FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA
AND
ROMANIA 
PREAMBLE
THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA AND ROMANIA (hereinafter called " the Parties
"),
REAFFIRMING their commitment to the principles of market economy, which
constitutes the basis for their relations,
REAFFIRMING their commitment to pluralistic democracy based on the rule of law,
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
EXPRESSING their intention to participate actively in the process of economic
integration in Europe as an important dimension of the stability on the European
continent and reaffirming their readiness to co-operate in finding the means and ways
for strengthening of this process,
RECALLING their firm commitment to the Final Act of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe, the Paris Charter, and in particular the principles contained in
the final document of the Bonn Conference on Economic Co-operation in Europe,
RESOLVED to this end to eliminate progressively the obstacles to substantially all
their mutual trade in accordance with the provisions of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT, 1994) and the Agreement establishing the World Trade
Organization (WTO),
FIRMLY convinced that this Agreement will foster the development of mutually
beneficial trade relations between them and will contribute to the process of
integration in Europe,
CONSIDERING that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting
the Parties from their obligations under other international agreements, especially the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and the Agreement establishing the
WTO,
Have agreed as follows: 
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. The Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area on a substantially all their
bilateral trade in a transitional period ending on 1 January 2007 in accordance with
the provisions of this Agreement and in conformity with those of the GATT 1994,
in particular Article XXIV and of the Agreement establishing the WTO, especially
the Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
a) to promote through the expansion of trade, the harmonious development of
economic relations between the Parties and thus to foster the advance of their
economic activity,
b) to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Parties,
c) to contribute in this way by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade,
d) to enhance co-operation between the Parties.
CHAPTER I
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 2
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products, originating in the
Parties.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term “industrial products” means products
falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding
System, with the exception of the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.
ARTICLE 3
Basic Duties
1. For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions set out in this
Agreement are to be applied shall be the Most Favored Nation duty in force on the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. If after this date, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes basis, in
particular reductions resulting from the GATT 1994 and the Agreement 
establishing the WTO, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties under
Paragraph 1 as from the date when such reductions are applied.
3. If a reduction of duties is effected by way of a suspension of duties made for a
particular period of time, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties only for
the period of such suspension.
4. The Parties declare that the reduced duties, calculated in accordance with
Paragraph 1, shall be rounded up when the first decimal place is 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and
rounding down, when it is 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4.
5. The Parties shall exchange information on their respective customs duties.
ARTICLE 4
Customs Duties on Imports
1. No new customs duties on imports shall be introduced in trade between the Parties
as from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. All customs duties on imports of products originating in the Parties shall be
abolished in accordance with the provisions laid down in Protocol 1 of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 5
Charges Equivalent to Import Duties
1. No new charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on imports shall be
introduced in trade between the Parties as from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on imports of products
originating in the Parties shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 6
Fiscal Duties
The provisions of Article 4 of this Agreement shall also apply to customs duties of a
fiscal nature.
ARTICLE 7
Customs Duties on Exports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new customs duties on exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Parties as from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement. 
2. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement the Parties shall abolish, between
them, all customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect.
ARTICLE 8
Quantitative Restrictions on Exports and Imports and Measures Having
Equivalent Effect
1. No new quantitative restrictions on exports and imports or measures having
equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties as from the date
of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and imports and measures having equivalent
effect shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 9
Technical Barriers to Trade
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties, relating to technical barriers shall be
governed taking into account the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Parties shall cooperate and exchange information in the field of
standardization, metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation, with the aim
of reducing and eliminating technical barriers to trade.
CHAPTER II
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 10
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products ( hereinafter called
"agricultural products"), falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System and to the products listed in Annex I to
this Agreement originating in Parties.
ARTICLE 11
Exchange of Concessions 
1. The Parties shall grant each other the concessions specified in the Protocol 2, in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and those laid down in this Protocol.
2. Taking into account:
- the role of agriculture in their economies,
- the development of trade in agricultural products between the Parties,
- the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products,
- the rules of their agricultural policies,
- the results of the multilateral trade negotiations under WTO,
the Parties shall examine the possibilities of granting each other further concessions.
ARTICLE 12
Concessions and Agricultural Policies
1. Without prejudice to the concessions granted under Article 11 the provisions of
this Chapter shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective
agricultural policies of the Parties or the application of any measures under such
policies, including the implementation of the provision of the WTO Agreement on
Agriculture.
2. The Parties shall notify each other the changes in their respective agricultural
policies pursued or measures applied which may affect the conditions of
agricultural trade among them, as provided for in this Agreement. Upon request of
a Party prompt consultations within the Joint Committee shall be held to examine
the situation.
ARTICLE 13
Specific Safeguards
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement and, in particular, Article 26, and
given the particular sensitivity of the Agricultural products, if imports of products,
originating in a Party, which are subject to concessions granted under this Agreement,
cause serious disturbances to the markets of the other Party, the Parties shall
immediately enter into consultations to find an appropriate solution. Pending such
solution, the Party concerned may take the measures it deems necessary.
ARTICLE 14
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
The Parties shall apply their regulations in the fields of veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary control in a way, corresponding to the WTO Agreement on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures. 
CHAPTER III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 15
Rules of Origin and Co-operation in Customs Administration
1. Protocol 3 of this Agreement lays down the rules of origin and related methods of
administrative co-operation.
2. The Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews in the Joint
Committee and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the
provisions of Protocol 3 and Articles 3 to 8, 11, 16 and 27 of this Agreement are
effectively and harmoniously applied, and to reduce, as far as possible, the
formalities imposed on trade, as well as to achieve mutually satisfactory solutions
to any difficulties arising from the operation of those provisions.
ARTICLE 16
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measures or practices of internal fiscal nature
establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination against products
originating in the Parties.
2. Exporters from the Parties may not benefit from repayment of internal taxation in
excess of the amount of indirect taxation imposed on products exported to the
territory of one of the Parties.
ARTICLE 17
General Exceptions
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or
goods in transit, justified on grounds of: public morality, public policy or public
security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants and
environment; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or
archeological value; the protection of intellectual property or rules relating to gold or
silver or the conservation of exhaustible natural resources, if such measures are made
effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption.
Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties. 
ARTICLE 18
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures which it
considers necessary:
a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security
interests;
b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies:
i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided
that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of
products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in
other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
iii) taken in time of war or other serious international tension. 
ARTICLE 19
State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall adjust progressively any state monopoly of a commercial
character so as to ensure that by the end of the transitional period laid down in
Article 1 of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under
which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals of the Parties.
The Parties shall inform each other about the measures adopted to implement this
objective.
2. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any body through which the
competent authorities of the Parties, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly
supervise, determine or appreciably influence imports or exports between the
Parties. These provisions shall likewise apply to monopolies delegated by the
State to other bodies.
ARTICLE 20
Payments
1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to trade in goods between the
Parties and the transfer of such payments to the territory of the Party, where the
creditor resides, shall be free from any restrictions.
2. The Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the grant,
repayment or acceptance of short term international trade credits or financial credits
in which a resident of a Party participates.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, any measures concerning current
payments connected with the movement of goods shall be in conformity with the
conditions laid down under Article VIII of the Articles of the Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund.
ARTICLE 21
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in so
far as they may affect trade between the Parties:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings
and concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect
the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the
Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof. 
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 (a) and (b) shall apply to the activities of all
undertakings including public undertakings and undertakings to which the Parties
grant special or exclusive rights. Undertakings entrusted with the operation of
services of general economic interest or having the character of a revenueproducing monopoly, shall be subject to provisions of paragraph 1 (a) and (b)
insofar as the application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in
law or in fact, of the particular public tasks assigned to them.
3. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II the provisions stipulated in
paragraph 1 (a) shall not apply to such agreements, decisions and practices which
form an integral part of a national market organization.
4. If a Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with paragraphs 1 (a) and
(b) and paragraph 2 of this Article and if such practice causes or threatens to cause
serious prejudice to the interest of that Party or material injury to its domestic
industry, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions
and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 30 of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 22
State Aid
1. Any aid granted by a Party or through state resources in any form whatsoever which
distorts or threatens to distort competition by favoring certain undertakings or the
production of certain goods shall, in so far as it may affect trade between the Parties,
be incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to products covered by Chapter II of
this Agreement.
3. The Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid, inter alia, by reporting
annually to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of the aid
given and by providing to the other Party, upon request, information on aid schemes
and on particular individual cases of state aid.
4. The Joint Committee shall, within three years from the entry into force of this
Agreement, adopt the criteria on the basis of which the practices derogating from
paragraph 1 shall be assessed, as well as the rules for their implementation.
5. If a Party considers that a particular practice , including that in agriculture:
− is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1, and
− causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Party or
material injury to its domestic industry or agriculture,
it may take appropriate measures under the conditions of and in accordance with the
provisions laid down in Article 30 of this Agreement.
Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with the procedures and
under the conditions laid down by the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing 
Measures, the GATT 1994 and WTO and any other relevant instrument negotiated
under their auspices, which are applicable between the Parties. 
ARTICLE 23
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement markets
as an objective of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall progressively adjust their respective rules, conditions and practices
in the field of public procurement with a view to grant suppliers of the other Party
access to contract award procedures on their respective public procurement markets.
3. The Joint Committee shall examine developments related to the achievement of the
objectives of this Article and may recommend practical modalities of implementing
the provisions of paragraph 2 so as to ensure free access, transparency, full balance of
rights and obligations and mutual opening of their respective public procurement
markets.
ARTICLE 24
Protection of Intellectual Property
 1. The Parties shall grant and ensure the protection of intellectual property rights on a
non-discriminatory basis, including measures for granting and enforcing such rights. The
protection shall be improved to a level corresponding to the substantive standards of the
multilateral agreements which are specified in Annex II to this Agreement.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "intellectual property protection" includes,
in particular, protection of copyright and related rights including computer programs and
data bases, trade marks for goods and services, geographical indications, patents,
industrial designs, new varieties of plants, topographies of integrated circuits, as well as
undisclosed information on know-how.
3. The Parties shall co-operate in matters of intellectual property. They shall hold, upon
request of any Party, expert consultations on these matters, in particular, on activities
relating to the existing or future international conventions on harmonization,
administration and enforcement of intellectual property and on activities in international
organizations, such as the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property
Organization, as well as relations of the Parties with any third country on matters
concerning intellectual property.
ARTICLE 25
Anti – Dumping
If a Party finds that dumping within the meaning of Article VI of the GATT 1994 is
taking place in trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate
measures against that practice in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994 and with
the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 under the 
conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 30 of this
Agreement. 
ARTICLE 26
General safeguards
Where any product is being imported into any of the Parties in such increased
quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause:
a) serious injuries to domestic producers of a like or directly competitive products in
the territory of the importing Party, or
b) serious disturbances in any sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring
about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region,
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedure, laid down in Article 30 of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 27
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration, derogating from the provisions of
Article 4 of this Agreement, may be taken by any of the Parties in the form of
increased customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties
produce important social problems.
3. Customs duties on imports, applicable in the Party concerned to products
originating in the other Party, introduced by these measures may not exceed 25%
ad valorem and shall maintain an element of preference for products, originating
in the other Party. The total value of imports of the product which are subject to
these measures may not exceed 15% of total imports of industrial products from
the other Party, as defined Chapter I, during the last year for which statistical data
is available.
4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding five years, unless a
longer duration is authorized by the Joint Committee. They shall cease to apply at
the expiration of the transitional period.
5. No such measures can be introduced in respect to a product if more than three
years have elapsed since the elimination of all duties and quantitative restrictions,
charges or measures having equivalent effect concerning that product.
6. The Party concerned shall inform the other Party of any exceptional measures it
intends to take and, at the request of the other Party, consultations shall be held
within the Joint Committee on such measures and the sectors to which they apply,
before they are applied. When taking such measures the Party concerned shall
provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the customs
duties introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a phasing out 
of these duties starting at the latest two years after their introduction, at equal
annual rates. The Joint Committee may decide upon a different schedule.
ARTICLE 28
Re-export and serious shortage
 Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 7 and 8 leads to:
(a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party maintains for
the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures
or charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise, to
major difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate
measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures, laid down
in Article 30 of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 29
Fulfillment of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the
objectives and the fulfillment of the obligations under this Agreement.
2. If any Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation under
this Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the
conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 30 of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 30
Procedure for the Application of Trade Defense Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of trade defense measures set
out in the following paragraphs of the present Article, the Parties shall endeavor to
solve any disputes between them through direct consultations.
2. If a Party is subject to imports of products liable to give rise to the situation
referred to in Article 26, of an administrative procedure having as its purpose the
rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other
Party.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 7 of the present Article, a Party which considers
resorting to trade defense measures shall promptly notify the other Party thereof 
and supply all relevant information. Consultations between the Parties shall take
place without delay in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution.
4.
(a) As regard Articles 25, 26 and 28 of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall
examine the case or the situation and may take any decision needed to put an
end to the difficulties notified by the Party concerned. In the absence of such
decision within thirty days of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee,
the Party concerned may adopt the measures necessary in order to remedy the
situation,
(b) As regard Article 29 of this Agreement, the Party concerned may take
appropriate measures after the consultations have been concluded or a period
of three months has elapsed from the date of the first notification to the other
Party,
(c) As regards Article 21 and 22 of this Agreement, the Party concerned shall give
the Joint Committee all the assistance required in order to examine the case
and, where appropriate, eliminate the practice objected to. If the other Party
fails to put an end to the practice objected to within the period fixed by the
Joint Committee or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an agreement within
thirty working days on the matter being referred to it, the Party concerned may
adopt appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the
practice in question.
5. The measures taken shall be notified immediately to the other Party. They shall be
restricted with regard to their extent and to their duration, to what is strictly
necessary to remedy the situation, giving rise to their application and shall not be
in excess of the injury caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority
shall be given to measures that will least disturb the functioning of this
Agreement.
6. The measures taken shall be subject to periodic consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view to their relaxation or abolition when conditions no longer
justify their maintenance.
7. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior
examination impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 25, 26
and 28 of this Agreement, apply forthwith the provisional measures strictly
necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified without delay
and consultations between the Parties shall take place as soon as possible in the
Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 31
Balance of Payments Difficulties 
1. The Parties shall endeavor to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures including
measures relating to imports for balance of payments purposes.
2. Where one of the Parties is in serious balance of payments difficulties, or under
imminent threat thereof, the Party concerned may, in accordance with the conditions
established under the GATT 1994 and WTO adopt restrictive measures, including
measures related to imports, which shall be of limited duration and may not go
beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The measures
shall be progressively relaxed as balance of payments conditions improve and they
shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The Party
concerned shall inform the other Party forthwith of their introduction and, whenever
practicable, of a time schedule for their removal. 
ARTICLE 32
Services and investment
1. The Parties to this Agreement recognize the growing importance of certain areas,
such as services and investments. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden
their co-operation, in particular in the context of the European integration, they will
co-operate with the aim of achieving a progressive liberalization and mutual
opening of their markets for investments and trade in services, taking into account
relevant provisions of the General Agreement on Trade and Services.
2. The Parties will discuss in the Joint Committee this co-operation with the aim of
developing and deepening of their relations governed in this Article.
ARTICLE 33
Evolutionary Clause
Where a Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the economies of the
Parties to develop and deepen the relations established by this Agreement by
extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the
other Party. The Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine this request and,
where appropriate, to make recommendations, particularly with a view to opening
negotiations.
CHAPTER IV
 INSTITUTIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 34
The Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Party shall be represented.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administrated by the
Joint Committee.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall
exchange information and, upon request of any Party, shall hold consultations
within the Joint Committee. The Committee shall keep under review the
possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Parties.
4. The Joint Committee may take decisions in the cases provided for in this
Agreement. On other matters the Committee may make recommendations.
ARTICLE 35
Procedures of the Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet
whenever necessary. Each Party may request a meeting to be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall act by consensus.
3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Party to this Agreement has accepted
a decision, subject to the fulfillment of internal legal requirements, the decision
shall enter into force, if no later date is contained therein, on the day of the receipt
of the written notification about the fulfillment of such requirements.
4. The Joint Committee may decide to set up sub-committees and working groups to
assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
ARTICLE 36
Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas and Frontier Trade
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs
unions, free trade areas or frontier trade arrangements to the extent that these do
not negatively affect the trade regime of the Parties and in particular the
provisions concerning rules of origin provided for in this Agreement.
2. Upon request the Parties shall inform each other of any agreement establishing
customs unions or free trade areas concluded with other countries.
ARTICLE 37
Territorial application
This Agreement shall apply to the customs territories of the Parties.
ARTICLE 38
Annexes and Protocols
1. Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement are an integral part of it.
2. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Annexes and Protocols of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 39
Amendments 
Amendments to this Agreement shall enter into force in accordance with the
procedure stipulated in Article 40 of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 40
Entry into Force
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the
date of the receipt of the last written notification by which the Parties inform each other
through diplomatic channels that the internal legal procedures for the entry into force of
this Agreement have been fulfilled.
ARTICLE 41
Validity and Termination
1. The Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period.
2. Each Party may denounce it through diplomatic channels by a written notification
to the other Party. In such case this Agreement shall cease to apply on the first day
of the seventh month after the date on which the other Party received the
notification.
3. The Parties agree that in case of accession of one of them to the European Union,
the Agreement will be terminated on the day before the date of the accession to
the European Union, without successive compensations for the other party.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized
thereto, have signed the present Agreement.
DONE in ………….at this.............day of..........of….... in two original copies each of
them in the Albanian, Romanian and English language, all texts being equally
authentic. In case of differences of interpretation, the English text shall prevail.
For the
Republic of Albania

 For
Romania

ANNEX TEXT:

JOINT DECLARATION
(referred to Article 5 of the Agreement)
 Romania will continue to apply a custom charge of 0.5% ad valorem for
customs formalities on imports and the Republic of Albania shall apply temporally a
tax of 1% on imports in its territory.
 The Parties will examine the abolition on a reciprocity basis, these charges
having equivalent effect to customs duties, within the framework of the Joint
Committee. 

ANNEX I
(referred to in Article 2 and 10 of the Agreement)

PROTOCOL 1
(referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 4 of the Agreement)
1. Customs duties on imports applicable in Romania to products originating in the
Republic of Albania listed in Annex A to this Protocol shall be progressively reduced
in accordance with the following timetable:
- on the date of entry into
 force of this Agreement - to 80% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2004 - to 60% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2005 - to 40% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2006 - to 20% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2007 - the remaining duties shall be eliminated.
2. For products originating in the Republic of Albania imported into Romania and not
listed in Annexes A to this Protocol zero customs duties shall be applied from the date
of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. Customs duties on imports applicable in the Republic of Albania to products
originating in Romania listed in Annex B to this Protocol shall be progressively
reduced in accordance with the following timetable:
- on the date of entry into
 force of this Agreement - to 80% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2004 - to 60% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2005 - to 40% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2006 - to 20% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2007 - the remaining duties shall be eliminated.
4. Customs duties on imports applicable in the Republic of Albania to products
originating in Romania listed in Annex C to this Protocol shall be progressively
reduced in accordance with the following timetable:
- on the date of entry into
 force of this Agreement - to 60% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2004 - to 30% of the basic duty,
- on 1 January 2005 - the remaining duties shall be eliminated.
5. For products originating in Romania imported into the Republic of Albania and not
listed in Annexes B and C to this Protocol zero customs duties shall be applied from 
the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 
ANNEX A TO PROTOCOL 1
CN
CODE Description
PROTOCOL 2
(referred to the Article 11 of the Agreement)
EXCHANGE OF AGRICULTURAL CONCESSIONS
BETWEEN ROMANIA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA
Article 1
The Protocol shall apply to products that are specified in the Chapter II of this
Agreement.
Article 2
Custom duties on imports applicable in Romania to products originating in the
Republic of Albania listed in this Article shall be abolished within the limits of
specified quotas from the date of the entry into force of this Agreement: 
Article 3
Custom duties on imports applicable in the Republic of Albania to products
originating in Romania listed in this Article shall be abolished within the limits of
specified quotas from the date of the entry into force of this Agreement: 
Article 4
For the purpose of ensuring the proper functioning of the provisions of the Protocol 2
to this Agreement and the possibilities of granting each other further concessions on a
mutually advantageous basis, the Parties should take into consideration regular
consultations within the framework of the Joint Committee. 

PROTOCOL 3
CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF
"ORIGINATING PRODUCTS" AND
METHODS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1 Definitions
TITLE II DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING
PRODUCTS"
Article 2 General requirements
Article 3 Bilateral cumulation of origin in Romania
Article 4 Bilateral cumulation of origin in the Republic of Albania
Article 5 Wholly obtained products
Article 6 Sufficiently worked or processed products
Article 7 Insufficient working or processing
Article 8 Unit of qualification
Article 9 Accessories, spare parts and tools
Article 10 Sets
Article 11 Neutral elements
TITLE III TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Article 12 Principle of territoriality
Article 13 Direct transport
Article 14 Exhibitions
TITLE IV DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
Article 15 Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, custom duties
TITLE V PROOF OF ORIGIN
Article 16 General requirements
Article 17 Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 
Article 18 Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
Article 19 Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
Article 20 Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of
origin
issued or made out previously
Article 20a Accounting segregation
Article 21 Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
Article 22 Approved exporter
Article 23 Validity of proof of origin
Article 24 Submission of proof of origin
Article 25 Importation by instalments
Article 26 Exemptions from proof of origin
Article 27 Supporting documents
Article 28 Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
Article 29 Discrepancies and formal errors
Article 30 Amounts expressed in euro
TITLE VI ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
Article 31 Mutual assistance
Article 32 Verification of proofs of origin
Article 33 Dispute settlement
Article 34 Penalties
Article 35 Free zones
TITLE VII FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 36 Amendments to the Protocol
Article 37 Customs Sub - Committee
Article 38 Annexes I – V
List of Annexes
Annex I: Introductory notes to the list in Annex II
Annex II: List of working or processing required to be carried out on nonoriginating materials in order that the product manufactured can
obtain originating status
Annex III: Specimens of movement certificate EUR.1 and application for a
movement certificate EUR.1
Annex IV: Text of the invoice declaration
Annex V: Continuation of the implementation of the harmonized preferential
rules of origin 
Joint Declaration
Joint Declaration concerning the review of the changes to the origin rules as a result
of the amendments to the Harmonized System
TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
a) "manufacture" means any kind of working or processing including assembly or
specific operations;
b) "material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in
the manufacture of the product;
c) "product" means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later
use in another manufacturing operation;
d) "goods" means both materials and products;
e) "customs value" means the value as determined in accordance with the
1994 Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);
f) "ex-works price" means the price paid for the product ex works to the
manufacturer in the Party in whose undertaking the last working or processing is
carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus
any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is
exported;
g) "value of materials" means the customs value at the time of importation of the
non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained,
the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the Party;
h) "value of originating materials" means the value of such materials as defined in
(g) applied mutatis mutandis;
i) "value added" shall be taken to be the ex-works price minus the customs value of
each of the materials incorporated which originate in the other Party or, where the
customs value is not known or cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price
paid for the materials in one of the Parties;
j) "chapters" and "headings" mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes)
used in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as "the Harmonized
System" or "HS"; 
k) "classified" refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular
heading;
l) "consignment" means products which are either sent simultaneously from one
exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering
their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a
document, by a single invoice;
m) “territories" includes territorial waters;
n) “euro” means the single currency of the European Monetary Union.
TITLE II
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
ARTICLE 2
General requirements
For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be
considered as originating in a Party:
a) products wholly obtained in that Party within the meaning of Article 5;
b) products obtained in that Party incorporating materials which have not been
wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient
working or processing in that Party within the meaning of Article 6.
ARTICLE 3
Bilateral cumulation of origin in Romania
Materials originating in the Republic of Albania shall be considered as materials
originating in Romania when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not
be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing,
provided that they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred
to in Article 7 (1).
ARTICLE 4
Bilateral cumulation of origin in the Republic of Albania
Materials originating in Romania shall be considered as materials originating in
Romania when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary
that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided that
they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred to in Article 7
(1).
ARTICLE 5
Wholly obtained products
1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in a Party:
a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed; 
b) vegetable products harvested there;
c) live animals born and raised there;
d) products from live animals raised there;
e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;
f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the
territorial waters of a Party by their vessels;
g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to
in (f);
h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials,
including used tyres fit only for retreading or for use as waste;
i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;
j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside their territorial waters
provided that they have sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;
k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in (a) to (j).
2. The terms "their vessels" and "their factory ships" in paragraph 1(f) and (g) shall
apply only to vessels and factory ships:
a) which are registered or recorded in a Party;
b) which sail under the flag of that Party;
c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50 per cent by nationals of that Party,
or by a company with its head office in one of the Parties, of which the
manager or managers, Chairman of the Board of Directors or the Supervisory
Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are nationals of that
Party and of which, in addition, in the case of partnerships or limited
companies, at least half the capital belongs to that Party or to public bodies or
nationals of that Party;
d) of which the master and officers are nationals of that Party;
and
e) of which at least 75 per cent of the crew are nationals of that Party.
ARTICLE 6
Sufficiently worked or processed products
1. For the purposes of Article 2, products, which are not wholly obtained are
considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in
the list in Annex II are fulfilled. 
The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by the
Agreement, the working or processing, which must be carried out on
non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to
such materials. It follows that if a product which has acquired originating status
by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another
product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not
apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which
may have been used in its manufacture.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the
conditions set out in the list, should not be used in the manufacture of a product
may nevertheless be used, provided that:
a) their total value does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the
product;
b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of
non-originating materials are not exceeded through the application of this
paragraph.
This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the
Harmonized System.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply subject to the provisions of Article 7.
ARTICLE 7
Insufficient working or processing
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as
insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products,
whether or not the requirements of Article 6 are satisfied:
a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition
during transport and storage;
b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;
c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
d) ironing or pressing of textiles;
e) simple painting and polishing operations;
f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;
g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;
h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;
i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching; (including the
making-up of sets of articles); 
k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or
boards and all other simple packaging operations;
l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on
products or their packaging;
m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds,
n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or
disassembly of products into parts;
o) a combination of two or more operations specified in (a) to (n);
p) slaughter of animals.
2. All operations carried out in a Party on a given product shall be considered
together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that
product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 8
Unit of qualification
1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall
be the particular product, which is considered as the basic unit when
determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonized System.
 It follows that:
a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified
under the terms of the Harmonized System in a single heading, the whole
constitutes the unit of qualification;
b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified
under the same heading of the Harmonized System, each product must be
taken individually when applying the provisions of this Protocol.
2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonized System, packaging is included
with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes
of determining origin.
ARTICLE 9
Accessories, spare parts and tools
Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine,
apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the
price thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the
piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.
ARTICLE 10
Sets
Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded as
originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is
composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be
regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does
not exceed 15 per cent of the ex-works price of the set.
ARTICLE 11
Neutral elements
In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to
determine the origin of the following, which might be used in its manufacture:
a) energy and fuel;
b) plant and equipment;
c) machines and tools;
d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final
composition of the product.
TITLE III
TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 12
Principle of territoriality
1. Except as provided for in Article 3 and paragraph 3 of this Article, the conditions
for acquiring originating status set out in Title II must be fulfilled without
interruption in the Parties.
2. Except as provided for in Article 3, where originating goods exported from one of
the Parties to another country return, they must be considered as non-originating,
unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
a) the returning goods are the same as those exported;
 and
b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve
them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.
3. The acquisition of originating status in accordance with the conditions set out in
Title II shall not be affected by working or processing done outside the Parties on
materials exported from one of the Parties and subsequently re-imported there,
provided: 
a) the said materials are wholly obtained in one of the Parties or have
undergone working or processing beyond the operations referred to in
Article 7 prior to being exported;
 and
b) it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
i) the re-imported goods have been obtained by working or processing the
exported materials;
 and
ii) the total added value acquired outside the Parties by applying the
provisions of this Article does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works
price of the end product for which originating status is claimed.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the conditions for acquiring originating status
set out in Title II shall not apply to working or processing done outside the
Parties. But where, in the list in Annex II, a rule setting a maximum value for all
the non-originating materials incorporated is applied in determining the originating
status of the end product, the total value of the non-originating materials
incorporated in the territory of the party concerned, taken together with the total
added value acquired outside the Parties by applying the provisions of this
Article, shall not exceed the stated percentage.
5. For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4, 'total added
value' shall be taken to mean all costs arising outside the Parties, including the
value of the materials incorporated there.
6. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which do not
fulfil the conditions set out in the list in Annex II or which can be considered
sufficiently worked or processed only if the general tolerance fixed in Article 6(2)
is applied.
7. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products of Chapters 50
to 63 of the Harmonized System.
8. Any working or processing of the kind covered by the provisions of this Article
and done outside the Parties shall be done under the outward processing
arrangements, or similar arrangements.
ARTICLE 13
Direct transport
1. The preferential treatment provided for under the Agreement applies only to
products, satisfying the requirements of this Protocol, which are transported
directly between the Parties. However, products constituting one single
consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the
occasion arise, trans-shipment or temporary warehousing in such territories,
provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in
the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than 
unloading, reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good
condition.
Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than
that of the Parties.
2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be
supplied to the customs authorities of the importing country by the production of:
a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting country
through the country of transit; or
b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:
(i) giving an exact description of the products;
(ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where
applicable, the names of the ships, or the other means of transport used;
 and
(iii) certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit
country; or
c) failing these, any substantiating documents.
ARTICLE 14
Exhibitions
1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in a country outside the Parties and
sold after the exhibition for importation in a Party shall benefit on importation
from the provisions of the Agreement provided it is shown to the satisfaction of
the customs authorities that:
a) an exporter has consigned these products from a Party to the country in
which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;
b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a
person in a Party;
c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately
thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition;
 and
d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used
for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.
2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions
of Title V and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the
normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated
thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions
under which they have been exhibited may be required. 
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition,
fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes
in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and
during which the products remain under customs control.
TITLE IV
ARTICLE 15
Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
1. Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in a
Party for which a proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with the
provisions of Title V shall not be subject in that Party to drawback of, or
exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.
2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund,
remission or non-payment, partial or complete, of customs duties or charges
having an equivalent effect, applicable in a Party to materials used in the
manufacture, where such refund, remission or non-payment applies, expressly or
in effect, when products obtained from the said materials are exported and not
when they are retained for home use there.
3. The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit
at any time, upon request from the customs authorities, all appropriate
documents proving that no drawback has been obtained in respect of the nonoriginating materials used in the manufacture of the products concerned and that
all customs duties or charges having equivalent effect applicable to such
materials have actually been paid.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging
within the meaning of Article 8 (2), accessories, spare parts and tools within the
meaning of Article 9 and products in a set within the meaning of Article 10 when
such items are non-originating.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials which
are of the kind to which the Agreement applies. Furthermore, they shall not
preclude the application of an export refund system for agricultural products,
applicable upon export in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement.
TITLE V
PROOF OF ORIGIN
ARTICLE 16
General requirements
1. Products originating in a Party shall, on importation into the other Party benefit
from the Agreement upon submission of either:
a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III; or 
b) in the cases specified in Article 21(1), a declaration, subsequently referred to
as the "invoice declaration", given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery
note or any other commercial document which describes the products
concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified; the text of the
invoice declaration appears in Annex IV.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this
Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 26, benefit from the Agreement
without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above.
ARTICLE 17
Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1
1. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the
exporting country on application having been made in writing by the exporter or,
under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorised representative.
2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out both
the movement certificate EUR.1 and the application form, specimens of which
appear in Annex III. These forms shall be completed in one of the languages in
which this Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of the
domestic law of the exporting country. If they are hand-written, they shall be
completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products must be
given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where
the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last
line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.
3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be
prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the
exporting country where the movement certificate EUR.1 is issued, all
appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned
as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
4. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of a
Party if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in that
Party and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
5. The customs authorities issuing movement certificates EUR.1 shall take any
steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment
of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the
right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's
accounts or any other check considered appropriate. They shall also ensure that
the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall
check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been
completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
6. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in Box 11
of the certificate.
7. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and
made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected
or ensured. 
ARTICLE 18
Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 17(7), a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally
be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:
a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary
omissions or special circumstances;
 or
b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a
movement certificate EUR.1 was issued but was not accepted at importation
for technical reasons.
2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his
application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the
movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and state the reasons for his request.
3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively
only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application
agrees with that in the corresponding file.
4. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively must be endorsed with one
of the following phrases:
RO "EMIS A POSTERIORI",
SQ "LËSHUAR APOSTERIORI".

EN "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY",
5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the "Remarks"
box of the movement certificate EUR.1.
ARTICLE 19
Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the
exporter may apply to the customs authorities, which issued it for a duplicate
made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.
2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with one of the following
words:
RO "DUPLICAT"
SQ "DUPLIKATË",

EN "DUPLICATE" 
3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the "Remarks"
box of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.
4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement
certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as from that date.
ARTICLE 20
Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a
proof of origin issued or made out previously
When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in a Party,
it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement
certificates EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of these products
elsewhere within the Party. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1 shall be
issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.
ARTICLE 20a
Accounting segregation
1. Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks
of originating and non-originating materials, which are identical and
interchangeable, the customs authorities may, at the written request of those
concerned, authorise the so-called "accounting segregation" method to be used
for managing such stocks.
2. This method must be able to ensure that, for a specific reference-period, the
number of products obtained which could be considered as "originating" is the
same as that which would have been obtained if there had been physical
segregation of the stocks.
3. The customs authorities may grant such authorisation, subject to any conditions
deemed appropriate.
4. This method is recorded and applied on the basis of the general accounting
principles applicable in the country where the product was manufactured.
5. The beneficiary of this facilitation may issue or apply for proofs of origin, as the
case may be, for the quantity of products, which may be considered as
originating. At the request of the customs authorities, the beneficiary shall
provide a statement of how the quantities have been managed.
6. The customs authorities shall monitor the use made of the authorisation and may
withdraw it at any time whenever the beneficiary makes improper use of the
authorisation in any manner whatsoever or fails to fulfil any of the other
conditions laid down in this Protocol.
ARTICLE 21
Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
1. An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 16(1)(b) may be made out:
a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 22, 
 or
b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages
containing originating products whose total value does not exceed
EUR 6,000.
2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be
considered as products originating in a Party and fulfil the other requirements of
this Protocol.
3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at
any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country, all
appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned
as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or
printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the
declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV, using one of the linguistic
versions set out in that Annex and in accordance with the provisions of the
domestic law of the exporting country. If the declaration is hand-written, it shall
be written in ink in printed characters.
5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in
manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 22
shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the
customs authorities of the exporting country a written undertaking that he
accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which identifies him as if it
had been signed in manuscript by him.
6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to
which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented
in the importing country no longer than two years after the importation of the
products to which it relates.
ARTICLE 22
Approved exporter
1. The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorise any exporter,
hereinafter referred to as 'approved exporter', who makes frequent shipments of
products under this Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of
the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation
must offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary
to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the
other requirements of this Protocol.
2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to
any conditions, which they consider appropriate.
3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs
authorisation number, which shall appear on the invoice declaration.
4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the
approved exporter. 
5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall
do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in
paragraph 1, no longer fulfils the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or
otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorisation.
ARTICLE 23
Validity of proof of origin
1. A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the
exporting country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs
authorities of the importing country.
2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing
country after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be
accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to
submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional
circumstances.
3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing
country may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted
before the said final date.
ARTICLE 24
Submission of proof of origin
Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country
in accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities
may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import
declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the
products meet the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement.
ARTICLE 25
Importation by instalments
Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs
authorities of the importing country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the
meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System falling within Sections XVI
and XVII or headings 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonized System are imported by
instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the
customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.
ARTICLE 26
Exemptions from proof of origin
1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or
forming part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating
products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such 
products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting
the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity
of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, this declaration can
be made on the customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper
annexed to that document.
2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use
of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports
by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that
no commercial purpose is in view.
3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the
case of small packages or EUR 1,200 in the case of products forming part of
travellers' personal luggage.
ARTICLE 27
Supporting documents
The documents referred to in Articles 17(3) and 21(3) used for the purpose of proving
that products covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice declaration can
be considered as products originating in one of the Party and fulfil the other
requirements of this Protocol may consist inter alia of the following:
a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain
the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;
b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in
one of the Party where these documents are used in accordance with domestic
law;
c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in one of the Party,
issued or made out in that Party, where these documents are used in accordance
with domestic law;
d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating
status of materials used, issued or made out in a Party in accordance with this
Protocol.
ARTICLE 28
Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep
for at least three years the documents referred to in Article 17(3).
2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least
three years a copy of this invoice declaration as well as the documents referred
to in Article 21(3).
3. The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement
certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the application form referred
to in Article 17(2). 
4. The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep for at least
three years the movement certificates EUR.1 and the invoice declarations
submitted to them.
ARTICLE 29
Discrepancies and formal errors
1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof
of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for
the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not
ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this
document does correspond to the products submitted.
2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause
this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts
concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.
ARTICLE 30
Amounts expressed in euro
1. For the application of the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) and Article 26(3) in cases
where products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the
national currencies of the Parties equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro
shall be fixed annually by each of the Parties concerned.
2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) or Article 26(3)
by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the
amount fixed by the country concerned.
3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in
that currency of the amounts expressed in euro as at the first working day of
October and shall apply from 1 January the following year. For the purposes of
implementing the provisions of paragraph 2 on importation the Parties shall
recognize the relevant amounts notified by the country concerned or the
European Commission.
4. A Party may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its
national currency of an amount expressed in euro. The rounded-off amount may
not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5 per cent.
A Party may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount
expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in
paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, prior to any rounding-off, results in
an increase of less than 15 per cent in the national currency equivalent. The
national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would
result in a decrease in that equivalent value.
5. The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee at the
request of any of the Parties. When carrying out this review, the Joint Committee
shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in
real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in
euro. 
TITLE VI
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
ARTICLE 31
Mutual assistance
1. The customs authorities of the Parties shall provide each other with specimen
impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of movement
certificates EUR.1 and with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible
for verifying those certificates and invoice declarations.
2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the Parties shall assist
each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the
authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.1 or the invoice declarations and
the correctness of the information given in these documents.
ARTICLE 32
Verification of proofs of origin
1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or
whenever the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable
doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the
products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs
authorities of the importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR.1
and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of
these documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving,
where appropriate, the reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information
obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect
shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.
3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting
country. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and
to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check
considered appropriate.
4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the
granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the
results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer
subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.
5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the
results of this verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate
clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products
concerned can be considered as products originating in one of the Parties and
fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten months of the date of
the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to
determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the
products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional
circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences. 
ARTICLE 33
Dispute settlement
Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 32, which
cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the
customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification or where they raise a
question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Joint
Committee.
In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs
authorities of the importing country shall be under the legislation of the said country.
ARTICLE 34
Penalties
Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up,
a document, which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a
preferential treatment for products.
ARTICLE 35
Free zones
1. The Parties shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products traded under
cover of a proof of origin which in the course of transport use a free zone
situated in their territory, are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo
handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.
2. By means of an exemption to the provisions contained in paragraph 1, when
products originating in a Party are imported into a free zone under cover of a
proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned
shall issue a new movement certificate EUR.1 at the exporter's request, if the
treatment or processing undergone is in conformity with the provisions of this
Protocol.
TITLE VII
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 36 
Amendments to the Protocol
The Joint Committee may decide to amend the provision of this Protocol
ARTICLE 37
Customs Sub - Committee
1. The Customs Sub-Committee shall be set up, charged with carrying out
administrative co-operation with a view to the correct and uniform application
of this Protocol and with carrying out any other task in the customs field which
may be entrusted to it.
2. The Sub-Committee shall be composed of experts of the Parties who are
responsible for customs questions.
ARTICLE 38
Annexes
Annexes I, II, III, IV and V to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof. 
ANNEX I TO PROTOCOL 3
Introductory notes to the list in Annex II
Note 1:
The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or
processed within the meaning of Article 6 of the Protocol.
Note 2:
2.1 The first two columns in the list describe the product obtained. The first
column gives the heading number or chapter number used in the Harmonized
System and the second column gives the description of goods used in that
system for that heading or chapter. For each entry in the first two columns, a
rule is specified in column 3 or 4. Where, in some cases, the entry in the first
column is preceded by an 'ex', this signifies that the rules in column 3 or 4
apply only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.
2.2 Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 1 or a chapter
number is given and the description of products in column 2 is therefore given
in general terms, the adjacent rules in column 3 or 4 apply to all products
which, under the Harmonized System, are classified in headings of the chapter
or in any of the headings grouped together in column 1.
2.3 Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within
a heading, each indent contains the description of that part of the heading
covered by the adjacent rules in column 3 or 4.
2.4 Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both
columns 3 and 4, the exporter may opt, as an alternative, to apply either the
rule set out in column 3 or that set out in column 4. If no origin rule is given
in column 4, the rule set out in column 3 has to be applied.
Note 3:
3.1 The provisions of Article 6 of the Protocol, concerning products having
acquired originating status which are used in the manufacture of other
products, shall apply, regardless of whether this status has been acquired
inside the factory where these products are used or in another factory in the
Parties.
 Example:
 An engine of heading 8407, for which the rule states that the value of the nonoriginating materials which may be incorporated may not exceed 40 per cent
of the ex-works price, is made from "other alloy steel roughly shaped by
forging" of heading ex 7224. 
 If this forging has been forged in a Party concerned from a non-originating
ingot, it has already acquired originating status by virtue of the rule for
heading ex 7224 in the list. The forging can then count as originating in the
value-calculation for the engine, regardless of whether it was produced in the
same factory or in another factory in a Party concerned. The value of the nonoriginating ingot is thus not taken into account when adding up the value of
the non-originating materials used.
3.2 The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or processing
required, and the carrying-out of more working or processing also confers
originating status; conversely, the carrying-out of less working or processing
cannot confer originating status. Thus, if a rule provides that non-originating
material, at a certain level of manufacture, may be used, the use of such
material at an earlier stage of manufacture is allowed, and the use of such
material at a later stage is not.
3.3 Without prejudice to Note 3.2, where a rule uses the expression "Manufacture from materials
of any heading", then materials of any heading(s) (even materials of the same description and
heading as the product) may be used, subject, however, to any specific limitations which may
also be contained in the rule.
However, the expression "Manufacture from materials of any heading,
including other materials of heading ..." or "Manufacture from materials of
any heading, including other materials of the same heading as the product"
means that materials of any heading(s) may be used, except those of the same
description as the product as given in column 2 of the list.
3.4 When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufactured from
more than one material, this means that one or more materials may be used. It
does not require that all be used.
 Example:
 The rule for fabrics of headings 5208 to 5212 provides that natural fibres may
be used and that chemical materials, among other materials, may also be used.
This does not mean that both have to be used; it is possible to use one or the
other, or both.
3.5 Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a
particular material, the condition obviously does not prevent the use of other
materials which, because of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See
also Note 6.2 below in relation to textiles).
 Example:
 The rule for prepared foods of heading 1904, which specifically excludes the
use of cereals and their derivatives, does not prevent the use of mineral salts,
chemicals and other additives which are not products from cereals. 
 However, this does not apply to products which, although they cannot be
manufactured from the particular materials specified in the list, can be
produced from a material of the same nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.
 Example:
 In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made from non-woven
materials, if the use of only non-originating yarn is allowed for this class of
article, it is not possible to start from non-woven cloth - even if non-woven
cloths cannot normally be made from yarn. In such cases, the starting material
would normally be at the stage before yarn - that is, the fibre stage.
3.6 Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the maximum value
of non-originating materials that can be used, then these percentages may not
be added together. In other words, the maximum value of all the nonoriginating materials used may never exceed the higher of the percentages
given. Furthermore, the individual percentages must not be exceeded, in
relation to the particular materials to which they apply.
Note 4:
4.1 The term "natural fibres" is used in the list to refer to fibres other than artificial
or synthetic fibres. It is restricted to the stages before spinning takes place,
including waste, and, unless otherwise specified, includes fibres that have been
carded, combed or otherwise processed but not spun.
4.2 The term "natural fibres" includes horsehair of heading 0503, silk of headings
5002 and 5003 as well as the wool-fibres and fine or coarse animal hair of
headings 5101 to 5105, the cotton fibres of headings 5201 to 5203, and the
other vegetable fibres of headings 5301 to 5305.
4.3 The terms "textile pulp", "chemical materials" and "paper-making materials"
are used in the list to describe the materials, not classified in Chapters 50 to
63, which can be used to manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or
yarns.
4.4 The term "man-made staple fibres" is used in the list to refer to synthetic or
artificial filament tow, staple fibres or waste, of headings 5501 to 5507.
Note 5:
5.1 Where, for a given product in the list, a reference is made to this Note, the
conditions set out in column 3 shall not be applied to any basic textile
materials used in the manufacture of this product and which, taken together,
represent 10 per cent or less of the total weight of all the basic textile materials
used. (See also Notes 5.3 and 5.4 below). 
5.2 However, the tolerance mentioned in Note 5.1 may be applied only to mixed
products which have been made from two or more basic textile materials. 

ANNEX II TO PROTOCOL 3
List of working or processing required to be carried out
on non-originating materials in order that the product
manufactured can obtain originating status
The products mentioned in the list may not all be covered by the
Agreement. It is therefore necessary to consult the other parts of the
Agreement. 