AGREEMENT
on Free Trade Between the Government of Georgia and the Government of the Republic of
Azerbaijan
 The government of Georgia and the government of the Republic of Azerbaijan , further
referred to as “the parties,”
 reaffirming their willingness to develop freely the economic cooperation;
 taking into consideration the existing integration economic ties between Georgia and the
Republic of Azerbaijan,
 striving to develop commercial and economic cooperation between Georgia and the
Republic of Azerbaijan on the basis of equality and mutual benefit,
 recognising that free movement of goods and services requires undertaking of
coordinated measures,
 guided by the provisions of the Declaration on the Fundamentals of the Economic
Relations between Georgia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, proceeding from each state’s
sovereign right to conduct an independent foreign economic policy,
 intending to promote the economic growth, full employment, productivity growth and
resource mobilisation,
 striving to promote harmonisation and growth of the world commerce eliminating the
obstacles hindering its development,
 reaffirming the intention of Georgia and the Republic of Azerbaijan to join the
GATT/WTO participants, sharing the GATT/WTO goals and principles and taking into
consideration the results of the agreements and negotiations, reached within the framework of
the Uruguay Multilateral Trade Negotiations Round,
have agreed upon the following:
Article 1
 1. The parties shall not apply customs duties and similar fees for export and import of
goods, originated from the customs territory of one of the parties and designated for the other
party’s customs territory. Exclusions from this trade regime, if the parties deem it necessary,
shall be put into a document, which shall be an integral part of the present agreement.
 2. For the goals of this agreement and during the term of its validity, the goods originated
from the territory of one of the parties are considered the goods defined as such in accordance
with the international law.
Article 2
Neither party shall:
 impose on the other party’s goods envisaged by the present agreement direct or indirect
internal taxes exceeding the corresponding taxes or duties imposed on the similar products
manufactured in their own country or the products manufactured in the countries non-members
of the agreement. 
 Impose on the import and export of goods under this agreement any special restrictions
and requirements, not applied in similar conditions for the similar goods produced inside the
country or originated from any other country.
 Apply for storage, unloading, transportation, also for payment and bank transfer
transactions connected with the goods originated from the territory of the other party the rules
different from those applied in similar conditions for the goods originated from their own
country or from any other country.
Article 3
 The parties shall refrain from undertaking discriminating measures in mutual trade as
well as from setting quantitative restrictions or equivalent measures in export and import of
goods described in the present agreement.
 The quantitative restrictions stated in this article can be set unilaterally and for a strictly
defined term only:
 during the acute deficit of these good in the home market;
 before the stabilisation of the taxation balance,
 if one of the goods is imported to the territory of one of the parties in such a big amount,
or under such circumstances, that cause damage, or threaten to cause damage to the local
entrepreneurs producing similar or competitive goods, or
 with the purpose of undertaking measures stipulated by the article regulating the reexport
transactions.
 A party which will apply quantitative restrictions in accordance with this article, shall, at
his convenience and in advance present to the other party full information about the reasons,
forms and supposed term of application of these restrictions, after which consultations are set
and a separate protocol is created.
 The parties strive to resolve by means of consultations all questions relating to the
introduction of quantitative restrictions, which arise in accordance with the second paragraph of
this article.
 During selecting measures in accordance with this article, the parties shall give
preference to the measures affecting least negatively the achievement of the agreement’s goals.
Article 4
The parties, on a regular basis, shall exchange information on:
 - laws and other normative acts, connected with the economic activities, including trade
and transport, investments, taxation, bank and insurance activities and other financial services,
including customs service and customs statistics.
 The parties shall immediately inform each other of the changes in the national legislation,
which can affect the realisation of the present agreement.
 The authorised bodies of the parties agree upon the procedure of such information
exchange.
Article 5
 The parties agree that export is allowed only in case of existence of the written agreement
from the authorised body of the exporting country. 
Article 6
 The parties shall inform each other of the acting customs tariffs and all exclusions from
them.
Article 7
 The parties deem it inconsistent with the goals of this agreement dishonest activities and
commit themselves to prevent the following, and not only:
 - agreements between the enterprises, decisions taken by the corporations, and certain
activities aiming at hindering or restricting the competition, or violating its conditions on the
parties’ territories.;
 - activities, with the help of which one or more enterprise using its dominating position
restricts the competition on the whole or a considerable part of the parties’ territories.
Article 8
 While conducting the tariff and non-tariff regulation of bilateral economic relations, in
order to exchange statistical information and carry out the customs procedures, the parties agree
to use a common nine-bar nomenclature of the trade foreign economic activities, based on the
description of goods and the harmonised system of the goods bar coding and the EU combined
tariff statistical nomenclature. In addition, the parties, for their own purposes, if necessary, can
introduce the goods nomenclature other than the nine-bar standard.
 The introduction of the trade nomenclature standard takes place on the basis of mutual
agreements via existing missions in respective international organisations.
Article 9
 The parties agree that adherence to the principle of free transit is the principal condition
to guarantee achievement of goals of this agreement and an essential element for their inclusion
into the system of international labour division and cooperation.
 With regard to this, each party, except the cases, which concerns the national security
interests of the parties, shall guarantee within its territory the transit of goods originated from the
other party’s and/or any other country’s customs territory and designated for the other party’s or
any other country’s customs territory, and shall provide the exporters, importers or deliverers
transports with all means and services necessary for guaranteeing the transit under the conditions
which shall not be less favourable than those provided for the same type of services and means to
the exporters, importers and transports of their own country or any other country.
 The parties agree that tariffs for transit conducted by any means of transport, including
the loading and unloading tariffs, will be economically documented.
Article 10
 The present agreement is not in conflict with the right of any party to take measures
accepted in the international practice, which the party deems necessary to undertake in order to
protect its vital interests, or, which are necessary to fulfil those international agreements the
member of which the party is or intends to become, if these measures concern:
 - information connected with the national security interests;
 - trade with weapon, ammunition and military technique;
 - production and research connected with the defence; 
 - delivery of materials and machinery used in the nuclear industry;
 - maintaining public moral and public order;
 - protection of intellectual and industrial property;
 - gold, silver, or any other precious stones and metals;
 - protection of public health, flora and fauna, environmental protection.
Article 11
 In order to conduct a coordinated export control policy towards other countries, the
parties shall conduct regular consultations and take co-ordinated measures to create a more
effective export control system.
Article 12
 The provisions of the present agreement shall replace the provisions of the agreements
made between the parties, where they are not consistent or are identical.
Article 13
 The disputes between the parties concerning the application and interpretation of the
provisions of the present agreement shall be resolved by means of negotiations. The parties shall
try to avoid conflict situations in mutual trade. The parties shall determine that all claims and
disputes arisen during the interpretation and fulfilment of the commercial contracts and deals
between the industrial entities of both countries, if their resolution is not reached after
consultations and negotiations, and if other provisions are not set, shall be within the
competence of the arbitrary courts, created on the territory of the parties or any other country,
determined by the parties having signed the contract.
 The latter can also define the used material rights, norms and procedures, also the site of
arbitration.
 Each party guarantees that effective means exist on its territory for recognition and
implementation of the arbitration decisions.
Article 14
 In order to elaborate recommendations aimed at realisation of the present agreement and
perfection of the commercial economic cooperation between the two countries, the parties have
agreed to found a Joint Commission of Georgia and Azerbaijan, which will meet at the wish of
one of the parties, in either Azerbaijan or Georgia.
Article 15
 All payments and transfer of money for the commercial economic cooperation between
Georgia and Azerbaijan shall take place in accordance with the agreement between the
authorised banks of the parties.
Article 16
 Nothing in this agreement prevents the parties, without violating its provisions and goals,
from establishing relationship with the states, which are not the parties of this agreement, also
with their unions and international organisations.
Article 17 
 Any country provided that the parties approve of it, can join the present agreement with
the conditions agreed upon by the parties and the country willing to join the agreement.
Article 18
 The present agreement comes into force as of the date of exchange of the final written
notification about the fulfilment of all intra-state formalities.
 The agreement becomes invalid after the expiration of twelve months as of the date of the
written notification by one of the parties about the intention to stop the agreement.
 the agreement is made in Tbilisi on March 1996, in two copies, each one in Georgian,
Azeri, and Russian. All texts have an equal force.
 In case of any difference in interpretation of any of the article of the present agreement,
the Russian text shall be referred to.
On behalf of the Georgian Government On behalf of the Azerbaijan Government 

