FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN TURKEY AND BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
_______________
PREAMBLE
The Republic of Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina (hereinafter "the Parties"),
Reaffirming their firm commitment to pluralistic democracy based on the rule of law, human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
Recalling their intention to participate actively in the process of economic integration in
Europe as an important dimension of the stability on the European continent and expressing their
preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways and means to strengthen this process;
Reaffirming their commitment to the principles of a market economy, which constitutes the
basis for their relations;
Considering the importance of the links existing between the Parties, their desire to
strengthen those links and to further extend the relations established previously;
Taking into consideration the Agreement Establishing an Association between Turkey and the
European Economic Community and the Stabilisation and Association Process offering the prospect
of integration into European structures for Bosnia and Herzegovina;
Convinced that this Agreement will create a new climate for economic relations between the
Parties and above all for the development of trade and investment;
Resolved to eliminate progressively the obstacles to substantially all their mutual trade, in
accordance with the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (hereinafter
"GATT 1994") and the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation (hereinafter "WTO"),
Bosnia and Herzegovina having objective to become a member of the WTO;
Considering that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting the Parties
from their obligations under other international agreements;
Firmly convinced that this Agreement will foster the intensification of mutually beneficial
trade relations between the Parties and contribute to the process of integration in Europe;
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Objectives
1. The Parties shall establish a free trade area on substantially all their bilateral trade in a
transitional period ending on 31 December 2006, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement
and in conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the other multilateral agreements on
trade in goods annexed to the Agreement establishing WTO. 
Page 2
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to promote through the expansion of mutual trade the harmonious development of
economic relations between the Parties and thus to foster in the Parties the advance of
economic activity, the improvement of living and employment conditions, and
financial stability;
(b) to provide fair conditions of competition for trade between the Parties;
(c) to contribute by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious development and
expansion of world trade.
CHAPTER I: PRODUCT COVERAGE
Article 2
Scope
 The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products listed in Chapters 1 to 24 of the
Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and the products listed in Annex I of this
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "agricultural products") and products listed in Chapters 25 to 97
of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the exception of the products
listed in Annex I of this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "industrial products") originating in the
Parties.
Article 3
Basic Duties
1. In trade between the Parties covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall apply their
respective Customs Tariffs and other regulations concerning classification of goods for imports into
them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions set out in this Agreement
are to be applied shall be the Most Favoured Nation rate of duty in force on the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.
3. If, after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes
basis, in particular reductions resulting from the tariff negotiations in the WTO or accession of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the WTO, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duty referred to in paragraph
2 of this Article as from the date when such reductions are applied.
4. The reduced duties calculated in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article shall be applied
rounded to the first decimal place.
5. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective basic duties.
Article 4
Customs Duties On Imports, Charges Having Equivalent Effect And
Import Duties Of A Fiscal Nature
1. The Parties shall not introduce new customs duties on imports, charges having an effect
equivalent to customs duties on imports and import duties of a fiscal nature in trade between them. 
Page 3
2. For industrial products defined in Article 2 of this Agreement, customs duties on imports
applicable in the Republic of Turkey to products originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina shall be
abolished upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. For agricultural products defined in Article 2 of this Agreement, customs duties on imports
applicable in the Republic of Turkey to products originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina shall be
abolished upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except for the products listed in Annex
II to this Agreement.
4. Customs duties on imports, charges having equivalent effect and import duties of a fiscal
nature applicable in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the date of entry into force of this Agreement to
products originating in the Republic of Turkey shall be progressively reduced in accordance with the
following timetable:
− on 1 January 2003 - to 65% of their value;
− on 1 January 2004 - to 50% of their value;
− on 1 January 2005 - to 35% of their value;
− on 1 January 2006 - to 15% of their value;
− on 1 January 2007 - the remaining duties shall be abolished.
Article 5
Customs Duties On Exports, Charges Having Equivalent Effect And
Export Duties Of A Fiscal Nature
1. The Parties shall not introduce new customs duties on exports, charges having equivalent
effect and export duties of a fiscal nature in trade between them.
2. The Parties shall abolish all customs duties on exports, charges having equivalent effect and
export duties of a fiscal nature upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 6
Quantitative Restrictions And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. The Parties shall not introduce new quantitative restrictions on imports and exports or
measures having equivalent effect in trade between them.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and measures having equivalent effect
shall be abolished upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 7
Elimination Of Technical Barriers To Trade
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to technical regulations or standards and
related measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Parties shall co-operate and exchange information in the field of conformity assessment,
standardisation, metrology and accreditation with the aim of reducing and/or eliminating technical
barriers to trade.
3. Each Party, upon request of the other Party, shall provide information on particular individual
cases of technical norms, standards and related measures. 
Page 4
4. To eliminate technical barriers and effectively implement this Agreement, the Parties shall
conclude an agreement on mutual recognition of test reports, certificates of conformity and other
documents directly or indirectly related to conformity assessment of the products which are the
subject of trade between the Parties.
Article 8
Agricultural Policy
1. Without prejudice to the concessions granted under Article 4 of this Agreement, the
provisions of this Chapter shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective agricultural
policies of the Parties or the taking of any measures under such policies, including the implementation
of the results of the Uruguay Round agreements.
2. The Parties shall notify to the Joint Committee changes in their respective agricultural policies
pursued or measures applied which may affect the conditions of trade in agricultural products between
them. On the request of a Party, prompt consultations shall be held to examine the situation.
Article 9
Specific Safeguards
 Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Article 22, given the
particular sensitivity of the agricultural market, if imports of products originating in one of the Parties,
which are the subject of concessions granted under this Agreement cause serious disturbance to the
market or to its domestic regulatory mechanisms in the other Party, both Parties shall enter into
consultations immediately to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Party concerned
may take appropriate measures in accordance with the provisions of the GATT and the other relevant
WTO agreements.
Article 10
Sanitary And Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and sanitary matters, in
particular in the exchange of information on infectious animal diseases, quarantine diseases, plant
pests and weed, taking into account the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures.
2. The Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and sanitary matters in a
non-discriminatory fashion and shall not introduce any new measures that have the effect of unduly
obstructing trade.
3. The veterinary-sanitary measures and the work of the veterinary services will be in
accordance with the International Office of Epizootics and the Codex Alimentarius.
4. The phytosanitary measures and the work of the plant protection services will be in
accordance with the International Plant Protection Convention.
5. The Parties shall exchange the information on sanitary and phytosanitary protection of
animals, plants and products. 
Page 5
CHAPTER II: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 11
Rules Of Origin And Co-Operation Between The Customs Administrations
1. The Parties agree to apply the harmonized European preferential rules of origin in the mutual
trade including all existing and further amendments thereto.
2. Protocol 1 to this Agreement (hereinafter "Protocol 1") lays down the rules of origin and
related methods of administrative co-operation.
3. The Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews by the Joint Committee
and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the provisions of Protocol 1 of this
Agreement are effectively and harmoniously applied, and to reduce, as far as possible, the formalities
imposed on trade, and to achieve mutually satisfactory solutions to any difficulties arising from the
operation of those provisions.
Article 12
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing,
whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products originating in the Parties.
2. Products exported to the territory of one of the Parties may not benefit from repayment of
internal taxes in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxes imposed on them.
Article 13
General Exceptions
 This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in
transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of
health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic,
historic or archaeological value; the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property; the
rules relating to gold and silver, or the protection of environment or the conservation of exhaustible
natural resources, if such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic
production or consumption. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of
arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 14
Security Exceptions
 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any appropriate measure which it
considers necessary:
(a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies:
(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided
that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of 
Page 6
products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in
other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
(ii) relating to the non proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
(iii) taken in time of war or other serious international tension.
Article 15
State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall adjust progressively any State monopoly of a commercial character so as to
ensure that by the end of the fourth year following the entry into force of this Agreement, no
discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed exists between
nationals of the Parties. The Parties shall inform each other about the measures adopted to implement
this objective.
2. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any body through which the competent authorities
of the Parties, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly supervise, determine or appreciably
influence imports or exports between the Parties. These provisions shall likewise apply to monopolies
delegated by the State to other bodies.
Article 16
Payments
1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to commercial transactions between the
Parties within the framework of this Agreement and the transfer of such payments to the territory of
the Party where the creditor resides shall be free from any restrictions.
2. The Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the grant,
repayment or acceptance of short and medium term credits covering commercial transactions within
the framework of this Agreement in which a resident of a Party participates.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article, any measures concerning
current payments connected with the commercial transactions within the framework of this
Agreement shall be in conformity with the conditions laid down under Article VIII of Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund and shall be applied on a non-discriminatory basis.
Article 17
Rules Of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement insofar as they
may affect trade between the Parties:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the
Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof. 
Page 7
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall apply to the activities of all undertakings
including public undertakings and undertakings to which the Parties grant special or exclusive rights.
Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest or having the
character of a revenue-producing monopoly, shall be subject to provisions of paragraph 1 of this
Article insofar as the application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in law or in
fact, of the particular public tasks assigned to them.
3. With regard to agricultural products the provisions of paragraph 1 a. of this Article shall not
apply to such agreements, decisions and practices which form an integral part of a national market
organisation.
4. If a Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this
Article and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Party
or material injury to its domestic industry, it may take appropriate measures under the conditions and
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 26 of this Agreement.
Article 18
State Aid
1. Any aid granted by a State being Party to this Agreement or through State resources in any
form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings
or the production of certain goods shall, insofar as it may affect trade between the Parties, be
incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement.
2. For agricultural products the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall comply with the
relevant WTO Agreements.
3. The Joint Committee shall, within three years from the entry into force of this Agreement,
adopt the criteria on the basis of which the practices contrary to paragraph 1 of this Article shall be
assessed, as well as the rules for their implementation.
4. The Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid, inter alia by reporting annually
to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given and by providing to
the other Party, upon request, information on aid schemes and on particular individual cases of state
aid.
5. If a Party considers that a particular practice:
− is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1 of this Article, and is not adequately
dealt with under the implementing rules referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, or
− in the absence of rules referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, causes or threatens to
cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Party or material injury to its domestic
industry,
it may take appropriate measures under the conditions of and in accordance with the provisions laid
down in Article 26 of this Agreement.
6. Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with the procedures and under
the conditions laid down by the GATT 1994 and the WTO, and any other relevant instruments
negotiated under their auspices, which are applicable between the Parties. 
Page 8
Article 19
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement markets as an
objective of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall progressively adjust their respective rules, conditions and practices with a
view to grant suppliers of the other Party access to contract award procedures on their respective
public procurement markets.
3. The Joint Committee shall examine developments related to the achievement of the objectives
of this Article and may recommend practical modalities of implementing the provisions of paragraph
2 of this Article so as to ensure free access, transparency and mutual opening of their respective
public procurement markets.
4. The Parties shall endeavour to accede to the relevant Agreements negotiated under the
auspices of the GATT 1994 and the WTO.
Article 20
Intellectual, Industrial And Commercial Property
1. The Parties shall provide suitable and effective protection of intellectual, industrial and
commercial property rights in line with Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPs) and other international Agreements. This shall encompass effective means of
enforcing such rights.
2. Implementation of this Article shall be regularly assessed by the Parties. If difficulties which
affect trade arise in connection with intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights, either
Party may request urgent consultations to find mutually satisfactory solutions.
Article 21
Dumping
 If a Party finds that dumping within the meaning of Article VI of the GATT 1994 is taking
place in trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures against that
practice in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VI of the GATT 1994 under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in
Article 26 of this Agreement.
Article 22
General Safeguards
 Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions
as to cause or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injury to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the
territory of the importing Party, or
(b) serious disturbances in any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could
bring about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region, 
Page 9
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 26 of this Agreement.
Article 23
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article 4 of
this Agreement, may be taken for industrial products by any of the Parties in the form of increased
customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important
social problems.
3. Customs duties on imports applicable in the Party concerned to products originating in the
other Party introduced in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article may not exceed 25 % ad
valorem and shall maintain an element of preference in customs duties for products originating in the
other Party. The total value of imports of the products which are subject to these measures may not
exceed 15 % of total imports of industrial products from the other Party as defined in Chapter I of this
Agreement, during the last year for which statistics are available.
4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding the transitional period determined
in paragraph 1 of Article 1 of this Agreement.
5. The Party concerned shall inform the other Party of any exceptional measures it intends to
take and, at the request of the other Party, consultations shall be held immediately within the Joint
Committee on such measures and the sectors to which they apply prior to their introduction. When
taking such measures the Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the
elimination of the customs duties introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a
phasing out of these duties starting at the latest two years after their introduction, at equal annual
rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a different schedule.
Article 24
Re-Export And Serious Shortage
Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 5 and 6 of this Agreement leads to:
(a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party maintains for the
product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or
charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party; and
where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to major
difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under
the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 26 of this
Agreement. The measures shall be non-discriminatory and shall be eliminated when
conditions no longer justify their maintenance. 
Page 10
Article 25
Fulfilment Of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take any measures required to fulfil their obligations under this Agreement.
They shall ensure that the objectives set out in this Agreement are attained.
2. If a Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Agreement,
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 26 of this Agreement.
Article 26
Procedure For The Application Of Safeguard Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in the
following paragraphs, the Parties shall endeavour to solve any differences between them through
direct consultations.
2. In the event of a Party subjecting imports of products liable to give rise to the situation
referred to in Article 22 of this Agreement to an administrative procedure having as its purpose the
rapid provision of information on the trade flows, it shall inform the other Party.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 7 of this Article, a Party which considers resorting to
safeguard measures shall promptly notify the other Party thereof and supply all relevant information.
Consultations between the Parties shall take place without delay within the Joint Committee with a
view to finding a solution acceptable to the Parties.
4. (a) With regard to Articles 21, 22 and 24 of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall
examine the case or the situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to
the difficulties notified by the Party concerned. In the case of the absence of such
decision within thirty days of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the
Party concerned may adopt the measures necessary in order to remedy the situation
and shall notify to the other Party the measures taken.
(b) As regards Article 25 of this Agreement, the Party concerned may take appropriate
measures after the consultations have been concluded or a period of three months has
elapsed from the date of the notification to the other Party.
(c) With regard to Articles 17 and 18 of this Agreement, the Party concerned shall give
the Joint Committee all the assistance required in order to examine the case and,
where appropriate, eliminate the practice objected to. If the Party in question fails to
put an end to the practice objected to within the period fixed by the Joint Committee,
or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an agreement within thirty working days of
the matter being referred to it, the Party concerned may adopt the appropriate
measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the practice in question.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be immediately notified to the other Party. They shall be
limited, with regard to their extent and to their duration, to what is strictly necessary in order to rectify
the situation giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury caused by the
practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures which will least disturb
the functioning of this Agreement. 
Page 11
6. The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of periodic consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view to their relaxation as soon as possible, or abolition when conditions no longer
justify their maintenance.
7. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 21, 22 and 24 of this Agreement, apply
forthwith the provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation. The measures taken
shall be notified without delay and consultations between the Parties shall take place as soon as
possible within the Joint Committee.
Article 27
Balance Of Payments Difficulties
1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures including
measures relating to imports for balance of payments difficulties.
2. Where one of the Parties is in serious balance of payments difficulties, or under imminent
threat thereof, the Party concerned may, in accordance with the conditions established under the
GATT 1994 and the WTO and Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of International Monetary
Fund, adopt restrictive measures, including measures related to imports, which shall be of limited
duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The
measures shall be progressively relaxed as balance of payments conditions improve and they shall be
eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The Party concerned shall inform the
other Party forthwith of their introduction and, whenever practicable, of a time schedule for their
removal.
Article 28
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where a Party considers that it would be useful in the interests of the economies of the Parties
to develop and deepen the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not
covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Party. The Joint Committee may
examine such request and, where appropriate, may make recommendations, particularly with a view
to opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article will be
subject to ratification by the Parties in accordance with their internal legislation.
Article 29
Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established and shall be composed of the representatives of the
Parties.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administered by the Joint
Committee.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall exchange
information and, at the request of a Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee. The
Joint Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade
between the Parties. 
Page 12
4. The Joint Committee may take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement. On
other matters the Joint Committee may make recommendations.
Article 30
Procedures Of The Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall meet whenever
necessary but at least once a year. Each Party may request that a meeting be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall act by consensus.
3. If the representative of a Party in the Joint Committee has accepted, under reservation, a
decision subject to the fulfilment of internal legal requirements, the decision shall enter into force, if
no later date is contained therein, on the date of the receipt of a written notification as to the fulfilment
of such requirements.
4. For the purpose of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure
which shall, inter alia, contain provisions for convening meetings and for the designation of the Chair
person and his/her term of office.
5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such subcommittees and working groups as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
Article 31
Services And Investments
1. The Parties recognise the growing importance of certain areas, such as services and
investments. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden their co-operation, in particular in the
context of the European integration, they will co-operate with the aim of achieving a progressive
liberalisation and mutual opening of their markets for investments and trade in services, taking into
account relevant provisions of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
2. The Parties will discuss in the Joint Committee this cooperation with the aim of developing
and deepening of their relations governed in this Article.
Article 32
Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas And Frontier Trade
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free
trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that these do not negatively affect the trade
regime of the Parties and in particular the provisions concerning rules of origin provided for by this
Agreement.
2. Exchange of information shall take place, upon request of either Party, within the Joint
Committee concerning agreements establishing such customs unions or free trade areas. 
Page 13
Article 33
Protocols And Annexes
 All Protocols, Annexes to this Agreement and Record of understanding shall form an integral
part thereof. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Protocols and Annexes in accordance
with the national legislation of the Parties.
Article 34
Amendments
 Amendments to this Agreement, as well as to its Annexes and Protocols, shall enter into force
on the date of receipt of the latter written notification through diplomatic channels, by which the
Parties inform each other that all necessary requirements foreseen by their national legislation for the
entry into force of this Agreement, have been fulfilled.
Article 35
Entry Into Force
 This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the date when
the Parties have notified each other through diplomatic channels that their respective internal
requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.
Article 36
Validity And Denouncement
1. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Each Party may denounce it through diplomatic channels by a written notification to the other
Party. In such case the Agreement shall be terminated on the first day of the seventh month after the
date on which the other Party received the notification.
3. The Parties agreed, that in case of accession of one of the Parties to the EU, the Agreement
will be terminated without any compensations for the other Party, on the day before the date of the
accession to the EU. In that case, the Party acceding to the EU shall inform the other Party of such
accession within a reasonable period of time.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized thereto,
have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Ankara on July 3, 2002 in two originals in English language.
__________
 