FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE EFTA STATES
AND
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
III
PREAMBLE
Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway, and the Swiss
Confederation (hereinafter referred to as “the EFTA States”), on the one part,
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, on the other,
hereinafter individually referred to as a “Party” or collectively as the “Parties”:
RECOGNISING the common wish to strengthen the links between the EFTA States on
the one part and Bosnia and Herzegovina on the other by establishing close and lasting
relations;
RECALLING their intention to participate actively in the process of EuroMediterranean economic integration and expressing their preparedness to cooperate in
seeking ways and means to strengthen this process;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to democracy, the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with their obligations under international law,
including as set out in the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights;
DESIRING to create favourable conditions for the development and diversification of
trade between them and for the promotion of commercial and economic cooperation in
areas of common interest on the basis of equality, mutual benefit, non-discrimination
and international law;
DETERMINED to promote and further strengthen the multilateral trading system,
building on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organisation (hereinafter referred to as the “WTO
Agreement”) and the other agreements negotiated thereunder, thereby contributing to
the harmonious development and expansion of world trade;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to pursue the objective of sustainable development
and recognising the importance of coherence and mutual supportiveness of trade,
environment and labour policies in this respect;
RECALLING their rights and obligations under multilateral environmental agreements
to which they are party, and the respect for the fundamental principles and rights at
work, including the principles set out in the relevant International Labour Organisation
(hereinafter referred to as the “ILO”) Conventions to which they are a party;
AIMING to create new employment opportunities and to improve living standards,
along with high levels of protection of health and safety and of the environment;
DETERMINED to implement this Agreement in line with the objective to preserve and
protect the environment through sound environmental management and to promote an
optimal use of the world‟s resources in accordance with the objective of sustainable
development;
IV
AFFIRMING their commitment to prevent and combat corruption in international trade
and investment, and to promote the principles of transparency and good public
governance;
ACKNOWLEDGING the importance of good corporate governance and corporate
social responsibility for sustainable development, and affirming their aim to encourage
enterprises to observe internationally recognised guidelines and principles in this
respect, such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, the OECD
Principles of Corporate Governance and the UN Global Compact;
DECLARING their readiness to examine the possibility of developing and deepening
their economic relations in order to extend them to fields not covered by this
Agreement;
CONVINCED that this Agreement will enhance the competitiveness of their firms in
global markets and create conditions encouraging economic, trade and investment
relations between them;
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Agreement
(referred to as “this Agreement”):
V
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. The EFTA States and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall establish a free trade area
by means of this Agreement and the complementary agreements on trade in agricultural
products, concurrently concluded between each individual EFTA State and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with a view to spurring prosperity and sustainable development in their
territories.
2. The objectives of this Agreement, which is based on trade relations between
market economies and on the respect of democratic principles and human rights, are:
(a) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in goods, in conformity with Article
XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (hereinafter
referred to as the “GATT 1994”);
(b) to mutually increase investment opportunities between the Parties, and to
gradually develop an environment conducive to enhanced trade in
services;
(c) to provide fair conditions of competition for trade between the Parties
and to ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual property
rights;
(d) to gradually achieve further liberalisation on a mutual basis of the
government procurement markets of the Parties;
(e) to develop international trade in such a way as to contribute to the
objective of sustainable development and to ensure that this objective is
integrated and reflected in the Parties‟ trade relationship; and
(f) to contribute in this way to the harmonious development and expansion
of world trade.
ARTICLE 2
Trade Relations Governed by this Agreement
1. This Agreement shall apply to trade relations between, on the one side, the
individual EFTA States and, on the other side, Bosnia and Herzegovina, but not to the
trade relations between individual EFTA States, unless otherwise provided for in this
Agreement.
VI
2. As a result of the customs union established by the Customs Treaty of 29 March
1923 between Switzerland and Liechtenstein, Switzerland shall represent Liechtenstein
in matters covered thereby.
ARTICLE 3
Relation to Other International Agreements
1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement, the
other agreements negotiated thereunder to which they are party, and any other
international agreement to which they are party.
2. The provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to the interpretation
or application of rights and obligations under any other international agreement relating
to investment to which Bosnia and Herzegovina and one or several EFTA States are
parties.
3. If a Party considers that the maintenance or establishment of a customs union, a
free trade area, an arrangement for frontier trade or another preferential agreement by
another Party has the effect of altering the trade regime provided for by this Agreement,
it may request consultations. The Party concluding such agreement shall afford adequate
opportunity for consultations with the requesting Party.
ARTICLE 4
Territorial Application
1. This Agreement shall, except as otherwise specified in Article 8, apply:
(a) to the land territory, internal waters, and the territorial sea of a Party, and
the air-space above the territory of a Party, in accordance with
international law; and
(b) beyond the territorial sea, with respect to measures taken by a Party in
the exercise of its sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with
international law.
2. This Agreement shall not apply to the Norwegian territory of Svalbard, with the
exception of trade in goods.
VII
ARTICLE 5
Central, Regional and Local Government
Each Party shall ensure within its territory the observance of all obligations and
commitments under this Agreement by its respective central, regional and local
governments and authorities, and by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
governmental powers delegated to them by central, regional and local governments or
authorities.
ARTICLE 6
Transparency
1. Each Party shall publish or otherwise make publicly available its laws,
regulations, judicial decisions, administrative rulings of general application and the
international agreements to which it is a party that may affect the operation of this
Agreement.
2. A Party shall promptly respond to specific questions and provide, upon request,
information to another Party on matters referred to in paragraph 1. The Parties are not
required to disclose confidential information.
VIII
CHAPTER 2
TRADE IN GOODS
ARTICLE 7
Scope
1. This Chapter applies to the following products:
(a) all products classified under Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System (HS), except products
subject to Annex I;
(b) processed agricultural products specified in Annex II, with due regard to
the arrangements provided for in that Annex; and
(c) fish and other marine products as provided for in Annex III.
2. Each EFTA State and Bosnia and Herzegovina have concluded agreements on
trade in agricultural products on a bilateral basis. These agreements form part of the
instruments establishing a free trade area between the EFTA States and Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
ARTICLE 8
Rules of Origin and Administrative Cooperation
1. The provisions on rules of origin and methods of administrative cooperation are
set out in the Protocol on Rules of Origin.
2. From the date of entry into force, for the Parties, of the Regional Convention on
Pan-Euro-Mediterranean Preferential Rules of Origin (hereinafter referred to as “the
Convention”), the Protocol on Rules of Origin shall no longer be applicable, and the
rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of rules of origin and administrative
cooperation between the customs authorities of the Parties shall be governed by the
Convention, without prejudice to Article 16.
3. If a Party withdraws from the Convention, the Parties shall immediately enter
into negotiations on new rules of origin applicable to this Agreement. Until new rules
enter into force, those contained in the Convention shall apply mutatis mutandis to this
Agreement, allowing for cumulation only between the Parties.
IX
ARTICLE 9
Customs Duties
1. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall abolish all customs
duties, and charges having equivalent effect to customs duties, on imports and exports
of products originating in an EFTA State or in Bosnia and Herzegovina covered by
subparagraph 1(a) of Article 7, except as otherwise specified in Annex IV of this
Agreement. No new customs duties shall be introduced.
2. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect to customs duties include
any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the importation or
exportation of a product, including any form of surtax or surcharge, but does not include
any charge imposed in conformity with Articles III and VIII of the GATT 1994.
ARTICLE 10
Basic Duties
1. The basic duty, to which the successive reductions set out in this Agreement are
to be applied, shall be:
(a) the Most-Favoured-Nation rate of duty (MFN rate) applied by the EFTA
States on 1 January 2011;
(b) Bosnia and Herzegovina„s applied Customs Tariff for 2011.1
2. If before, by or after entry into force of this Agreement any tariff reduction is
applied on an erga omnes basis, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties
referred to in paragraph 1 as from the date when such reductions are applied, or from
the entry into force of this Agreement, whichever is later.
3. Reduced duties shall be rounded to the first decimal place or, in the case of
specific duties, to the second decimal place.
ARTICLE 11
Quantitative Restrictions
With respect to the rights and obligations of the Parties concerning quantitative
restrictions, Article XI of the GATT 1994 shall apply and is hereby incorporated into
and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

1 Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina No. 106/10 of 22 December 2010.
X
ARTICLE 12
Internal Taxation and Regulations
1. The Parties commit themselves to apply any internal taxes and other charges and
regulations in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994 and other relevant WTO
Agreements.
2. Exporters may not benefit from repayment of internal taxes in excess of the
amount of indirect taxation imposed on products exported to the territory of a Party.
ARTICLE 13
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures.
2. The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of contact points with sanitary
and phytosanitary expertise in order to facilitate communication and the exchange of
information.
ARTICLE 14
Technical Regulations
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment, with a view to increasing the mutual
understanding of their respective systems and facilitating access to their respective
markets.
ARTICLE 15
Trade Facilitation
With the aim to facilitate trade between the EFTA States and Bosnia and
Herzegovina in accordance with the provisions set out in Annex V, each Party shall:
(a) simplify, to the greatest extent possible, procedures for trade in goods
and related services;
XI
(b) promote cooperation among them in order to enhance their participation
in the development and implementation of international conventions and
recommendations on trade facilitation; and
(c) cooperate on trade facilitation within the framework of the Joint
Committee.
ARTICLE 16
Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation
1. With reference to Articles 8 and 15, a Sub-Committee of the Joint Committee on
Rules of Origin, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation (hereinafter referred to as
“the Sub-Committee”) is hereby established.
2. The mandate of the Sub-Committee is set out in Annex VI.
ARTICLE 17
State Trading Enterprises
With respect to the rights and obligations of the Parties concerning state trading
enterprises, Article XVII of the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Interpretation
of Article XVII of the GATT 1994 shall apply and are hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 18
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in
so far as they may affect trade between an EFTA State and Bosnia and Herzegovina:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of
undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have
as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of
competition; and
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territory
of a Party as a whole or in a substantial part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to the activities of public undertakings
and undertakings for which a Party grants special or exclusive rights, in so far as the
application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of
the particular public tasks assigned to them.
XII
3. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not be construed to create any direct
obligations for undertakings.
4. If a Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with the provisions of
paragraphs 1 and 2, it may request consultations within the Joint Committee. The
Parties concerned shall give to the Joint Committee all the assistance required in order
to examine the case and, where appropriate, eliminate the practice objected to. If the
Party concerned fails to put an end to the practice objected to within the period set by
the Joint Committee, or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an agreement after
consultations, or after 30 days following referral for such consultations, the Party
requesting consultations may adopt appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties
resulting from the practice in question.
ARTICLE 19
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to subsidies and countervailing
measures shall be governed by Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994 and the WTO
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, except as provided for in
paragraph 2.
2. Before an EFTA State or Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the case may be, initiates
an investigation to determine the existence, degree and effect of any alleged subsidy in
an EFTA State or in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as provided for in Article 11 of the WTO
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the Party considering initiating
an investigation shall notify in writing the Party whose goods are subject to
investigation and allow for a 45 day period with a view to finding a mutually acceptable
solution. The consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee if any Party so
requests within 20 days from the receipt of the notification.
3. If the consultations referred to in paragraph 2 do not resolve the situation, the
Party considering initiation of an investigation, may proceed in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 20
Anti-dumping
1. A Party shall not apply anti-dumping measures as provided for under Article VI
of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the
GATT 1994 in relation to products originating in another Party.
2. Nevertheless, the Parties recognise that the effective implementation of
competition rules may address economic causes leading to dumping.
XIII
3. Four years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may in
the Joint Committee review the operation of paragraph 1 to 2 of this Article. Thereafter
the Parties may conduct biennial reviews of this matter in the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 21
Global Safeguard Measures
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of global safeguards shall be
governed by Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards. In
taking global safeguard measures a Party shall exclude imports of an originating product
from one or several Parties if such imports do not in and of themselves cause or threaten
to cause serious injury. The Party taking the measure shall demonstrate that such
exclusion is in accordance with WTO rules and practice.
ARTICLE 22
Bilateral Safeguard Measures
1. Where, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this
Agreement, any product originating in a Party is being imported into the territory of
another Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic
production, and under such conditions as to constitute a substantial cause of serious
injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry of like or directly competitive products
in the territory of the importing Party, the importing Party may take bilateral safeguard
measures to the minimum extent necessary to remedy or prevent the injury, subject to
the provisions of paragraphs 2 to 10.
2. Bilateral safeguard measures shall only be taken upon clear evidence that
increased imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury pursuant to an
investigation in accordance with the procedures laid down in the WTO Agreement on
Safeguards mutatis mutandis.
3. The Party intending to take a bilateral safeguard measure under this Article shall
immediately, and in any case before taking a measure, make notification to the other
Parties. The notification shall contain all pertinent information, which shall include
evidence of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased imports, a precise
description of the product involved and the proposed measure, as well as the proposed
date of introduction, expected duration and timetable for the progressive removal of the
measure.
4. If the conditions set out in paragraph 1 are met, the importing Party may take
measures consisting in:
(a) suspending the further reduction of any rate of customs duty provided for
under this Agreement for the product; or
XIV
(b) increase the rate of customs duty for the product to a level not to exceed
the lesser of:
(i) the MFN rate of duty applied at the time the action is taken; or
(ii) the MFN rate of duty applied on the day immediately preceding
the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
5. Bilateral safeguard measures shall be taken for a period not exceeding two years.
In very exceptional circumstances, after review by the Joint Committee, measures may
be taken up to a total maximum period of three years. No bilateral safeguard measure
shall be applied to the import of a product that has previously been subject to such a
measure for a period of, at least four years since the expiry of the measure.
6. The Joint Committee shall, within 30 days from the date of notification referred
to in paragraph 3, examine the information provided in order to facilitate a mutually
acceptable resolution of the matter. In the absence of such resolution, the importing
Party may adopt a measure pursuant to paragraph 4 to remedy the problem. In the
selection of the bilateral safeguard measure, priority must be given to the measure
which least disturbs the functioning of this Agreement. The bilateral safeguard measure
shall be immediately notified to the other Parties and the Joint Committee and shall be
subject to periodic consultations in the Joint Committee, particularly with a view to
establishing a timetable for their abolition as soon as circumstances permit.
7. Upon the termination of the bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of customs
duty shall be the rate which would have been in effect but for the measure.
8. In critical circumstances, where delay would cause damage which would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional bilateral safeguard measure pursuant to
a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports constitute
a substantial cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to the domestic industry. The
Party intending to take such a measure shall immediately notify in writing the other
Parties and the Joint Committee thereof. Within 30 days of the date of the notification,
the procedures set out in paragraphs 2 to 6, shall be initiated.
9. Any provisional bilateral safeguard measures shall be terminated within 200
days at the latest. The period of application of any such provisional bilateral safeguard
measure shall be counted as part of the duration of the bilateral safeguard measure set
out in paragraph 5 and any extension thereof. Any tariff increases shall be promptly
refunded if the investigation described in paragraph 2 does not result in a finding that
the conditions of paragraph 1 are met.
10. Five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall
review in the Joint Committee whether there is need to maintain the possibility to take
bilateral safeguard measures between them. If the Parties decide, after the first review,
to maintain such possibility, they shall thereafter conduct biennial reviews of this matter
in the Joint Committee.
XV
ARTICLE 23
Shortage clause
1. Where compliance with the provisions of this Chapter leads to:
(a) a critical shortage, or threat thereof, of foodstuffs or other products
essential to the exporting Party; or
(b) re-export to a third country of a product against which the exporting
Party maintains quantitative export restrictions, export duties or
measures or charges having equivalent effect, and where this gives rise,
or is likely to give rise to major difficulties for the exporting Party,
that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance
with the procedures laid down in the following paragraphs of this Article.
2. Before taking the measures provided for in paragraph 1 the Party considering
taking such measures shall supply the Joint Committee with all relevant information,
with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties. The Parties within the Joint
Committee may agree on any means needed to put an end to the difficulties. If no
agreement is reached within 30 days of the matter being referred to the Joint
Committee, the exporting Party may apply measures under this Article on the
exportation of the product concerned.
3. In the selection of measures, priority shall be given to those which least disturb
the functioning of the arrangements in this Agreement. Such measures shall not be
applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade and
shall be eliminated when the conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
4. Any measure applied pursuant to this Article shall be immediately notified to the
Joint Committee and shall be subject to periodic consultations within it, in particular
with a view to their elimination as soon as circumstances permit.
ARTICLE 24
Exceptions
With respect to the rights and obligations of the Parties under this Chapter
concerning general and security exceptions, Articles XX and XXI of the GATT 1994
shall apply and are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.
XVI
CHAPTER 3
PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 25
Protection of Intellectual Property
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non-discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, and provide for measures for the enforcement
of such rights against infringement thereof, counterfeiting and piracy, in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, Annex VII and the international agreements referred
to therein.
2. The Parties shall accord to each other‟s nationals treatment no less favourable
than that they accord to their own nationals. Exemptions from this obligation must be in
accordance with the substantive provisions of Articles 3 and 5 of the WTO Agreement
of 15 April 1994 on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (hereinafter
referred to as the “TRIPS Agreement”).
3. The Parties shall grant to each other‟s nationals treatment no less favourable
than that accorded to nationals of any other State. Exemptions from this obligation must
be in accordance with the substantive provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular
Articles 4 and 5 thereof.
4. The Parties agree, upon request of any Party, to review the provisions on the
protection of intellectual property rights contained in this Article and in Annex VII with
a view to further improving the levels of protection and to avoiding or remedying trade
distortions caused by actual levels of protection of intellectual property rights.
XVII
CHAPTER 4
INVESTMENT, SERVICES AND GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE 26
Investment
1. The Parties shall endeavour to provide in their territories stable, equitable and
transparent investment conditions for investors of the other Parties that are making or
seeking to make investments in their territories.
2. The Parties shall admit investments by investors of the other Parties in
accordance with their laws and regulations. They recognise that it is inappropriate to
encourage investment by relaxing health, safety or environmental standards.
3. The Parties recognise the importance of promoting investment and technology
flows as a means for achieving economic growth and development. Cooperation in this
respect may include:
(a) appropriate means of identifying investment opportunities and
information channels on investment regulations;
(b) exchange of information on measures to promote investment abroad; and
(c) the furthering of a legal environment conducive to increased investment
flows.
4. The Parties affirm their commitment to review issues related to investment in the
Joint Committee no later than five years after the entry into force of this Agreement,
including the right of establishment of investors of one Party in the territory of another
Party.
5. Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland, on the one part, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on the other, shall refrain from arbitrary or discriminatory measures
regarding investments by investors of another Party mentioned in this paragraph and
shall observe obligations they have entered into with regard to specific investments by
an investor of another Party mentioned in this paragraph.
ARTICLE 27
Trade in Services
1. The Parties shall aim at achieving gradual liberalisation and the opening of their
markets for trade in services in accordance with the provisions of the General
Agreement on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred to as the “GATS”).
XVIII
2. If a Party grants to a non-party, after the entry into force of this Agreement,
additional benefits with regard to the access to its services markets, it shall agree to
enter into consultations with a view to extending these benefits to another Party on a
reciprocal basis.
3. The Parties undertake to keep under review paragraphs 1 and 2 with a view to
establishing an agreement liberalising trade in services between them in accordance
with Article V of the GATS.
ARTICLE 28
Government Procurement
1. The Parties shall enhance their mutual understanding of their government
procurement laws and regulations with a view to progressively liberalising their
respective procurement markets on the basis of non-discrimination and reciprocity.
2. Each Party shall publish its laws, or otherwise make publicly available its laws,
regulations and administrative rulings of general application as well as its respective
international agreements that may affect its procurement markets. Each Party shall
promptly respond to specific questions and provide, upon request, information to
another Party on such matters.
3. If a Party grants to a non-party, after the entry into force of this Agreement,
additional benefits with regard to the access to its procurement markets, it shall agree to
enter into negotiations with a view to extending these benefits to another Party on a
reciprocal basis.
XIX
CHAPTER 5
PAYMENTS AND CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
ARTICLE 29
Payments for Current Transactions
Subject to the provisions of Article 31, the Parties undertake to allow all
payments for current transactions to be made in a freely convertible currency.
ARTICLE 30
Capital Movements
1. Subject to the provisions of Article 31, the Parties shall ensure that capital for
investments made in companies formed in accordance with their respective laws, any
returns stemming therefrom, and the amounts resulting from liquidations of investments
are freely transferable.
2. The Parties shall hold consultations with a view to facilitating the movement of
capital between the EFTA States and Bosnia and Herzegovina and achieving its
complete liberalisation as soon as conditions permit.
ARTICLE 31
Balance of Payments Difficulties
Where an EFTA State or Bosnia and Herzegovina is in serious balance of
payments difficulties, or under threat thereof, the EFTA State concerned or Bosnia and
Herzegovina, respectively, may in conformity with the conditions laid down within the
framework of the GATT 1994 and the GATS as well as the Articles of Agreement of
the International Monetary Fund, take restrictive measures with regard to current
payments and capital movements if such measures are strictly necessary. Such measures
shall be applied on temporary, equitable and non-discriminatory basis. The EFTA State
concerned or Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the case may be, shall inform the other Parties
immediately of such measures and shall provide as soon as possible a timetable for their
removal.
ARTICLE 32
Exceptions
With respect to the rights and obligations of the Parties under this Chapter
concerning general exceptions and security exceptions, Article 24 of this Agreement 
XX
shall apply mutatis mutandis, as well as Article XIV subparagraphs (a) to (c) and
paragraph 1 of Article XIV bis of the GATS which are hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
XXI
CHAPTER 6
TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 33
Context and Objectives
1. The Parties recall the Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment of
1972, the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992, Agenda 21 on
Environment and Development of 1992, the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles
and Rights at Work and its Follow-up of 1998, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation on Sustainable Development of 2002, the Ministerial Declaration of the
UN Economic and Social Council on Full Employment and Decent Work of 2006 and
the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization of 2008.
2. The Parties recognise that economic development, social development and
environmental protection are interdependent and mutually supportive components of
sustainable development. They underline the benefit of cooperation on trade-related
labour and environmental issues as part of a global approach to trade and sustainable
development.
3. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to promote the development of
international trade in such a way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable
development and to ensure that this objective is integrated and reflected in the Parties‟
trade relationship.
ARTICLE 34
Scope
Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, this Chapter applies to
measures adopted or maintained by the Parties affecting trade-related and investmentrelated aspects of labour2
and environmental issues.
ARTICLE 35
Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection
1. Recognising the right of each Party, subject to the provisions of this Agreement,
to establish its own levels of environmental and labour protection, and to adopt or
modify accordingly its relevant laws and policies, each Party shall seek to ensure that its
laws, policies and practices provide for and encourage high levels of environmental and
labour protection, consistent with standards, principles and agreements referred to in

2 When labour is referred to in this Chapter, it includes the issues relevant to the Decent Work
Agenda as agreed on in the ILO.
XXII
Articles 37 and 38, and shall strive to further improve the levels of protection provided
for in those laws and policies.
2. The Parties recognise the importance, when preparing and implementing
measures related to the environment and labour conditions that affect trade and
investment between them, of taking account of scientific, technical and other
information, and relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations.
ARTICLE 36
Upholding Levels of Protection in the Application and Enforcement of Laws,
Regulations or Standards
1. A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental and labour laws,
regulations or standards in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.
2. Subject to Article 35, a Party shall not:
(a) weaken or reduce the levels of environmental or labour protection
provided by its laws, regulations or standards with the sole intention to
encourage investment from another Party or to seek or to enhance a
competitive trade advantage of producers or service providers operating
in its territory; or
(b) waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise
derogate from, such laws, regulations or standards in order to encourage
investment from another Party or to seek or to enhance a competitive
trade advantage of producers or service providers operating in its
territory.
ARTICLE 37
International Labour Standards and Agreements
1. The Parties recall the obligations deriving from membership of the ILO and the
ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up
adopted by the International Labour Conference at its 86th Session in 1998, to respect,
promote and realise the principles concerning the fundamental rights, namely:
(a) the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to
collective bargaining;
(b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;
(c) the effective abolition of child labour; and
(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and
occupation.
XXIII
2. The Parties reaffirm their commitment, under the Ministerial Declaration of the
UN Economic and Social Council on Full Employment and Decent Work of 2006, to
recognising full and productive employment and decent work for all as a key element of
sustainable development for all countries and as a priority objective of international
cooperation and to promoting the development of international trade in a way that is
conducive to full and productive employment and decent work for all.
3. The Parties recall the obligations deriving from membership of the ILO to
effectively implementing the ILO Conventions which they have ratified and to make
continued and sustained efforts towards ratifying the fundamental ILO Conventions as
well as the other Conventions that are classified as “up-to-date” by the ILO.
4. The violation of fundamental principles and rights at work shall not be invoked
or otherwise used as a legitimate comparative advantage. Labour standards shall not be
used for protectionist trade purposes.
ARTICLE 38
Multilateral Environmental Agreements and Environmental Principles
The Parties reaffirm their commitment to the effective implementation in their
laws and practices of the multilateral environmental agreements to which they are party,
as well as their adherence to environmental principles reflected in the international
instruments referred to in Article 33.
ARTICLE 39
Promotion of Trade and Investment Favouring Sustainable Development
1. The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote foreign investment, trade in and
dissemination of goods and services beneficial to the environment, including
environmental technologies, sustainable renewable energy, energy efficient and ecolabelled goods and services, including through addressing related non-tariff barriers.
2. The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote foreign investment, trade in and
dissemination of goods and services that contribute to sustainable development,
including goods and services that are the subject of schemes such as fair and ethical
trade.
3. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, the Parties agree to exchange views and
may consider, jointly or bilaterally, cooperation in this area.
4. The Parties shall encourage cooperation between enterprises in relation to goods,
services and technologies that contribute to sustainable development and are beneficial
to the environment.
XXIV
ARTICLE 40
Cooperation in International Fora
The Parties shall strive to strengthen their cooperation on trade and investment
related labour and environmental issues of mutual interest in relevant bilateral, regional
and multilateral fora in which they participate.
ARTICLE 41
Implementation and Consultations
1. The Parties shall designate the administrative entities which shall serve as
contact points for the purpose of implementing this Chapter.
2. A Party may, through the contact point(s) referred to in paragraph 1, request
expert consultations or consultations within the Joint Committee regarding any matter
arising under this Chapter. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually
satisfactory resolution of the matter. Where relevant, and subject to the agreement of the
Parties, they may seek advice of the relevant international organisations or bodies.
3. If a Party considers that a measure of another Party does not comply with the
obligations under this Chapter, it may have recourse to consultations according to
paragraphs 1 to 3 of Article 44.
ARTICLE 42
Review
The Parties shall periodically review in the Joint Committee progress achieved
in pursuing the objectives set out in this Chapter, and consider relevant international
developments to identify areas where further action could promote these objectives.
XXV
CHAPTER 7
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 43
The Joint Committee
1. The Parties hereby establish the EFTA-Bosnia and Herzegovina Joint
Committee. It shall be composed of representatives of the Parties which shall be headed
by senior officials.
2. The Joint Committee shall:
(a) supervise and review the implementation of this Agreement, inter alia by
means of a comprehensive review of the application of the provisions of
this Agreement, with due regard to any specific reviews provided for in
this Agreement;
(b) keep under review the possibility of further removal of barriers to trade
and other restrictive measures concerning trade between the EFTA States
and Bosnia and Herzegovina;
(c) oversee the further development of this Agreement;
(d) supervise the work of any sub-committees and working groups
established under this Agreement;
(e) endeavour to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation
or application of this Agreement; and
(f) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this
Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. Except where
otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the sub-committees and working groups shall
work under a mandate established by the Joint Committee.
4. The Joint Committee may take decisions as provided for in this Agreement. On
other matters the Joint Committee may make recommendations.
5. The Joint Committee shall take decisions and make recommendations by
consensus.
6. The Joint Committee shall meet whenever necessary upon mutual agreement but
normally every two years. Its meetings shall be chaired jointly by one of the EFTA 
XXVI
States and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules of
procedure.
7. Each Party may request at any time, through written notice to the other Parties,
that a special meeting of the Joint Committee be held. Such a meeting shall take place
within 30 days of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
8. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Annexes and the Protocol on
Rules of Origin to this Agreement, including their Appendices. Subject to paragraph 9,
the Joint Committee may set a date for the entry into force of such decisions.
9. If a representative of a Party in the Joint Committee has accepted a decision
subject to the fulfilment of constitutional requirements, the decision shall enter into
force on the date the last Party notifies that its internal requirements have been fulfilled,
unless the decision itself specifies a later date. The Joint Committee may decide that the
decision shall enter into force for those Parties that have fulfilled their internal
requirements, provided that Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of those Parties. A Party
may apply a decision of the Joint Committee provisionally until such decision enters
into force for that Party, subject to its constitutional requirements.
XXVII
CHAPTER 8
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
ARTICLE 44
Consultations
1. In case of any divergence with respect to the interpretation, implementation and
application of this Agreement, the Parties shall make every attempt through cooperation
and consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory solution.
2. A Party may request in writing consultations with any other Party regarding any
actual or proposed measure or any other matter that it considers might affect the
operation of this Agreement. The Party requesting consultations shall at the same time
notify the other Parties in writing thereof and supply all relevant information.
3. The consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee if any of the Parties so
requests within 20 days from the receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2,
with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
4. If the Party to which a request is made in accordance with paragraph 2 does not
reply within 10 days or does not enter into consultations within 20 days from the date of
receipt of the request, the Party making the request is entitled to request the
establishment of an arbitration panel in accordance with Article 45.
ARTICLE 45
Arbitration
1. Disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation of rights and
obligations under this Agreement, which have not been settled through direct
consultations or in the Joint Committee within 60 days from the date of the receipt of
the request for consultations, may be referred to arbitration by the complaining Party by
means of a written request to the Party complained against. A copy of this request shall
be communicated to all other Parties so that they may determine whether to participate
in the arbitration.
2. Where more than one Party requests the establishment of an arbitration panel
relating to the same matter, or where the request involves more than one Party
complained against, a single arbitration panel should, whenever feasible, be established
to consider such disputes.
3
3. A Party that is not a party to the dispute shall be entitled, on delivery of a written
request to the parties to the dispute, to make written submissions to the arbitration panel,

3
For the purpose of this Chapter, the terms “Party” and “Party to the dispute” are used regardless
of whether two or more Parties are involved in a dispute.
XXVIII
receive written submissions, including annexes, from the parties to the dispute, attend
hearings and make oral statements.
4. The arbitration panel shall comprise three members, who shall be nominated in
accordance with the Optional Rules for Arbitrating Disputes between Two States of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, effective 20 October 1992 (hereinafter referred to as
the “Optional Rules”). If a member of the arbitration panel fails to participate in the
arbitration, the other members shall, unless a party to the dispute requests otherwise,
have the discretion to continue the arbitration and to render any ruling notwithstanding
the failure of one member to participate.
5. The arbitration panel shall examine the matter referred to it in the request for the
establishment of an arbitration panel in light of the provisions of this Agreement applied
and interpreted in accordance with the rules of interpretation of public international law.
The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the parties to the
dispute. Any ruling of the arbitration panel shall be made public, unless the parties to
the dispute agree otherwise.
6. The language of any proceedings shall be English. The hearings of the
arbitration panel shall be open to the public unless the parties to the dispute agree
otherwise. Each Party shall treat as confidential the information submitted by any other
Party to the arbitration panel which that Party has designated as confidential.
7. There shall be no ex parte communications with the arbitration panel concerning
matters under its consideration.
8. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be rendered within 180 days of the date
on which the presiding arbitrator of the arbitration panel was appointed. This period
may be extended by a maximum of 90 days, if the parties to the dispute so agree.
9. The costs of arbitration, including the remuneration of the members of the
arbitration panel, shall be borne by the parties to the dispute in equal shares. Each party
shall bear its own costs of arbitration, in particular for its representation, witnesses,
including expert witnesses, and statements submitted to the arbitration panel.
10. Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement or agreed between the parties to
the dispute, the Optional Rules shall apply.
11. Disputes regarding the same matter arising under both this Agreement and the
WTO Agreement may be settled in either forum at the discretion of the complaining
party. The forum thus selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other. For the
purpose of this paragraph, dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement or
this Agreement are deemed to be initiated upon a request for the establishment of a
panel by a Party. Before a Party initiates dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO
Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes against
another Party regarding a matter arising under both this Agreement and the WTO
Agreement, that Party shall notify all other Parties of its intention to do so.
XXIX
ARTICLE 46
Implementation of the Ruling
1. The Party complained against shall promptly comply with the ruling of the
arbitration panel. If it is impracticable to comply immediately, the parties to the dispute
shall endeavour to agree on a reasonable period of time to do so. In the absence of such
agreement within 30 days from the date of the ruling, either party to the dispute may,
within 10 days from the expiration of such period, request the original arbitration panel
to determine the length of the reasonable period of time.
2. The Party concerned shall notify in writing the other party to the dispute of the
measure adopted in order to implement the ruling.
3. If the Party concerned fails to comply with the ruling within a reasonable period
of time and the parties to the dispute have not agreed on any compensation, the other
party to the dispute may, until the ruling has been properly implemented or the dispute
has been otherwise resolved, and subject to a prior notification of 30 days, suspend the
application of benefits granted under this Agreement, but only equivalent to those
affected by the measure that the arbitration panel has found to violate this Agreement.
4. Any dispute regarding the implementation of the ruling or the notified
suspension shall be decided by the original arbitration panel upon request of either party
to the dispute before suspension of benefits can be applied. The arbitration panel may
also rule on the conformity with the ruling of any implementing measures adopted after
the suspension of benefits and whether the suspension of benefits should be terminated
or modified. The ruling of the arbitration panel under this paragraph shall normally be
given within 45 days from the date of receipt of the request.
XXX
CHAPTER 9
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 47
Fulfilment of Obligations
The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their
obligations under this Agreement.
ARTICLE 48
Annexes and Protocols
The Annexes and the Protocol on Rules of Origin to this Agreement, including
their Appendices, are an integral part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 49
Evolutionary Clause
The Parties undertake to review this Agreement in light of further developments
in international economic relations, inter alia in the framework of the WTO, and to
examine in this context and in light of any other relevant factor the possibility of further
developing and deepening their cooperation under this Agreement and of extending it to
areas not covered therein. The Joint Committee shall regularly examine this possibility
and, where appropriate, make recommendations to the Parties, particularly with a view
to opening negotiations.
ARTICLE 50
Amendments
1. The Parties may agree on any amendment to this Agreement. Amendments to
this Agreement other than those referred to in paragraph 8 of Article 43 shall be
submitted to the Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval. Unless otherwise
agreed by the Parties, amendments shall enter into force on the first day of the third
month following the deposit of the last instrument of ratification, acceptance or
approval.
2. The text of the amendments as well as the instruments of ratification, acceptance
or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
XXXI
ARTICLE 51
Accession
1. Any State becoming a member of the European Free Trade Association may
accede to this Agreement, provided that the Joint Committee approves its accession, on
terms and conditions to be agreed upon by the Parties. The instrument of accession shall
be deposited with the Depositary.
2. In relation to an acceding State, this Agreement shall enter into force on the first
day of the third month following the deposit of its instrument of accession, or the
approval of the terms of accession by the existing Parties, whichever is later.
ARTICLE 52
Withdrawal and Expiration
1. A Party may withdraw from this Agreement by means of a written notification
to the Depositary. The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the date on which
the notification is received by the Depositary.
2. If Bosnia and Herzegovina withdraws, this Agreement shall expire when its
withdrawal becomes effective.
3. Any EFTA State which withdraws from the Convention establishing the
European Free Trade Association shall, ipso facto on the same day as the withdrawal
takes effect, cease to be a Party to this Agreement.
ARTICLE 53
Entry into Force
1. This Agreement is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval in accordance
with the respective constitutional requirements of the Parties. The instruments of
ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
2. This Agreement shall enter into force, in relation to those Parties which have
deposited their instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval, or notified
provisional application to the Depositary, on the first day of the third month following
the receipt of the latest deposit of instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, or
notification on provisional application, provided that at least one EFTA State and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are among them.
3. In relation to an EFTA State depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval after this Agreement has entered into force, this Agreement shall enter into
force on the first day of the third month following the deposit of its instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval.
XXXII
4. If its constitutional requirements permit, any EFTA State or Bosnia and
Herzegovina may apply this Agreement provisionally pending ratification, acceptance
or approval by that Party. Provisional application of this Agreement shall be notified to
the Depositary.
ARTICLE 54
Depositary
The Government of Norway shall act as Depositary.
XXXIII
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed
this Agreement.
Done at Trondheim, this 24th day of June 2013, in one original in the English language.
The Depositary shall transmit certified copies to all the Parties.
For Iceland For Bosnia and Herzegovina
........................................... ....................................................
For the Principality of Liechtenstein
...........................................
For the Kingdom of Norway
...........................................
For the Swiss Confederation
...........................................