FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE EFTA STATES
AND
THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE 
III
PREAMBLE
The Republic of Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway and
the Swiss Confederation (hereinafter referred to as “the EFTA States”),
and
The Republic of Chile (hereinafter referred to as “Chile”),
hereinafter collectively referred to as “the Parties”, resolved to:
STRENGTHEN the special bonds of friendship and co-operation between their nations;
CONTRIBUTE to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade by
removing obstacles to trade and provide a catalyst to broader international cooperation;
ESTABLISH clear and mutually advantageous rules governing their trade;
CREATE an expanded and secure market for goods and services in their territories;
ENSURE a stable and predictable environment for business planning and investment;
FOSTER creativity and innovation by protecting intellectual property rights;
BUILD on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakech Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organization and other multilateral and bilateral
instruments of co-operation;
ENSURE that the gains from trade liberalisation are not offset by the erection of
private, anti-competitive barriers;
ENHANCE the competitiveness of their firms in global markets;
CREATE new employment opportunities and improve working conditions and living
standards in their respective territories;
PROMOTE environmental protection and conservation, and sustainable development; 
IV
REAFFIRMING their commitment to democracy, the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with their obligations under international law,
including principles and objectives set out in the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights; and
CONVINCED that this Agreement will create conditions encouraging economic, trade
and investment relations between them;
HAVE AGREED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as “this Agreement”): 
V
CHAPTER I
INITIAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1
 Establishment of a free trade area
The EFTA States and Chile hereby establish a free trade area by means of this
Agreement and the complementary agreements on trade in agricultural goods,
concurrently concluded between Chile and each individual EFTA State.
ARTICLE 2
Objectives
1. The objectives of this Agreement, as elaborated more specifically through its
principles and rules, are to:
(a) achieve the progressive and reciprocal liberalisation of trade in goods, in
conformity with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (hereinafter referred to as “the GATT 1994”);
(b) achieve the liberalisation of trade in services, in conformity with Article
V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred to
as “the GATS”);
(c) open the government procurement markets of the Parties;
(d) promote conditions of fair competition in the free trade area;
(e) substantially increase investment opportunities in the free trade area;
(f) provide adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights; and
(g) establish a framework for further bilateral and multilateral cooperation to
expand and enhance the benefits of this Agreement. 
VI
ARTICLE 3
Territorial application
1. Without prejudice to Annex I, this Agreement shall apply to the territory of each
Party, as well as to areas beyond the territory in which each Party may exercise
sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with international law.
2. Annex II shall apply with respect to Norway.
ARTICLE 4
Relation to other international agreements
The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under the Marrakech Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organization and the other agreements negotiated
thereunder (hereinafter referred to as “the WTO Agreement”) to which they are party,
and under any other international agreement to which they are a party.
ARTICLE 5
Trade and economic relations governed by this Agreement
1. The provisions of this Agreement apply to the trade and economic relations
between, on the one side, the individual EFTA States and, on the other side, Chile, but
not to the trade relations between individual EFTA States, unless otherwise provided for
in this Agreement.
2. As a result of the customs union established by the Treaty of 29 March 1923
between Switzerland and the Principality of Liechtenstein, Switzerland shall represent
the Principality of Liechtenstein in matters covered thereby.
ARTICLE 6
Regional and local governments
Each Party is fully responsible for the observance of all obligations and commitments
under this Agreement and shall ensure their observance by its respective regional and
local governments and authorities and by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
governmental powers delegated by central, regional and local governments or
authorities within its territory. 
VII
CHAPTER II
TRADE IN GOODS
ARTICLE 7
Coverage
This Chapter applies to trade between the Parties relating to:
(a) products falling within chapters 25 through 97 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System (hereinafter referred to as
“the HS”), excluding the products listed in Annex III;
(b) products specified in Annex IV, with due regard to the arrangements
provided for in that Annex; and
(c) fish and other marine products as provided for in Annex V.
ARTICLE 8
Rules of origin and administrative co-operation
1. The provisions on rules of origin and administrative co-operation applicable to
Article 9(1) and Article 19 are set out in Annex I
2. For the purpose of Article 9(2), Article 13(1) and Article 18, the term “goods of
a Party” shall mean domestic goods as understood within the meaning of GATT 1994 or
such goods as the Parties may agree, and shall include originating products of that Party.
ARTICLE 9
Elimination of customs duties
1. The Parties shall, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, abolish all
customs duties on imports of products originating in an EFTA State or in Chile, except
as provided for in Annex VI.
2. The Parties shall, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, abolish all
customs duties on exports of goods of a Party in trade between the Parties.
3. No new customs duty shall be introduced nor shall those already applied be
increased in trade between the EFTA States and Chile.
VIII
ARTICLE 10
Customs duty
A customs duty includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the
importation or exportation of a product, including any form of surtax or surcharge in
connection with such importation or exportation, but does not include any:
(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with Article 15;
(b) anti-dumping or countervailing duty applied consistently with Article 18;
or
(c) fee or other charge imposed consistently with Article 11.
ARTICLE 11
Fees and other charges
Fees and other charges referred to in Article 10(c) shall be limited in amount to the
approximate cost of services rendered and shall not represent an indirect protection for
domestic products or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes.
ARTICLE 12
Basic duties
1. For each product the basic duty, to which the successive reductions set out in
Annex VI are to be applied, shall be the most-favoured nation rate of duty applied on 1
January 2003.
2. If, before, by or after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is
applied on an erga omnes basis, in particular reductions in accordance with
commitments resulting from multilateral negotiations under the World Trade
Organization (hereinafter referred to as “the WTO”), such reduced duties shall replace
the basic duties referred to in paragraph 1 as from the date when such reductions are
applied, or from the entry into force of this Agreement if this is later.
3. The reduced duties calculated in accordance with Annex VI shall be applied
rounded to the first decimal place or, in case of specific duties, to the second decimal
place. 
IX
ARTICLE 13
Import and export restrictions
1. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement, all import or export
prohibitions or restrictions on trade in goods of a Party between the EFTA States and
Chile, other than customs duties and taxes, whether made effective through quotas,
import or export licenses or other measures, shall be eliminated, except as provided for
in Annex VII.
2. No new measures as referred to in paragraph 1 shall be introduced.
ARTICLE 14
Classification of goods and customs valuation
1. The classification of goods in trade between the EFTA States and Chile shall be
determined in accordance with each Party's respective tariff nomenclature in conformity
with the HS.
2. The WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the GATT 1994 shall
govern customs valuation rules applied to trade between the EFTA States and Chile.
ARTICLE 15
National treatment
The Parties shall apply national treatment in accordance with Article III of the GATT
1994, including its interpretative notes, which is hereby incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 16
Sanitary and phytosanitary measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures (hereinafter referred to as “the SPS Agreement”).
2. The Parties shall strengthen their co-operation in the field of sanitary and
phytosanitary measures, with a view to increasing the mutual understanding of their
respective systems and facilitating access to their respective markets.
3. At the request of a Party, expert consultations shall be convened if any Party
considers that another Party has taken measures which are likely to affect, or have
affected, access to its market. Such experts, representing the Parties concerned on 
X
specific issues in the field of sanitary and phytosanitary matters, shall aim at finding an
appropriate solution in conformity with the SPS Agreement.
4. The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of “contact points” with
sanitary and phytosanitary expertise in order to facilitate communication and the
exchange of information.
5. In order to permit the efficient use of resources, the Parties shall, to the extent
possible, endeavour to use modern technological means of communication, such as
electronic communication, video or telephone conference, or arrange for meetings
referred to in paragraph 3 to take place back-to-back with Joint Committee meetings or
with sanitary and phytosanitary meetings in the framework of the WTO. The results of
expert consultations convened in accordance with paragraph 3 shall be reported to the
Joint Committee.
6. Chile and any of the EFTA States may, for better implementation of this Article,
develop bilateral arrangements including agreements between their respective
regulatory agencies.
ARTICLE 17
Technical regulations
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade (hereinafter referred to as “the TBT Agreement”).
2. The Parties shall strengthen their co-operation in the field of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment, with a view to increasing the mutual
understanding of their respective systems and facilitating access to their respective
markets.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the Parties agree to hold consultations in the
framework of the Joint Committee where a Party considers that another Party has taken
measures which are likely to create, or have created, an obstacle to trade, in order to
find an appropriate solution in conformity with the TBT Agreement.
ARTICLE 18
Anti-dumping and countervailing measures
1. A Party shall not apply anti-dumping measures as provided for under the WTO
Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 in relation to goods of a
Party.
2. The Parties recognise that the effective implementation of competition rules may
address economic causes leading to dumping. 
XI
3. The rights and obligations of the Parties related to countervailing measures shall
be governed by the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
ARTICLE 19
Emergency action on imports of particular products
1. Where any product originating in a Party, as a result of the reduction or
elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, is being imported into the territory
of another Party in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to constitute a
substantial cause of serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry of like or
directly competitive products in the territory of the importing Party, the importing Party
may take emergency measures to the minimum extent necessary to remedy or prevent
the injury.
2. Such measures may consist in:
(a) suspending the further reduction of any rate of duty provided for under
this Agreement on the product; or
(b) increasing the rate of duty on the product to a level not to exceed the
lesser of:
i) the most-favoured nation rate of duty in effect at the time the
action is taken;
ii) the most-favoured nation rate of duty in effect on the day
immediately preceding the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement.
3. Emergency measures shall be taken for a period not exceeding one year. In very
exceptional circumstances, after review by the Joint Committee, measures may be taken
up to a total maximum period of three years. In this case, the Party taking such measures
shall present a schedule leading to their progressive elimination. No measures shall be
applied to the import of a product which has previously been subject to such a measure
for a period of, at least, five years since the expiry of the measure.
4. Emergency measures shall only be taken upon clear evidence that increased
imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury pursuant to an
investigation in accordance with the procedures laid down in the WTO Agreement on
Safeguards.
5. The Party intending to take emergency measures under this Article shall
promptly make a notification to the other Parties, containing all pertinent information
which shall include evidence of serious injury caused by increased imports, precise
description of the product involved, the proposed measure, the proposed date of
introduction and expected duration of the measures. Any Party that may be affected 
XII
shall simultaneously be offered compensation in the form of substantially equivalent
trade liberalisation in relation to the imports from any such Party.
6. The Joint Committee shall, within 30 days from the date of notification to the
Parties, meet to examine the information provided under paragraph 5 in order to
facilitate a mutually acceptable solution of the matter. In the absence of such solution,
the importing Party may adopt a measure pursuant to paragraph 2 to remedy the
problem, and, in the absence of mutually agreed compensation, the Party against whose
product the measure is taken may take retaliatory action. The emergency measure and
any compensatory or retaliatory action shall be immediately notified to the Joint
Committee. The retaliatory action shall consist of the suspension of concessions having
substantially equivalent trade effects or concessions substantially equivalent to the value
of the additional duties expected to result from the emergency action. In the selection of
the emergency measure and the retaliatory action, priority must be given to the action
which least disturbs the functioning of this Agreement.
7. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage which would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional emergency measure not exceeding 120
days pursuant to a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased
imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury. The Party intending to
take such a measure shall immediately notify the other Parties thereof and, within 30
days of the date of such notification, the pertinent procedures set out in paragraphs 5
and 6, including for compensatory and retaliatory action, shall be initiated. Any
compensation shall be based on the total period of application of the provisional
measure. The period of application of any such provisional measure shall be counted as
part of the duration of the definitive measure and any extension thereof.
ARTICLE 20
Global safeguard
The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and
the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.
ARTICLE 21
General exceptions
Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination of a Party where the same
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by any Party of
measures:
(a) necessary to protect public morals;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; 
XIII
(c) relating to the importations or exportations of gold and silver;
(d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those
relating to customs enforcement, the protection of intellectual property
rights, and the prevention of deceptive practices;
(e) relating to the products of prison labour;
(f) imposed for the protections of national treasures of artistic, historic or
archaeological value;
(g) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such
measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic
production or consumption;
(h) undertaken in pursuance of obligations under any intergovernmental
commodity agreement which conforms to criteria submitted to the WTO
and not disapproved by it or which is itself so submitted and not so
disapproved;
(i) involving restrictions on exports of domestic materials necessary to
ensure essential quantities of such materials to a domestic processing
industry during periods when the domestic price of such materials is held
below the world price as part of a governmental stabilization plan;
provided that such restrictions shall not operate to increase the exports of
or the protection afforded to such domestic industry, and shall not depart
from the provisions of this Agreement relating to non-discrimination;
(j) essential to the acquisition or distribution of products in general or local
short supply; provided that any such measures shall be consistent with
the principle that all WTO members are entitled to an equitable share of
the international supply of such products, and that any such measures,
which are inconsistent with the other provisions of this Agreement shall
be discontinued as soon as the conditions giving rise to them have ceased
to exist. 
XIV
CHAPTER III
TRADE IN SERVICES AND ESTABLISHMENT
SECTION I – TRADE IN SERVICES
ARTICLE 22
Coverage

1. This Section applies to measures affecting trade in services taken by central,
regional or local governments and authorities as well as by non-governmental bodies in
the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local governments or
authorities.
2. This Section applies to measures affecting trade in all services sectors with the
exception of air services, including domestic and international air transportation
services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and related services in support of air
services, other than:
(a) aircraft repair and maintenance services;
(b) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(c) computer reservation system (CRS) services.1
3. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose any obligation with respect
to government procurement, which is subject to the Chapter V.
ARTICLE 23
Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:
(a) “trade in services” is defined as the supply of a service:
(i) from the territory of a Party into the territory of another Party
(mode 1);
(ii) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of another Party
(mode 2);

1
 The terms “aircraft repair and maintenance services”, “selling and marketing of air transport
services” and “computer reservation system (CRS) services” are as defined in paragraph 6 of the
Annex on Air Transport Services to the GATS.
XV
(iii) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in
the territory of another Party (mode 3);
(iv) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural
persons in the territory of another Party (mode 4).
(b) “measure” means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action or any other
form;
(c) “supply of a service” includes the production, distribution, marketing,
sale and delivery of a service;
(d) “measures by a Party affecting trade in services” include measures in
respect of:
(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;
(ii) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a
service, services which are required by that Party to be offered to
the public generally;
(iii) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of
another Party for the supply of a service in the territory of that
Party;
(e) “commercial presence” means any type of business or professional
establishment, including through:
(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person;
or
(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office;
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;
(f) “service supplier” means any person that seeks to supply or supplies a
service;2
(g) “natural person of a Party” is, in accordance with its legislation, a
national or a permanent resident of that Party if he or she is accorded

2
 Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of
commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e. the juridical
person) shall, nonetheless, through such presence be accorded the treatment provided for service suppliers
under this Agreement. Such treatment shall be extended to the presence through which the service is
supplied and need not be extended to any other parts of the supplier located outside the territory where the
service is supplied. 
XVI
substantially the same treatment as nationals in respect of measures
affecting trade in services;
(h) “juridical person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and
whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any
corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or
association;
(i) “services” includes any service in any sector except services supplied in
the exercise of governmental authority;
(j) “juridical person of a Party” means a juridical person which is either:
(i) constituted or otherwise organised under the law of Chile or an
EFTA State, and that is engaged in substantive business
operations in Chile or in the EFTA State concerned, or
(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial
presence, owned or controlled by:
(A) natural persons of that Party; or
(B) juridical persons identified under paragraph (j)(i); and
(k) “a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” means any
service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in
competition with one or more service suppliers.
ARTICLE 24
Most-favoured nation treatment
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties with respect to most-favoured nation
treatment shall be governed by the GATS.
2. If a Party enters into an agreement with a non-Party which has been notified
under Article V of the GATS, it shall, upon request from another Party, afford adequate
opportunity to the other Parties to negotiate, on a mutually advantageous basis, the
benefits granted therein.
XVII
ARTICLE 25
Market access
1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in Article
23, each Party shall accord services and service suppliers of another Party treatment no
less favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed
and specified in its Schedule referred to in Article 27.
2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the measures
which a Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or
on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined
as:
(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirements of an economic needs test;
(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total
quantity of service output expressed in the terms of designated numerical
units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test.3
(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed
in a particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and
who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific
service in the form of numerical quotas or a requirement of an economic
needs test;
(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entities or joint
ventures through which a service supplier of another Party may supply a
service; and
(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual
or aggregate foreign investment.
ARTICLE 26
National treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule referred to in Article 27 and subject to the
conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall grant to services and

3
 Subparagraph (c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of
services
XVIII
services suppliers of another Party, in respect of all measures affecting the supply of
services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like services and
services suppliers.4
2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and
service suppliers of another Party, either formally identical treatment or formally
different treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service
suppliers of the Party compared to like services or service suppliers of another Party.
ARTICLE 27
Trade liberalisation
1. The Schedule of specific commitments that each Party undertakes under Articles
25 and 26 as well as paragraph 3 of this Article is set out at Annex VIII. With respect to
sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each Schedule specifies:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments referred to in paragraph
3; and
(d) where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such
commitments and the date of entry into force of such commitments.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 25 and 26 are inscribed in the column
relating to Article 25. In this case, the inscription is considered to provide a condition
or qualification to Article 26 as well.
3. Where a Party undertakes a specific commitment on measures affecting trade in
services not subject to scheduling under Articles 25 and 26, including those regarding
qualifications, standards or licensing matters, such commitments are inscribed in its
Schedule as additional commitments.
4. The Parties undertake to review their Schedules of specific commitments at least
every three years, or more frequently, with a view to provide for a reduction or
elimination of substantially all remaining discrimination between the Parties with regard
to trade in services covered in this Section on a mutually advantageous basis and
ensuring an overall balance of rights and obligations.

4
 Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require the Parties to
compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantage which result from the foreign character of
the relevant services and service suppliers.
XIX
ARTICLE 28
Domestic regulation
1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall ensure
that all measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a
reasonable, objective and impartial manner.
2. Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial, arbitral or
administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of an affected
service supplier of another Party, for the prompt review of, and where justified,
appropriate remedies for, administrative decisions affecting trade in services. Where
such procedures are not independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative
decision concerned, the Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an
objective and impartial review.
3. Where authorisation is required for the supply of a service, the competent
authorities of a Party shall promptly, after the submission of an application is considered
complete under domestic laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision
concerning the application. At the request of the applicant, the competent authorities of
the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information concerning the status of the
application.
4. The Parties shall jointly review the results of the negotiations on disciplines for
measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and
licensing requirements pursuant to Article VI.4 of the GATS aiming to ensure that such
measure do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, with a view to their
incorporation into this Agreement. The Parties note that such disciplines aim to ensure
that such requirements are, inter alia:
(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the
ability to supply the service;
(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service;
(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction on the
supply of the service.
5. In sectors in which a Party has undertaken specific commitments, until the
incorporation of disciplines developed pursuant to paragraph 4, a Party shall not apply
licensing and qualification requirements and technical standards in a manner which:
(a) does not comply with the criteria outlined in paragraphs 4 (a), (b) or (c);
and
(b) could not reasonably have been expected of that Party at the time of the
conclusion of the negotiation of the present agreement. 
XX
6. Whenever a domestic regulation is prepared, adopted and applied in accordance
with international standards applied by both Parties, it shall be rebuttably presumed to
comply with the provisions of this Article.

7. Each Party shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the competence of
professionals of another Party.
ARTICLE 29
Recognition
1. The Parties shall encourage the relevant bodies in their respective territories to
provide recommendations on mutual recognition, for the purpose of the fulfilment, in
whole or in part, by service suppliers of the criteria applied by each Party for the
authorisation, licensing, accreditation, operation and certification of service suppliers
and, in particular, professional services.
2. The Joint Committee, within a reasonable period of time and considering the
level of correspondence of the respective regulations, shall decide whether a
recommendation referred to in paragraph 1 is consistent with this Section. If that is the
case, such a recommendation shall be implemented through an agreement on mutual
requirements, qualifications, licences and other regulations to be negotiated by the
competent authorities.
3. Any such agreement shall be in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
WTO Agreement and, in particular, Article VII of the GATS.
4. Where the Parties agree, each Party shall encourage its relevant bodies to
develop procedures for the temporary licensing of professional services suppliers of
another Party.
5. The Joint Committee shall periodically, and at least once every three years,
review the implementation of this Article.
6. Where a Party recognises, by agreement or arrangement, the education or
experience obtained, requirements met or licenses or certifications granted in the
territory of a non-Party, that Party shall accord another Party, upon request, adequate
opportunity to negotiate its accession to such an agreement or arrangement or to
negotiate comparable ones with it. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it
shall afford adequate opportunity for another Party to demonstrate that the education or
experience obtained, requirements met or licenses or certifications granted in the
territory of that other Party should also be recognised. 
XXI
ARTICLE 30
Movement of natural persons
1. This Section applies to measures affecting natural persons who are service
suppliers of a Party, and natural persons of a Party who are employed by a service
supplier of a Party, in respect of the supply of a service. Natural persons covered by a
Party’s specific commitments shall be allowed to supply the service in accordance with
the terms of those commitments.
2. This Section shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access
to the employment market of a Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding
nationality, residence or employment on a permanent basis.
3. This Section shall not prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the
entry of natural persons of another Party into, or their temporary stay in, its territory,
including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly
movement of natural persons across its borders, provided that such measures are not
applied in a manner so as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to a Party under the
terms of a specific commitment.5
ARTICLE 31
Telecommunications services
Specific provisions on telecommunications services are set out in Annex IX.
SECTION II – ESTABLISHMENT
ARTICLE 32
Coverage
This Section shall apply to establishment in all sectors, with the exception of establishment
in services sectors.

5
 The sole fact of requiring a visa shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a
specific commitment. 
XXII
ARTICLE 33
Definitions
For the purposes of this Section,
(a) "juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and
whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any
corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or
association;
(b) "juridical person of a Party" means a juridical person constituted or
otherwise organised under the law of an EFTA State or of Chile and that is
engaged in substantive business operations in Chile or in the EFTA State
concerned;
(c) "natural person" means a national of an EFTA State or of Chile
according to their respective legislation;
(d) "establishment" means:
(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person, or
(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office,
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of performing an economic
activity.
As regards natural persons, this shall not extend to seeking or taking employment in the
labour market or confer a right of access to the labour market of a Party.
ARTICLE 34
National treatment
With respect to establishment, and subject to the reservations set out in Annex X, each
Party shall grant to juridical and natural persons of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to its own juridical and natural persons performing a like
economic activity.
ARTICLE 35
Reservations
1. National treatment as provided for under Article 34 shall not apply to: 
XXIII
(a) any reservation that is listed by a Party in Annex X;
(b) an amendment to a reservation covered by paragraph (a) to the extent that
the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the reservation with
Article 34;
(c) any new reservation adopted by a Party, and incorporated into Annex X
which does not affect the overall level of commitments of that Party
under this Agreement;
to the extent that such reservations are inconsistent with Article 34.
2. As part of the reviews provided for in Article 37 the Parties undertake to review
at least every three years the status of the reservations set out in Annex X with a view to
reducing or removing such reservations.
3. A Party may, at any time, either upon the request of another Party or
unilaterally, remove in whole or in part reservations set out in Annex X by written
notification to the other Parties.
4. A Party may, at any time, incorporate a new reservation into Annex X in
accordance with paragraph 1(c) of this Article by written notification to the other
Parties. On receiving such written notification, the other Parties may request
consultations regarding the reservation. On receiving the request for consultations, the
Party incorporating the new reservation shall enter into consultations with the other
Parties.
ARTICLE 36
Right to regulate
Subject to the provisions of Article 34, each Party may regulate the establishment of
juridical and natural persons.
ARTICLE 37
Final provisions
With the objective of progressive liberalisation of investment conditions, the Parties
affirm their commitment to review the investment legal framework, the investment
environment and the flow of investment between them consistent with their
commitments in international investment agreements, no later than three years after the
entry into force of this Agreement.
XXIV
SECTION III – PAYMENTS AND CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
ARTICLE 38
Objective and scope
1. The Parties shall aim at the liberalisation of current payments and capital
movements between them, in conformity with the commitments undertaken in the
framework of the international financial institutions and with due consideration to each
Party's currency stability.
2. This Section applies to all current payments and capital movements between the
Parties. Specific provisions on current payments and capital movements are set out in
Annex XI.
ARTICLE 39
Current Account
The Parties shall allow, in freely convertible currency and in accordance with the
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, any payments and transfers
of the Current Account between the Parties.
ARTICLE 40
Capital Account
The Parties shall allow the free movements of capital relating to direct investments
made in accordance with the laws of the host country and investments made in
accordance with the provisions of Sections Trade in Services and Establishment of this
Chapter, and the liquidation or repatriation of these capitals and of any profit stemming
therefrom.
ARTICLE 41
Exceptions and safeguard measures
1. Where, in exceptional circumstances, payments and capital movements between
the Parties cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for the operation of monetary
policy or exchange rate policy in any Party, the Party concerned may take safeguard
measures with regard to capital movements that are strictly necessary for a period not
exceeding one year. The application of safeguard measures may be extended through
their formal reintroduction. 
XXV
2. The Party adopting the safeguard measures shall inform the other Party
forthwith and present, as soon as possible, a time schedule for their removal.
ARTICLE 42
Final provisions
The Parties shall consult each other with a view to facilitating the movement of capital
between them in order to promote the objectives of this Agreement.
SECTION IV – COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 43
Relation to other international agreements
With respect to matters related to this Chapter, the Parties confirm the rights and
obligations existing under any bilateral or multilateral agreements to which they are a
party.
ARTICLE 44
General exceptions
Article XIV and Article XXVIII paragraph (o) of the GATS are hereby incorporated
into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 45
Financial services
1. The Parties understand that no commitments have been made in financial
services. For greater clarity, financial services are defined as in paragraph 5 of the
Annex on Financial Services of the GATS.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, two years after the entry into force of this
Agreement, the Parties will consider the inclusion of financial services in this Chapter
on a mutually advantageous basis and securing an overall balance of rights and
obligations. 
XXVI
CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 46
Intellectual property rights
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non-discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, and provide for measures for the enforcement
of such rights against infringement thereof, counterfeiting and piracy, in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, Annex XII to this Agreement and the international
agreements referred to therein.
2. The Parties shall accord to each other’s nationals treatment no less favourable
than that they accord to their own nationals. Exemptions from this obligation must be in
accordance with the substantive provisions of Articles 3 and 5 of the WTO Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (hereinafter referred to as “the
TRIPS Agreement”).6
3. The Parties shall grant to each other’s nationals treatment no less favourable
than that accorded to nationals of any other State. Exemptions from this obligation must
be in accordance with the substantive provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular
Articles 4 and 5 thereof6
4. The Parties agree, upon request of any Party to the Joint Committee and subject
to its consensus, to review the provisions on the protection of intellectual property rights
contained in the present Article and in Annex XII, with a view to further improving the
levels of protection and to avoid or remedy trade distortions caused by actual levels of
protection of intellectual property rights.
CHAPTER V
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE 47
Objective
In accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Parties shall ensure the effective
and reciprocal opening of their government procurement markets.

6
 It is understood that the reference of paragraphs 2 and 3 to Articles 3 to 5 of the TRIPS
Agreement is made for the purpose of outlining their applicability to the provisions on
Intellectual Property of this Agreement. 
XXVII
ARTICLE 48
Scope and coverage
1. This Chapter applies to any law, regulation, procedure or practice regarding any
procurement, by the entities of the Parties, of goods7
 and services including works,
subject to the conditions specified by each Party in Annexes XIII and XIV.
2. This Chapter shall not be applicable to:
(a) contracts awarded pursuant to:
(i) an international agreement and intended for the joint
implementation or exploitation of a project by the contracting
parties;
(ii) an international agreement relating to the stationing of troops;
and
(iii) the particular procedure of an international organisation;
(b) non-contractual agreements or any form of government assistance and
procurement made in the framework of assistance or co-operation
programmes;
(c) contracts for:
(i) the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings, or other
immovable property or concerning rights thereon;
(ii) the acquisition, development, production or co-production of
programme material by broadcasters and contracts for
broadcasting time;
(iii) arbitration and conciliation services;
(iv) employment contracts; and
(v) research and development services other than those where the
benefits accrue exclusively to the entity for its use in the conduct
of its own affairs, on condition that the service is wholly
remunerated by the entity;
(d) financial services.

7
 For the purpose of this Chapter, “goods” shall mean goods classified in chapters 1 to 97 of the
HS. 
XXVIII
3. Public works concessions, as defined in Article 49, shall also be subject to this
Chapter, as specified in Annexes XIII and XIV.
4. No Party may prepare, design or otherwise structure any procurement contract in
order to avoid the obligations under this Chapter.
ARTICLE 49
Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) “entity” means an entity covered in Annex XIII;
(b) “government procurement” means the process by which a government
obtains the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination
thereof, for governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial
sale or resale, or use in the production or supply of goods or services for
commercial sale or resale;
(c) “liberalisation” means a process as a result of which an entity enjoys no
exclusive or special rights and is exclusively engaged in the provision of
goods or services on markets that are subject to effective competition;
(d) “offsets” means those conditions imposed or considered by an entity
prior to, or in the course of its procurement process, that encourage local
development or improve its Party's balance of payments accounts by
means of requirements of local content, licensing of technology,
investment, counter-trade or similar requirements;
(e) “privatisation” means a process by means of which a public entity is no
longer subject to government control, whether by public tender of the
shares of that entity or otherwise, as contemplated in the respective
Party’s legislation in force;
(f) “public works concessions” means a contract of the same type as the
public works procurement contracts, except for the fact that the
remuneration for the works to be carried out consists either solely in the
right to exploit the construction or in this right together with a payment;
(g) “supplier” means a natural or legal person that provides or could provide
goods or services to an entity;
(h) “technical specifications” means a specification, which lays down the
characteristics of the products or services to be procured, such as quality,
performance, safety and dimensions, symbols, terminology, packaging,
marking and labelling, or the processes and methods for their production 
XXIX
and requirements relating to conformity assessment procedures
prescribed by procuring entities; and
(i) “tenderer” means a supplier who has submitted a tender.
ARTICLE 50
National treatment and non-discrimination
1. With respect to any laws, regulations, procedures and practices regarding
government procurement covered by this Chapter, each Party shall grant the goods,
services and suppliers of another Party a treatment no less favourable than that accorded
by it to domestic goods, services and suppliers.
2. With respect to any laws, regulations, procedures and practices regarding
government procurement covered by this Chapter, each Party shall ensure:
(a) that its entities do not treat a locally-established supplier less favourably
than another locally-established supplier on the basis of the degree of
foreign affiliation to or ownership by, a person of another Party; and
(b) that its entities do not discriminate against a locally-established supplier
on the basis that the goods or services offered by that supplier for a
particular procurement are goods or services of another Party.
3. This Article shall not apply to measures concerning customs duties or other
charges of any kind imposed on, or in connection with importation, the method of
levying such duties and charges, other import regulations, including restrictions and
formalities, nor to measures affecting trade in services other than measures specifically
governing procurement covered by this Chapter.
ARTICLE 51
Prohibition of offsets
Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not, in the qualification and selection of
suppliers, goods or services, in the evaluation of bids or in the award of contracts,
consider, seek or impose offsets.
ARTICLE 52
Valuation rules
1. Entities shall not split up a procurement, nor use any other method of contract
valuation with the intention of evading the application of this Chapter when determining
whether a contract is covered by the disciplines thereof, subject to the conditions set out
in Annexes XIII and XIV.
XXX
2. In calculating the value of a contract, an entity shall take into account all forms
of remuneration, such as premiums, fees, commissions and interests, as well as the
maximum permitted total amount, including option clauses, provided for by the
contract.
3. When, due to the nature of the contract, it is not possible to calculate in advance
its precise value, entities shall estimate this value on the basis of objective criteria.
ARTICLE 53
Transparency
1. Each Party shall promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision and
administrative ruling of general application and procedure, including standard contract
clauses, regarding procurement covered by this Chapter in the appropriate publications
referred to in Appendix 2 of Annex XIV, including officially designated electronic
media.
2. Each Party shall promptly publish in the same manner all modifications to such
measures.
ARTICLE 54
Tendering procedures
1. Entities shall award their public contracts by open or selective tendering
procedures according to their national procedures, in compliance with this Chapter and
in a non-discriminatory manner.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) open tendering procedures are those procedures whereby any interested
supplier may submit a tender;
(b) selective tendering procedures are those procedures whereby, consistent
with Article 55 and other relevant provisions of this Chapter, only
suppliers satisfying qualification requirements established by the entities
are invited to submit a tender.
3. However, in the specific cases and only under the conditions laid down in
Article 56, entities may use a procedure other than the open or selective tendering
procedures referred to in paragraph 1, in which case the entities may choose not to
publish a notice of intended procurement, and may consult the suppliers of their choice
and negotiate the terms of contract with one or more of these. 
XXXI
4. Entities shall treat tenders in confidence. In particular, they shall not provide
information intended to assist particular participants to bring their tenders up to the level
of other participants.
ARTICLE 55
Selective tendering
1. In selective tendering, entities may limit the number of qualified suppliers they
will invite to tender, consistent with the efficient operation of the procurement process,
provided that they select the maximum number of domestic suppliers and suppliers of
another Party, and that they make the selection in a fair and non-discriminatory manner
and on the basis of the criteria indicated in the notice of intended procurement or in
tender documents.
2. Entities maintaining permanent lists of qualified suppliers may select suppliers
to be invited to tender from among those listed, under the conditions foreseen in Article
57(7). Any selection shall allow for equitable opportunities for suppliers on the lists.
ARTICLE 56
Other procedures
1. Provided that the tendering procedure is not used to avoid maximum possible
competition or to protect domestic suppliers, entities shall be allowed to award contracts
by means other than an open or selective tendering procedure in the following
circumstances and subject to the following conditions, where applicable:
(a) when no suitable tenders or request to participate have been submitted in
response to a prior procurement, on condition that the requirements of
the initial procurement are not substantially modified;
(b) when, for technical or artistic reasons, or for reasons connected with
protection of exclusive rights, the contract may be performed only by a
particular supplier and no reasonable alternative or substitute exists;
(c) for reasons of extreme urgency brought about by events unforeseeable by
the entity, the products or services could not be obtained in time by
means of open or selective tendering procedures;
(d) for additional deliveries of goods or services by the original supplier
where a change of supplier would compel the entity to procure
equipment or services not meeting requirements of interchangeability
with already existing equipment, software or services; 
XXXII
(e) when an entity procures prototypes or a first product or service which are
developed at its request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for
research, experiment, study or original development;
(f) when additional services which were not included in the initial contract
but which were within the objectives of the original tender
documentation have, through unforeseeable circumstances, become
necessary to complete the services described therein. However, the total
value of contracts awarded for the additional construction services may
not exceed 50 percent of the amount of the main contract;
(g) for new services consisting of the repetition of similar services and for
which the entity has indicated in the notice concerning the initial service,
that tendering procedures other than open or selective might be used in
awarding contracts for such new services;
(h) in the case of contracts awarded to the winner of a design contest,
provided that the contest has been organised in a manner which is
consistent with the principles of this Chapter; in case of several
successful candidates, all successful candidates shall be invited to
participate in the negotiations; and
(i) for quoted goods purchased on a commodity market and for purchases of
goods made under exceptionally advantageous conditions which only
arise in the very short term in the case of unusual disposals and not for
routine purchases from regular suppliers.
2. The Parties shall ensure that, whenever it is necessary for entities to resort to a
procedure other than the open or selective tendering procedures based on the
circumstances set forth in paragraph 1, the entities shall maintain a record or prepare a
written report providing specific justification for the contract awarded under that
paragraph.
ARTICLE 57
Qualification of suppliers
1. Any conditions for participation in procurement shall be limited to those that are
essential to ensure that the potential supplier has the capability to fulfil the requirements
of the procurement and the ability to execute the contract in question.
2. In the process of qualifying suppliers, entities shall not discriminate between
domestic suppliers and suppliers of another Party.
3. A Party shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to participate
in a procurement, the supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts by an
entity of that Party or that the supplier has prior work experience in the territory of that
Party. 
XXXIII
4. Entities shall recognise as qualified suppliers all suppliers who meet the
conditions for participation in a particular intended procurement. Entities shall base
their qualification decisions solely on the conditions for participation that have been
specified in advance in notices or tender documentation.
5. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the exclusion of any supplier on grounds
such as bankruptcy or false declarations or conviction for a serious crime such as
participation in criminal organisations.
6. Entities shall promptly communicate to suppliers that have applied for
qualification their decision on whether or not they qualify.
7. Entities may establish permanent lists of qualified suppliers provided that the
following rules are respected:
(a) entities establishing permanent lists shall ensure that suppliers may apply
for qualification at any time;
(b) any supplier having requested to become a qualified supplier shall be
notified by the entities concerned of the decision in this regard;
(c) suppliers requesting to participate in a given intended procurement who
are not on the permanent list of qualified suppliers shall be given the
possibility to participate in the procurement by presenting the equivalent
certifications and other means of proof requested from suppliers who are
on the list;
(d) when an entity operating in the utilities sector uses a notice on the
existence of a permanent list as a notice of intended procurement, as
provided in Annex XIV, Appendix 5, paragraph 6, suppliers requesting
to participate who are not on the permanent list of qualified suppliers
shall also be considered for the procurement, provided there is sufficient
time to complete the qualification procedure; in this event, the procuring
entity shall promptly start procedures for qualification and the process of,
and the time required for, qualifying suppliers shall not be used in order
to keep suppliers of other Parties off the suppliers’ list.
ARTICLE 58
Publication of notices
General provisions
1. Each Party shall ensure that its entities provide for effective dissemination of the
tendering opportunities generated by the relevant government procurement processes,
providing suppliers of another Party with all the information required to take part in
such procurement. 
XXXIV
2. For each contract covered by this Chapter, except as set out in Articles 54(3) and
56, entities shall publish in advance a notice inviting interested suppliers to submit
tenders, or where appropriate, requests for participation for that contract.
3. The information in each notice of intended procurement shall include at least the
following:
(a) name, address, telefax number, electronic address of the entity and, if
different, the address where all documents relating to the procurement
may be obtained;
(b) the tendering procedure chosen and the form of the contract;
(c) a description of the intended procurement, as well as essential contract
requirements to be fulfilled;
(d) any conditions that suppliers must fulfil to participate in the
procurement;
(e) time-limits for submission of tenders and, where appropriate, other time
limits;
(f) main criteria to be used for award of the contract; and
(g) if possible, terms of payment and any other terms.
Common provisions
4. Each notice referred to in this Article and Appendix 5 of Annex XIV, shall be
accessible during the entire time period established for tendering for the relevant
procurement.
5. Entities shall publish the notices in a timely manner through means which offer
the widest possible and non-discriminatory access to the interested suppliers of the
Parties. These means shall be accessible free of charge through a single point of access
specified in Appendix 2 to Annex XIV.
ARTICLE 59
Tender documentation
1. Tender documentation provided to suppliers shall contain all information
necessary to permit them to submit responsive tenders.
2. Where contracting entities do not offer free direct access to the entire tender
documents and any supporting documents by electronic means, entities shall make
promptly available the tender documentation at the request of any supplier of the
Parties. 
XXXV
3. Entities shall promptly reply to any reasonable request for relevant information
relating to the intended procurement, on condition that such information does not give
that supplier an advantage over its competitors.
ARTICLE 60
Technical specifications
1. Technical specifications shall be set out in the notices, tender documents or
additional documents.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not prepare, adopt or apply any
technical specifications with a view to, or with the effect of, creating unnecessary
obstacles to trade between the Parties.
3. Technical specifications prescribed by entities shall be:
(a) in terms of performance and functional requirements rather than design or
descriptive characteristics; and
(b) based on international standards, where these exist or, in their absence, on
national technical regulations8
, recognised national standards9
, or building
codes.
4. The provisions of paragraph 3 do not apply when the entity can objectively
demonstrate that the use of technical specifications referred to in that paragraph would
be ineffective or inappropriate for the fulfilment of the legitimate objectives pursued.
5. In all cases, entities shall consider bids which do not comply with the technical
specifications but meet the essential requirements thereof and are fit for the purpose
intended. The reference to technical specifications in the tender documents must include
words such as “or equivalent”.
6. There shall be no requirement or reference to a particular trademark or trade
name, patent, design or type, specific origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no
sufficiently precise or intelligible way of describing the procurement requirements and
provided that words, such as “or equivalent”, are included in the tender documentation.

8
 For the purpose of this Chapter, a technical regulation is a document which lays down characteristics of a
product or a service or their related processes and production methods, including the applicable
administrative provisions, with which compliance is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively
with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements as they apply to a product,
service, process or production method.
9
 For the purpose of this Chapter, a standard is a document approved by a recognised body, that provides, for
common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for products or services or related processes and
production methods, with which compliance is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with
terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements as they apply to a product, service,
process or production method. 
XXXVI
7. The tenderer shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate that his bid meets the
essential requirements.
ARTICLE 61
Time limits
1. All time limits established by the entities for the receipt of tenders and requests
to participate shall be adequate to allow suppliers of another Party, as well as domestic
suppliers, to prepare and to submit tenders, and where appropriate, requests for
participation or applications for qualifying. In determining any such time limit, entities
shall, consistent with their own reasonable needs, take into account such factors as the
complexity of the intended procurement and the normal time for transmitting tenders
from foreign as well as domestic points.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its entities shall take due account of publication
delays when setting the final date for receipt of tenders or of requests for participation
or for qualifying for the suppliers’ list.
3. The minimum time limits for the receipt of tenders are specified in Appendix 3
to Annex XIV.
ARTICLE 62
Negotiations
1. A Party may provide for its entities to conduct negotiations:
(a) in the context of procurements in which they have indicated such intent
in the notice of intended procurement; or
(b) when it appears from evaluation that no one tender is obviously the most
advantageous in terms of the specific evaluation criteria set forth in the
notices or tender documentation.
2. Negotiations shall primarily be used to identify the strengths and weaknesses in
tenders.
3. Entities shall not, in the course of negotiations, discriminate between tenderers.
In particular, they shall ensure that:
(a) any elimination of participants is carried out in accordance with the
criteria set forth in the notices and tender documentation;
(b) all modifications to the criteria and to the technical requirements are
transmitted in writing to all remaining participants in the negotiations; 
XXXVII
(c) on the basis of the revised requirements and/or when negotiations are
concluded, all remaining participants are afforded an opportunity to
submit new or amended tenders in accordance with a common deadline.
ARTICLE 63
Submission, receipt and opening of tenders
1. Tenders and requests to participate in procedures shall be submitted in writing.
2. Entities shall receive and open bids from tenderers under procedures and
conditions guaranteeing the respect of the principles of transparency and nondiscrimination.
ARTICLE 64
Awarding of contracts
1. To be considered for award, a tender must, at the time of opening, conform to
the essential requirements of the notices or tender documentation and be submitted by a
supplier which complies with the conditions for participation.
2. Entities shall make the award to the tenderer whose tender is either the lowest
tender or the tender which, in terms of the specific objective evaluation criteria previously
set forth in the notices or tender documentation, is determined to be the most
advantageous.
ARTICLE 65
Information on contract award
1. Each Party shall ensure that its entities provide for effective dissemination of the
results of government procurement processes.
2. Entities shall promptly inform tenderers of decisions regarding the award of the
contract and of the characteristics and relative advantages of the selected tender. Upon
request, entities shall inform any eliminated tenderer of the reasons for the rejection of
its tender.
3. Entities may decide to withhold certain information on the contract award where
release of such information would prevent law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to
the public interest, would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of suppliers, or
might prejudice fair competition between them.
XXXVIII
ARTICLE 66
Bid challenges
1. Entities shall accord impartial and timely consideration to any complaints from
suppliers regarding an alleged breach of this Chapter in the context of a procurement
procedure.
2. Each Party shall provide non-discriminatory, timely, transparent and effective
procedures enabling suppliers to challenge alleged breaches of this Chapter arising in
the context of procurements in which they have, or have had, an interest.
3. Challenges shall be heard by an impartial and independent reviewing authority.
A reviewing authority which is not a court shall either be subject to judicial review or
shall have procedural guarantees similar to those of a court.
4. Challenge procedures shall provide for:
(a) rapid interim measures to correct breaches of this Chapter and to
preserve commercial opportunities. Such action may result in suspension
of the procurement process. However, procedures may provide that
overriding adverse consequences for the interests concerned, including
the public interest, may be taken into account in deciding whether such
measures should be applied; and
(b) if appropriate, correction of the breach of this Chapter or, in the absence
of such correction, compensation for the loss or damages suffered, which
may be limited to costs for tender preparation and protest.
ARTICLE 67
Information technology and co-operation
1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, endeavour to use electronic means of
communication to permit efficient dissemination of information on government
procurement, particularly as regards tender opportunities offered by entities, while
respecting the principles of transparency and non-discrimination.
2. The Parties shall endeavour to provide each other with technical co-operation,
particularly aimed at small and medium size enterprises, with a view to achieve a better
understanding of their respective government procurement systems and statistics, as
well as a better access to their respective markets. 
XXXIX
ARTICLE 68
Modifications to coverage
1. A Party may modify its coverage under this Chapter, provided that it:
(a) notifies the other Parties of the modification; and
(b) provides the other Parties, within 30 days following the date of such
notification, appropriate compensatory adjustments to its coverage in
order to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that existing prior to
the modification.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1(b), no compensatory adjustments shall be provided
to the other Parties where the modification by a Party of its coverage under this Chapter
concerns:
(a) rectifications of a purely formal nature and minor amendments to
Annexes XIII and XIV;
(b) one or more covered entities on which government control or influence
has been effectively eliminated as a result of privatisation or
liberalisation.
3. Where the Parties agree on the modification, the Joint Committee shall give
effect to the agreement by amending the relevant Annex.
ARTICLE 69
Further negotiations
In the case that a Party offers, in the future, a third party additional advantages with
regard to its respective government procurement market access coverage agreed under
this Chapter, it shall agree, upon request of another Party, to enter into negotiations with
a view to extending coverage under this Chapter on a reciprocal basis.
ARTICLE 70
Exceptions
Provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that would constitute a means
of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties or a disguised restriction
on trade between them, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent any Party
from adopting or maintaining measures necessary to protect:
(a) public morals, order or safety; 
XL
(b) human life, health or security;
(c) animal or plant life or health;
(d) intellectual property; or
(e) relating to goods or services of handicapped persons, of philanthropic
institutions or of prison labour.
ARTICLE 71
Review and implementation
1. The Joint Committee shall review the implementation of this Chapter every two
years, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties; it shall consider any issue arising from it,
and take appropriate action in the exercise of its functions.
2. At the request of a Party, the Parties shall convene a bilateral Working Group to
address issues related to the implementation of this Chapter. Such issues may include:
(a) bilateral cooperation relating to the development and use of electronic
communications in government procurement systems;
(b) the exchange of statistics and other information needed for monitoring
procurement conducted by the Parties and the results of the application
of this Chapter; and
(c) exploration of potential interest in further negotiations aimed at further
broadening of the scope of market access commitments under this
Chapter.
CHAPTER VI
COMPETITION POLICY
ARTICLE 72
Objectives
1. The Parties recognise that anti-competitive business conduct may frustrate the
benefits arising from this Agreement.
2. The Parties undertake to apply their competition laws in a manner consistent
with this Chapter so as to avoid that the benefits of the liberalisation process in goods
and services as provided by this Agreement may be diminished or cancelled out by anti-
XLI
competitive business conduct.10 To facilitate this, the Parties agree to co-operate and coordinate under the provisions of this Chapter. This co-operation includes notification,
consultation, and exchange of information.
3. For the purposes of this Agreement, ”anti-competitive business conduct”
includes, but is not limited to, anti-competitive agreements, concerted practices or
arrangements by competitors, the abuse of single or joint dominant positions in a market
and mergers with substantial anti-competitive effects. These practices refer to goods and
services and may be carried out by private and public enterprises.
4. The Parties recognise the importance of principles of competition that are
accepted in relevant multilateral fora of which the Parties are members or observers,
including non-discrimination, due process, and transparency.
ARTICLE 73
Notifications
1. Each Party, through its designated authority, shall notify the other Parties of an
enforcement activity regarding anti-competitive business conduct relating to goods and
services if it is liable to substantially affect another Party’s important interests, or if the
anti-competitive business conduct is liable to have a direct and substantial effect in the
territory of that other Party or is taking place principally in the territory of that other
Party.
2. Provided that this is not contrary to the Parties’ competition laws and does not
affect any investigation being carried out, notification shall take place at an early stage
of the procedure.
3. The notifications provided for in paragraph 1 should be detailed enough to
permit an evaluation in the light of the interests of the other Parties.
ARTICLE 74
Co-ordination of enforcement activities
A Party, through its designated authority, may notify another Party of its willingness to
co-ordinate enforcement activities with respect to a specific case. This co-ordination
shall not prevent the Parties from taking autonomous decisions.

10 For the purpose of this Chapter, “goods” shall mean goods classified in chapters 1 to 97 of the
HS
XLII
ARTICLE 75
Consultations
1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws, take into consideration the
important interests of the other Parties in the course of its enforcement activities on anticompetitive business conduct relating to goods and services. If a Party considers that an
investigation or proceeding being conducted by another Party may adversely affect such
Party's important interests it may transmit its views on the matter to that other Party
through its designated authority. Without prejudice to the continuation of any action
under its competition laws and to its full freedom of ultimate decision, the Party so
addressed should give full and sympathetic consideration to the views expressed by the
requesting Party.
2. If a Party considers that an anti-competitive business conduct carried out within
the territory of another Party may have an adverse effect on its interests, the first Party
may, through its designated authority, request that that other Party initiates appropriate
enforcement activities. The request shall be as specific as possible about the nature of
the anti-competitive business conduct and its effect on the interest of the requesting
Party, and shall include an offer of such further information and other assistance as the
requesting Party is able to provide. The requested Party shall carefully consider whether
to initiate enforcement activities, or to expand ongoing enforcement activities, with
respect to the anti-competitive business conduct identified in the request.
3. Regarding the issues addressed in paragraphs 1 and 2 each Party undertakes to
exchange information regarding sanctions and remedies applied and to provide the
grounds on which those actions were taken, when requested by another Party.
4. A Party may request consultations within the Joint Committee regarding the
issues addressed in paragraphs 1 and 2 as well as any other matter covered by this
Chapter. Such a request shall indicate the reasons for the request and whether any
procedural time limit or other constraints require that consultations be expedited.
ARTICLE 76
Exchange of information and confidentiality
1. With a view to facilitating the effective application of their competition laws in
order to eliminate the negative effects of anti-competitive business conduct relating to
goods and services, the Parties are encouraged to exchange information.

2. All exchange of information shall be subject to the rules and standards of
confidentiality applicable in the territory of each Party. No Party shall be required to
provide information when this is contrary to its laws regarding disclosure of
information. Each Party shall maintain the confidentiality of any information provided
to it according to the limitations that the submitting Party requests for the use of such
information. Where the laws of a Party so provide, confidential information may be
provided to their respective courts of justice. 
XLIII
ARTICLE 77
Public enterprises and enterprises entrusted with special or exclusive rights, including
designated monopolies
1. With regard to public enterprises and enterprises to which special or exclusive
rights have been granted, the Parties shall ensure that no measure is adopted or
maintained that distorts trade in goods or services between the Parties to an extent
contrary to the Parties’ interests and that such enterprises shall be subject to the rules of
competition insofar as the application of such rules does not obstruct the performance,
in law or in fact, of the particular tasks assigned to them.

2. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under Article XVII of the GATT
1994 and Article VIII of the GATS with regard to enterprises referred to in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 78
Dispute settlement
No Party may have recourse to dispute settlement under this Agreement for any matter
arising under this Chapter.
ARTICLE 79
Designated authorities
For the purpose of applying Articles 73, 74 and 75, each Party shall designate its
competition authority or any other public entity and communicate its decision to the
other Parties at the first meeting of the Joint Committee but in no case later than 60
days after the entry into force of the Agreement.
ARTICLE 80
Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter:
(a) “competition laws” means:
(i) for Chile, Decreto Ley N° 211 of 1973 and Ley N° 19.610 of
1999 and their implementing regulations or amendments as well
as other laws dealing with competition matters; 
XLIV
(ii) for the Republic of Iceland, Competition Law No. 8/1993 as
amended by Law No. 24/1994, 83/1997, 82/1998 and 107/2000
as well as other laws dealing with competition matters;
(iii) for the Principality of Liechtenstein, any competition rules that
Liechtenstein recognises or undertakes to apply within its
territory, including those provided for in other international
agreements, such as the Agreement on the European Economic
Area;
(iv) for the Kingdom of Norway, Act No. 65 of 11 June 1993 relating
to Competition in Commercial Activity as well as other laws
dealing with competition matters;
(v) for the Swiss Confederation, the Federal Act on Cartels and Other
Restraints of Competition of 6 October 1995 and the Order on the
Control of Business Concentration of 17 June 1996, and any
regulation provided for by these acts as well as other laws dealing
with competition matters,
and any changes that the above mentioned legislation may undergo after
the conclusion of this Agreement;
(b) “enforcement activity” includes any application of competition laws by
way of investigation or proceeding conducted by a Party, which may
result in the imposition of penalties or remedies.
CHAPTER VII
SUBSIDIES
ARTICLE 81
Subsidies/State aid
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of subsidies related to goods
shall be governed by Article XVI of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
2. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of subsidies related to
services shall be governed by the GATS.
3. Each Party may request information on individual cases of state aid believed to
affect trade between the Parties. The requested Party will make its best efforts to
provide such information. 
XLV
CHAPTER VIII
TRANSPARENCY
ARTICLE 82
Publication
1. The Parties shall publish, or otherwise make publicly available, their laws,
regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application as well as the
international agreements, that may affect the operation of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall provide, upon request, information on matters referred to in
paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 83
Contact points and exchange of information
1. In order to facilitate communication between the Parties on any trade matter
covered by this Agreement, each Party shall designate a contact point. On the request of
any Party, the contact point of the other Parties shall indicate the office or official
responsible for the matter and provide the required support to facilitate communication
with the requesting Party.
2. On the request of a Party, each Party shall provide information and reply to any
question from the other Parties relating to an actual measure that may affect the
operation of this Agreement. The Parties shall make information on proposed measures
available to the extent possible under their domestic laws and regulations.
3. The information referred to under this Article shall be considered to have been
provided when the information has been made available by appropriate notification to
the WTO or when the information has been made available on the official, publicly and
fee-free accessible website of the Party concerned.
ARTICLE 84
 Cooperation on increased transparency
The Parties agree to cooperate in bilateral and multilateral fora on ways to increase
transparency in trade matters. 
XLVI
CHAPTER IX
ADMINISTRATION OF THE AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 85
The Joint Committee
1. The Parties hereby establish the EFTA-Chile Joint Committee, comprising
Ministers of each Party, or senior officials delegated by them for this purpose.
2. The Joint Committee shall:
(a) supervise the implementation of this Agreement and evaluate the results
obtained in its application;
(b) oversee the further elaboration of this Agreement;
(c) endeavour to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation
or application of this Agreement;
(d) supervise the work of the sub-committees and working groups
established or created under this Agreement; and
(e) carry out any other function assigned to it under this Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. The Joint
Committee may seek the advice of non-governmental persons and groups.
4. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules of procedure.11 It may take
decisions as provided for in this Agreement. On other matters the Joint Committee may
make recommendations. The Joint Committee shall take decisions and make
recommendations by consensus.
5. Subject to the provisions set out in Annex XV, the Joint Committee may amend
the Annexes and the Appendices to this Agreement.
6. The Joint Committee shall meet whenever necessary but normally every two
years. The regular meetings of the Joint Committee shall alternate between Chile and an
EFTA State.

11 Rules of procedure were adopted by Joint Committee Decision No. 1 of 2006 (31 Janury 2006). 
XLVII
7. Each Party may request at any time, through a notice in writing to the other
Parties, that a special meeting of the Joint Committee be held. Such a meeting shall take
place within 30 days of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
ARTICLE 86
The Secretariat
1. The Parties hereby establish a Secretariat of this Agreement, comprising the
competent organs referred to in Annex XVI.

2. All communications to or by a Party shall be sent through the respective
competent organs unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement.
CHAPTER X
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
ARTICLE 87
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply with respect to the avoidance or the settlement of all
disputes arising from this Agreement between one or several EFTA States and Chile.
2. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and
application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through co-operation and
consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might
affect its operation.
3. This Chapter shall not apply to Articles 14(2), 16(1), 17(1), 18(3), 20, 24(1) and
81(1) and (2).
ARTICLE 88
Choice of forum
1. Disputes on the same matter arising under both this Agreement and the WTO
Agreement, or any agreement negotiated thereunder, to which the Parties are party, may
be settled in either forum at the discretion of the complaining Party. The forum thus
selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other. 
XLVIII
2. Once dispute settlement procedures have been initiated under this Agreement
pursuant to Article 91 or dispute settlement proceedings have been initiated under the
WTO Agreement, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other.
3. For the purposes of this Article, dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO
Agreement are deemed to be initiated by a Party’s request for the establishment of a
panel pursuant to Article 6 of the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing
the Settlement of Disputes.
4. Before a Party initiates dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO
Agreement against another Party or Parties, that Party shall notify all other Parties of its
intention.
ARTICLE 89
Good offices, conciliation or mediation
1. Good offices, conciliation and mediation are procedures that are undertaken
voluntarily if the Parties involved so agree. They may begin at any time and be
terminated at any time.
2. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation shall be
confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the Parties in any other proceedings.
ARTICLE 90
Consultations
1. A Party may request in writing consultations with another Party whenever it
considers that a measure applied by that Party is inconsistent with this Agreement or
that any benefit accruing to it directly or indirectly under this Agreement is impaired by
such measure. The Party requesting consultations shall at the same time notify the other
Parties in writing thereof. Consultations shall take place before the Joint Committee
unless the Party or Parties making or receiving the request for consultations disagree.
2. Consultations shall be held within 30 days from the date of receipt of the request
for consultations. Consultations on urgent matters, including those on perishable
agricultural goods, shall commence within 15 days from the receipt of the request for
consultations.
3. The Parties involved in the consultations shall provide sufficient information to
enable a full examination of how the measure is inconsistent with, or may impair the
benefit accruing to them under this Agreement and treat any confidential or proprietary
information exchanged in the course of consultations in the same manner as the Party
providing the information.
4. The consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the
Parties involved in any further proceedings. 
XLIX
5. The Parties involved in the consultations shall inform the other Parties of any
mutually agreed resolution of the matter.
ARTICLE 91
Establishment of arbitration panel
1. If the matter has not been resolved within 60 days, or 30 days in relation to a
matter of urgency, after the date of receipt of the request for consultations, it may be
referred to arbitration by one or more of the Parties involved by means of a written
notification addressed to the Party or Parties complained against. A copy of this
notification shall also be communicated to all Parties so that each Party may determine
whether to participate in the dispute.
2. Where more than one Party requests the establishment of an arbitration panel
relating to the same matter, a single arbitration panel should be established to examine
these complaints whenever feasible.
3. A request for arbitration shall give the reason for the complaint including the
identification of the measure at issue and an indication of the legal basis of the
complaint.
4. A Party to this Agreement which is not a Party to the dispute, on delivery of a
written notice to the disputing Parties, shall be entitled to make written submissions to
the arbitration panel, receive written submissions of the disputing Parties, attend all
hearings and make oral submissions.
ARTICLE 92
Arbitration panel
1. The arbitration panel shall comprise three members.
2. In the written notification pursuant to Article 91, the Party or the Parties
referring the dispute to arbitration shall designate one member of the arbitration panel.
3. Within 15 days of the receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2, the
Party or Parties to which it was addressed to shall designate one member of the
arbitration panel.
4. The Parties to the dispute shall agree on the appointment of the third arbitrator
within 15 days of the appointment of the second arbitrator. The member thus appointed
shall chair the arbitration panel.
5. If all 3 members have not been designated or appointed within 30 days from the
date of receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2, the necessary designations 
L
shall be made at the request of any Party to the dispute by the Director-General of the
WTO within a further 30 days.
6. The Chair of the arbitration panel shall not be a national of any of the Parties,
nor have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of any of the Parties, nor be
employed or previously have been employed by any of the Parties, nor have dealt with
the case in any capacity.
7. If an arbitrator dies, withdraws or is removed, a replacement shall be selected
within 15 days in accordance with the selection procedure followed to select him or her.
In such a case, any time period applicable to the arbitration panel proceedings shall be
suspended for a period beginning on the date the arbitrator dies, withdraws or is
removed and ending on the date the replacement is selected.
8. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the
Chair is appointed.
ARTICLE 93
Procedures of the arbitration panel
1. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the arbitration panel
proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure set
out at Annex XVII.
2. Unless the Parties to the dispute otherwise agree within 10 days from the date of
delivery of the request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, the terms of
reference shall be:
"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement, the matter
referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel pursuant to Article
91 and to make findings of law and fact together with the reasons therefore for the
resolution of the dispute.”
3. At the request of a Party to the dispute or on its own initiative, the arbitration
panel may seek scientific information and technical advice from experts as it deems
appropriate. Any information so obtained shall be submitted to the Parties for
comments.
4. The arbitration panel shall make its ruling based on the provisions of this
Agreement, in particular in the light of its objectives as set out in Article 2, applied and
interpreted in accordance with the rules of interpretation of public international law.

5. Decisions of the arbitration panel shall be taken by a majority of its members.
Arbitrators may furnish separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed. No
arbitration panel may disclose which arbitrators are associated with majority or minority
opinions. 
LI
6. The expenses of the arbitration panel, including the remuneration of its
members, shall be borne by the Parties to the dispute in equal shares.
ARTICLE 94
Ruling
1. The arbitration panel shall within 90 days from the date of the establishment of
the arbitration panel present to the Parties to the dispute its ruling.
2. The arbitration panel shall base its ruling on the submissions and arguments of
the Parties to the dispute and on any scientific information and technical advice
pursuant to Article 93(3).
3. Unless the Parties to the dispute decide otherwise, the ruling shall be published
15 days after it is presented to them.
ARTICLE 95
Termination of arbitration panel proceedings
A complaining Party may withdraw its complaint at any time before the ruling has been
issued. Such withdrawal is without prejudice to its right to introduce a new complaint
regarding the same issue at a later point in time.
ARTICLE 96
Implementation of arbitration panel rulings
1. The ruling shall be final and binding on the Parties to the dispute. Each Party to
the dispute shall be bound to take the measures necessary to comply with the ruling
referred to in Article 94.
2. The Parties to the dispute shall endeavour to agree on the specific measures that
are required for complying with the ruling.
3. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party within 30 days after
the ruling has been transmitted to the Parties to the dispute:
(a) the specific measures required for complying with the ruling;
(b) the reasonable period of time to do so; and
(c) a concrete proposal of a temporary compensation until the full
implementation of the specific measures required for compliance with
the ruling. 
LII
4. In case of disagreement between the Parties to the dispute on the content of such
notification, the complaining Party may request the original arbitration panel to rule on
whether the proposed measures referred to under paragraph 3(a) are in compliance with
the ruling, on the duration of the period of time and on whether the compensation
proposal is manifestly disproportionate. The ruling shall be given within 45 days after
that request.
5. The Party or Parties concerned shall notify to the other Party or Parties to the
dispute and the Joint Committee the measures adopted in order to implement the ruling
before the expiry of the reasonable period of time determined in accordance with
paragraph 4. Upon that notification, any Party to the dispute may request the original
arbitration panel to rule on the conformity of those measures with the ruling. The ruling
of the arbitration panel shall be given within 45 days from that request.
6. If the Party or Parties concerned fails to notify the implementing measures
before the expiry of the reasonable period of time determined in accordance with
paragraph 4, or if the arbitration panel rules that the implementing measures notified by
the Party or Parties concerned are not in compliance with the ruling, such Party or
Parties shall, if so requested by the complaining Party or Parties, enter into consultations
with a view to agree on a mutually acceptable compensation. If no such agreement has
been reached within 20 days from the request, the complaining Party or Parties shall be
entitled to suspend only the application of benefits granted under this Agreement
equivalent to those affected by the measure found to be inconsistent with, or to impair
benefits under, this Agreement.
7. In considering what benefits to suspend, the complaining Party or Parties should
first seek to suspend benefits in the same sector12 or sectors as that affected by the
measure that the arbitration panel has found to be inconsistent with, or to impair
benefits under, this Agreement. The complaining Party or Parties that consider it is not
practicable or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors may suspend
benefits in other sectors.
8. The complaining Party or Parties shall notify the other Party or Parties of the
benefits which it intends to suspend no later than 60 days before the date on which the
suspension is due to take effect. Within 15 days from that notification, any of the Parties
to the dispute may request the original arbitration panel to rule on whether the benefits
which the complaining Party or Parties intend to suspend are equivalent to those
affected by the measure found to be inconsistent with, or to impair benefits under, this
Agreement, and whether the proposed suspension is in accordance with paragraphs 6
and 7. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be given within 45 days from that
request. Benefits shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has issued its ruling.
9. The suspension of benefits shall be temporary and shall only be applied by the
complaining Party or Parties until the measure found to be inconsistent with, or to
impair benefits under, this Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it

12 For the purpose of this Article, with respect to goods ‘sector’ shall mean goods classified in
Chapters 1 to 97 of the HS. 
LIII
into conformity with this Agreement, or the Parties to the dispute have reached
agreement on a resolution of the dispute.
10. At the request of any of the Parties to the dispute, the original arbitration panel
shall decide on the conformity with the ruling of any implementing measures adopted
after the suspension of benefits and, in light of such ruling, whether the suspension of
benefits should be terminated or modified. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be
given within 30 days from the date of that request.
11. The rulings provided for in this Article shall be binding.
ARTICLE 97
Other provisions
1. Any time period mentioned in this Chapter may be extended by mutual
agreement of the Parties involved.
2. Hearings of the arbitration panels shall be closed to the public, unless the Parties
decide otherwise.
CHAPTER XI
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
ARTICLE 98
Balance of payments difficulties
1. Where a Party is in serious balance of payments and external financial
difficulties, or under threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures with
regard to trade in goods and in services and with regard to payments and capital
movements, including those related to direct investment.
2. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the application of the restrictive measures
referred to in paragraph 1.
3. Any restrictive measure adopted or maintained under this Article shall be nondiscriminatory and of limited duration and shall not go beyond what is necessary to
remedy the balance of payments and external financial situation. Such a measure shall
be in accordance with the conditions established in the WTO Agreements and consistent
with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, as applicable. 
LIV
4. The Party maintaining or having adopted restrictive measures, or any changes
thereto, shall promptly notify them to the other Parties and present, as soon as possible,
a time schedule for their removal.
5. The Party applying restrictive measures shall consult promptly within the Joint
Committee. Such consultations shall assess the balance of payments situation of the Party
concerned and the restrictions adopted or maintained under this Article, taking into
account, inter alia, such factors as:
(a) the nature and extent of the balance of payments and the external
financial difficulties;
(b) the external economic and trading environment of the consulting Party;
(c) alternative corrective measures which may be available.
The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictive measures with
paragraphs 3 and 4. All findings of statistical and other facts presented by the
International Monetary Fund relating to foreign exchange, monetary reserves and
balance of payments shall be accepted and conclusions shall be based on the assessment
by the International Monetary Fund of the balance of payments and the external
financial situation of the consulting Party.
ARTICLE 99
National security clause
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
(a) to require a Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for
the protection of its essential security interests
(i) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials
from which they are derived;
(ii) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war
and to such traffic in other goods and materials or relating to the
supply of services, as carried on directly or indirectly for the
purpose of supplying or provisioning a military establishment;
(iii) relating to the government procurement of arms, ammunition or
war materials or procurement indispensable for national security or
for national defense purposes; or 
LV
(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;
or
(c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations
under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
2. The Joint Committee shall be informed to the fullest extent possible of measures
taken under paragraphs 1(b) and (c) and of their termination.
ARTICLE 100
Taxation
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation measures except:
(a) Article 15, and such other provisions of this Agreement as are necessary
to give effect to that Article to the same extent as does Article III of the
GATT 1994; and
(b) with regard to taxation measures applicable in Section I of Chapter III,
where Article XIV of the GATS applies.
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party
under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement
and any such convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.
CHAPTER XII
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 101
Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:
“days” means calendar days;
“measure” includes inter alia any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or
practice; and
“Party” means any State regarding which this Agreement has entered into force. 
LVI
ARTICLE 102
Annexes and Appendices
The Annexes and Appendices to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.
ARTICLE 103
Amendments
1. The Parties may agree on any amendment to this Agreement. Unless the Parties
decide otherwise, the amendments shall enter into force on the first day of the third
month following the deposit of the last instrument of ratification, acceptance or
approval.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, with respect to decisions of the Joint Committee
amending the Annexes and Appendices to this Agreement, Article 85(5) shall apply.
Such decisions shall enter into force on the date that the last Party notifies that its
internal requirements have been fulfilled, unless the decision itself specifies a later date.
The Joint Committee may decide that any decision shall enter into force for those
Parties that have fulfilled their internal requirements, provided that Chile is one of those
Parties. An EFTA State may apply a decision of the Joint Committee provisionally until
such decision enters into force, subject to its constitutional requirements.
3. The text of the amendments shall be deposited with the Depositary.
ARTICLE 104
Additional Parties
Any third State may, upon invitation by the Joint Committee, become a Party to this
Agreement. The terms and conditions of the accession of the additional Party shall be
the subject of an agreement between the Parties and the invited State.
ARTICLE 105
Withdrawal and termination
1. Any Party to this Agreement may withdraw therefrom by means of a written
notification to the Depositary. The withdrawal shall take effect on the first day of the
sixth month after the date on which the notification was received by the Depositary.
2. If one of the EFTA States withdraws from this Agreement, a meeting of the
remaining Parties shall be convened to discuss the issue of the continued existence of
this Agreement. 
LVII
ARTICLE 106

Entry into force
1. This Agreement is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. The
instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the
Depositary.
2. This Agreement shall enter into force on 1 February 2004 in relation to those
Signatory States which by then have ratified, accepted or approved the Agreement,
provided they have deposited their instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval
with the Depositary at least 30 days before the date of entry into force, and provided
that Chile is among the States that have deposited their instruments of ratification,
acceptance or approval.
3. In case this Agreement does not enter into force on 1 February 2004, it shall
enter into force on the first day of the first month following the latter deposit of the
instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval by Chile and at least one EFTA
State.

4. In relation to an EFTA State depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval after this Agreement has entered into force, this Agreement shall enter into
force on the first day of the third month following the deposit of its instrument.
5. If its constitutional requirements permit, any EFTA State may apply this
Agreement provisionally. Provisional application of this Agreement under this
paragraph shall be notified to the Depositary.
ARTICLE 107
Relation to the complementary agreements
1. The complementary agreement on trade in agricultural goods between an EFTA
State and Chile referred to in Article 1 shall enter into force on the same date for that
EFTA State and Chile as this Agreement enters into force. The complementary
agreement shall remain in force as long as the Parties to it remain Parties to this
Agreement.
2. If an EFTA State or Chile withdraws from the complementary agreement, this
Agreement shall terminate between that EFTA State and Chile on the same date as the
withdrawal from the complementary agreement becomes effective.
ARTICLE 108
Depositary
The Government of Norway shall act as Depositary. 
LVIII 
LIX
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed
this Agreement.
Done at Kristiansand, this 26th day of June 2003, in a single authentic copy in the
English language which shall be deposited with the Government of Norway. The
Government of Norway shall transmit certified copies to all Signatory States to this
Agreement.
For the Republic of Iceland For the Republic of Chile
.......................................................... .....................................................
For the Principality of Liechtenstein
..........................................................
For the Kingdom of Norway
..........................................................
For the Swiss Confederation
.......................................................... 