Chile-Colombia Free Trade Agreement

which constitutes an additional protocol to ACE 24


Preamble

 

The Government of the Republic of Colombia (Colombia) and the Government of the Republic of Chile (Chile), hereinafter "the Parties", considering:

The will to strengthen the special bonds of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between their peoples;

The development of their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakech Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization and the 1980 Montevideo Treaty , as well as other bilateral and multilateral integration and cooperation instruments to which they are party;

The need to strengthen the integration process of Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty , through the conclusion of the broadest possible bilateral and multilateral agreements;

The active participation of the Parties in the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI);

The progress achieved in the economic integration between the Parties derived from the Economic Complementation Agreement for the Establishment of an Expanded Space between Colombia and Chile (Agreement No. 24);

The importance of working together towards greater integration with the Asia-Pacific region;

Colombia's participation in the Cartagena Agreement and the commitments derived from it for this country;

The advantages of offering economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade in goods and services, as well as for the promotion and protection of investments;

The importance that adequate international cooperation represents for the economic development of the Parties and the improvement of their competitive capacity;

The desirability of achieving a more active participation of the economic agents of the Parties in the tending efforts to increase the reciprocal exchange;

The importance of creating new and better employment opportunities and improving working conditions, in the search to ensure "decent work" for its workers and to promote increasing quality in the development of human resources and social capital;

Commitment to achieving sustainable development and recognizing that its pillars are interdependent and mutually reinforcing-economic growth, social development, and environmental protection;

That environmental and trade policies must support each other to achieve sustainable development;

The importance of cooperating in the prevention and fight against corrupt practices that may arise around the development of this Agreement.

Agree to enter into the following Agreement,

Chapter 1

Initial Provisions

Article 1.1: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services , and the Montevideo Treaty of 1980, establish a free trade zone.

Article 1.2: Objectives

1. The objectives of this Agreement are the following:

(a) promote, under conditions of equity, the balanced and harmonious development of the Parties;

(b) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;

(c) remove barriers to trade and facilitate the cross-border movement of goods and services between the Parties;

(d) substantially increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

(e) establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level, aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement;

(f) create effective procedures for the application and enforcement of this Agreement, for its joint administration, and to prevent and resolve disputes;

(g) promote cooperation between the Parties aimed at obtaining the widest benefit from the development and growth opportunities provided by this Agreement, with special emphasis on innovation and competitiveness;

(h) contribute to the efforts of the Parties to ensure that trade and environmental policies are mutually supportive and collaborate in promoting the best forms of sustainable use of natural resources and the protection of ecosystems; and

(i) promote the development of labor policies and practices that improve working conditions, employment and living standards, in the territory of each of the Parties;

2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.

Episode 2

General Definitions

Article 2.1: Definitions of General Application

For purposes of this Agreement and unless otherwise specified:

ACE 24 means the Economic Complementation Agreement for the Establishment of an Expanded Space between Colombia and Chile (Agreement No. 24) , signed in Santiago de Chile, on December 6, 1993;

Antidumping Agreement means the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 , which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization , dated April 15, 1994;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Agreement on Subsidies means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures , which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

GATS stands for the General Agreement on Trade in Services , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Customs duty includes any import tax or duty and any charge of any kind levied in connection with the importation of a good, including any form of surcharge or surcharge in connection with such importation, but does not include any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III.2 of the GATT 1994, with respect to like, directly competitive, or substitute goods of the Party, or with respect to goods from which it has been manufactured or produced all or part of the imported merchandise;

(b) antidumping or countervailing duty; either,

(c) duty or other charge related to importation proportional to the cost of services rendered;

customs authority means the authority that, according to the respective laws of each Party, is responsible for administering and applying customs laws and regulations.

(a) in the case of Chile, the National Customs Service; and

(b) in the case of Colombia, the Directorate of National Taxes and Customs.

Commission means the Free Trade Commission set forth in Article 15.1.1 (Free Trade Commission);

government procurement means the process by which a government procures the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination thereof, for government purposes and not with a view to commercial sale or resale or with a view to use in the production or supply of merchandise or services for commercial sale or resale;

days means calendar, calendar, or calendar days;

enterprise means any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and whether privately or governmentally owned, including any partnership, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, or other association ;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party;

State enterprise means an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through ownership rights;

existing means current as of the effective date of this Agreement;

GATT 1994 stands for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

levy means customs duty;

measure means any law, regulation, rule, procedure, requirement or practice;

originating merchandise means a good or product that complies with the rules of origin established in Chapter 4 (Regime of origin);

national means a natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with its Political Constitution or a permanent resident of a Party;

WTO means the World Trade Organization ;

signatory country means Party;

heading means the first four digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification number;

person means a natural person or a company;

person of a Party means a national or company of a Party;

Harmonized System (HS) means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System , including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes and Chapter Notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective customs tariff laws. ;

subheading means the first six digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification number;

territory means for a Party the territory of that Party as set out in Annex 2.1; and

preferential tariff treatment means the tariff applicable to an originating good in accordance with this Agreement.

Annex 2.1

Specific Definition for each Country

For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, territory means:

(a) with respect to Chile, the land, maritime and air space under its sovereignty and the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf over which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international law and its domestic legislation; and

(b) with respect to Colombia, in addition to its continental territory, the archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina, the Island of Malpelo and all other islands, islets, keys, hills and banks that belong to it, as well as its airspace and the maritime areas over which it has sovereignty or sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with its domestic legislation and International Law, including applicable international treaties.

Chapter 3

Merchandise Trade

Article 3.1: National Treatment

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to that end Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and made part of the Agreement. same, mutatis mutandis.

Article 3.2: Export Taxes

Except as provided in Annex 3.2, neither Party may adopt or maintain any duty, tax or other charge on exports of any good to the territory of the other Party, unless such duty, tax or charge is adopted or maintained on any merchandise for domestic consumption.

Article 3.3: Fees and Administrative Procedures

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article VIII of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, that all fees and charges of whatever nature (other than customs duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other domestic charges applied in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and countervailing duties), taxes on or in connection with imports or exports, are limited to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent a indirect protection to national merchandise nor a tax on imports or exports for tax purposes.

2. The Parties may not require consular transactions, including related fees and charges, in connection with the importation of any merchandise of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall make available, via the Internet or a comparable computer telecommunications network, a current list of its fees and charges imposed in connection with importation or exportation.

Article 3.4: Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of

any merchandise of the other Party or to the export or sale for export of any merchandise destined for the territory of the other Party, except as provided in Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, under any circumstances in which any other form of restriction is prohibited, a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) export and import price requirements, except as permitted in compliance with antidumping and countervailing duty orders and obligations;

(b) licensing to import on the condition of meeting a performance requirement; either

(c) voluntary export restrictions not consistent with Article VI of the GATT 1994, as applied under Article 18 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Article 8.1 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement.

Article 3.5: Subsidies for Agricultural Exports

1. The Parties share the objective of the multilateral elimination of export subsidies for agricultural goods and will work together in order to reach an agreement in the WTO to eliminate such export subsidies, as well as to prevent their reintroduction under any way.

2. Neither Party shall introduce or maintain any export subsidy on any agricultural good destined for the territory of the other Party.

3. For the purposes of this Article, export subsidies shall have the same meaning assigned to that term in Article 1(e) of the Agreement on Agriculture, which forms part of the WTO Agreement, including any amendments to that article.

Article 3.6: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Trade in Goods, composed of representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall meet at the request of either Party or the Commission to consider any matter included in this Chapter and the release schedule.

3. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) promote trade in goods between the Parties, including consultations for the acceleration of tariff elimination under this Agreement and other matters that are appropriate; and

(b) consider obstacles to trade in goods between the Parties, especially those related to the application of non-tariff measures and, if necessary, submit these matters to the Commission for its consideration.

Annex 3.1

National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions

Section A – Colombian Measures

Articles 3.1 and 3.4 shall not apply to:

1. Controls on the importation of used and imperfect merchandise, balances, excess, waste, waste and residues, in accordance with Resolution 001 of January 2, 1995;

2. Controls on the importation of motor vehicles, including used vehicles and new vehicles whose importation takes place after two (2) years from the date of manufacture, in accordance with Resolution 001 of January 2, 1995;

3. the departmental monopoly of liquor production and the power of the departments to establish taxes on the importation of liquor from other departments or countries;

4. Actions authorized by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.

Section B – Chilean Measures

Articles 3.1 and 3.4 shall not apply to:

1. Chile's actions authorized by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.

2. Chile's measures regarding the importation of used vehicles.

Annex 3.2

Export Taxes

Colombian Measures

1. Contribution required on the export of coffee in accordance with Law No.101 of 1993;

2. Contribution required on the export of emeralds in accordance with Law No.488 of 1988.

Chapter 4

Origin Regime

Section A – Rules of Origin

Article 4.1: Originating Goods

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a good will be considered originating when:

(a) the good is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or the other Party, as defined in Article 4.26;

(b) the good is produced in the territory of one or the other Party, exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter; either

(c) the good is produced in the territory of one or the other Party, from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification, a regional value content, or other requirements as specified in Annex 4.1 and the good meets with the other applicable provisions of this Chapter.

Article 4.2: Regional Value Content

1. The regional content value of the goods will be calculated according to the following formula:

VCR = [(VT - VMN) / VM] * 100

where:

RVC is the regional value content, expressed as a percentage;

VT is the transaction value of the merchandise adjusted on an FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 2. In the event that said value does not exist or cannot be determined in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, it will be calculated in accordance with said agreement; and

VNM is the transaction value of non-originating materials adjusted on a CIF basis, except as provided in paragraph 4. In case such value does not exist or cannot be determined in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, the It will be calculated in accordance with said agreement.

2. When a good is not directly exported by its producer, the value shall be adjusted up to the point at which the buyer receives the good within the territory of the Party where the producer is located.

3. All the records of the costs considered for the calculation of regional content value will be recorded and maintained in accordance with the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.

4. When the producer of a good acquires a non-originating material within the territory of a Party where it is located, the value of the non-originating material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in the transportation of the good. material from the supplier's warehouse to the producer's location.

5. For purposes of calculating regional value content, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good will not include the value of non-originating materials used by:

(a) another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either

(b) the producer of the good in the production of a self-manufactured originating material.

Article 4.3: Operations that do not Confer Origin

The following processes or operations do not confer origin, individually or in combination with each other:

(a) preservation of the goods in good condition during transport or storage, such as ventilation, aeration, refrigeration, freezing;

(b) facilitation of shipment or transportation;

(c) packaging, packaging, or conditioning of the merchandise for retail sale;

(d) filtration or dilution in water or other solvents that does not alter the characteristics of the merchandise;

(e) division into batches or volumes;

(f) placement of brands, labels and other similar distinctive signs on the merchandise or its packaging; either

(g) Disassembled merchandise into its parts.

Article 4.4: Accumulation

Originating materials or originating goods of either Party incorporated in the production of goods in the territory of the other Party shall be considered as originating in the territory of the latter Party.

Article 4.5: De Minimis

1. A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of this good that do not comply with the change in tariff classification requirement established in Annex 4.1 (Specific Rules of Origin) does not exceed ten percent. percent (10%) of the transaction value of the merchandise determined in accordance with Article 4.2. and the merchandise complies with the other applicable provisions of this Chapter.

2. In the case of merchandise that is classified in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the percentage indicated in paragraph 1 will refer to the weight of the fibers or yarns with respect to the weight of the merchandise produced.

3. Paragraph 1 does not apply to a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by Chapters 1 through 24 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading from that of the good. for which origin is being determined in accordance with this article.

4. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to a non-originating material classified in Chapter 15 of the Harmonized System that is used in the production of a good classified in headings 15.01 through 15.15.

Article 4.6: Goods and Fungible Materials

1. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory, the origin of these goods may be determined based on the physical segregation of each fungible good or material, or through the use of any inventory management method, such as, the average, last in - first out (LIFO) or first in - first out (FIFO), recognized in the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles of the Party where the production takes place or otherwise accepted by the Party where production is done.

2. The inventory management method selected pursuant to paragraph 1 for a particular good or fungible material shall continue to be used for that good or fungible material through the fiscal year of the person who selected the inventory management method. .

Article 4.7: Games or Assortments

1. A set or assortment of merchandise that is classified in accordance with rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, as well as merchandise whose description according to the Harmonized System nomenclature is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in that set or assortment complies with the rules of origin established in this Chapter and in Annex 4.1 (Specific Rules of Origin).

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the value transaction of the merchandise, determined in accordance with Article 4.2.

Article 4.8: Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. The accessories, spare parts or tools delivered with the merchandise as a normal part of the merchandise will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the merchandise comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the Annex. 4.1 (Specific Rules of Origin), provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts or tools are classified together with the merchandise and are not invoiced separately; and

(b) the quantity and value of these accessories, spare parts or tools are the usual ones for the merchandise.

2. For those accessories, spare parts or tools that do not meet the conditions mentioned above, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to each one of them.

3. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the accessories, spare parts or tools will be considered as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the merchandise.

Article 4.9: Containers and Packaging Materials for Retail Sale

1. When the containers and packaging materials in which a merchandise is presented for retail sale are classified in the Harmonized System with the merchandise they contain, they will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the merchandise comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.1 (Specific Rules of Origin).

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of said containers and packaging materials will be taken into account as originating or non-originating material, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the merchandise. commodity.

Article 4.10: Containers and Packaging Materials for Shipping

The containers and packaging materials in which the merchandise is packed exclusively for its transport, will not be taken into account for the purposes of determining if the merchandise is originating.

Article 4.11: Indirect Materials

Indirect materials will be considered originating materials regardless of the place of their production.

Article 4.12: Transit and Transhipment

Each Party shall provide that a good shall not lose its originating quality if:

(a) does not undergo further processing or is subject to any other operation, outside the territory of the Parties, except unloading, reloading, fractioning or any other operation necessary to keep the merchandise in good condition or to transport it to the territory of a Party ; and

(b) remains under the control of the customs authorities in the territory of a non-Party country.

Article 4.13: Exhibitions

1. The preferential tariff treatment provided for in this Agreement will be granted to originating goods sent for exhibition in a non-Party country and that have been sold after the exhibition to be imported into one of the Parties, when the following conditions are met to satisfaction from the customs authorities of the importing Party:

(a) an exporter has shipped these goods from one of the Parties to the non-Party country where the exposure took place;

(b) the goods were sold or otherwise disposed of by the exporter to a person of one of the Parties;

(c) the goods were shipped during or immediately after the exhibition in the same condition in which they were shipped to the exhibition;

(d) from the moment the goods were sent to the exhibition, they have not been used for purposes other than their presentation at said exhibition; and

(e) the goods have remained under the control of the customs authorities of the non-Party country during the exhibition.

2. For the purposes of applying paragraph 1, a certificate of origin shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of Section B (Origin Procedures), which shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party, mentioning the name and exhibition address. If deemed necessary, additional documentary evidence related to the exposure may be required.

Section B – Origin Procedures

Article 4.14: Certification of Origin

1. The importer may request preferential tariff treatment based on a written or electronic certificate of origin.1 issued by the competent authority of the exporting Party at the request of the exporter.

2. The competent authority of the exporting Party may delegate the issuance of the certificate of origin to other public or private entities.

3. The competent authority or authorized entities may examine in their territory the quality of origin of the goods and compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. For this purpose, they may request any supporting evidence, carry out inspections of the exporter's or producer's facilities or carry out any other control they deem appropriate.

4. The Parties will keep in force before the General Secretariat of ALADI the list of official departments or public or private entities authorized to issue certificates of origin and the record of the autograph or electronic signatures of the officials accredited for this purpose.

5. The certificate of origin will serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party, qualifies as originating. Said certificate may be modified by the Commission. The unique form of the certificate of origin is established in Annex 4.14.

6. The certificate of origin will be valid for one year from the date it was issued.

Article 4.15: Billing by a Non-Party Country Operator

In the certificate of origin, it must be indicated in the "Observations" field, when a merchandise is invoiced by an operator from a non-Party country.

Article 4.16: Exceptions

The certificate of origin will not be required when:

(a) the customs value of the import does not exceed one thousand five hundred United States dollars (US$1,500) or the equivalent amount in the currency of the importing Party, or such greater amount as may be established by the importing Party , unless the importing Party considers that the import is part of a series of imports made or planned for the purpose of evading compliance with the Party's legislation regulating claims for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement; either

(b) is a good for which the importing Party does not require the importer to present certification or information showing origin.

Article 4.17: Obligations Related to Imports

1. The customs authority of each Party shall require that the importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good:

(a) declare in writing in the import document required by its legislation, based on a certificate of origin, that a good qualifies as an originating good;

(b) have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time the declaration is made;

(c) provide, if requested by the customs authority, the certificate of origin or copies thereof; and

(d) immediately file a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding duty when the importer has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which the customs declaration is based contains incorrect information. The importer may not be penalized when he voluntarily submits the corrected merchandise declaration, prior to the customs authority having begun the exercise of its powers of verification and control or before the customs authorities notify the revision, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

2. If an importer in its territory does not comply with any of the requirements established in this Chapter, the customs authority will deny preferential tariff treatment.

Article 4.18: Return of Rights

When the importer has not requested a preferential tariff treatment for the goods imported into its territory that would have qualified as originating, the importer may, no later than one (1) year after the date of importation, request before the customs authority of the Part importer the return of customs duties paid in excess for not having requested preferential tariff treatment for that merchandise, provided that the request is accompanied by:

(a) a written statement indicating that the good qualifies as originating at the time of importation;

(b) the certificate of origin or its copy; and

(c) any other documentation related to the importation of the merchandise, as may be required by the customs authority.

Article 4.19: Obligations Related to Exports

1. Each Party shall provide that:

(a) when an exporter has reason to believe that the certificate of origin contains incorrect information, he must immediately communicate in writing to the competent authority or authorized entities any change that may affect the accuracy or validity of that certificate; and

(b) if an exporter delivered a certificate or false information and with it goods qualified as originating were exported to the territory of the other Party, he will be subject to sanctions similar to those that would be applied to an importer in its territory for violating its laws and customs regulations by making false statements and claims in connection with an importation.

2. No Party shall impose sanctions on an exporter for providing incorrect information if it voluntarily communicates it in writing to the competent authority or authorized entities, before the customs authority of the importing Party has begun to exercise its powers of verification and control or before that the customs authorities notify the revision, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 4.20: Record Keeping Requirements

1. The competent authority or authorized entities must keep a copy of the certificate of origin for a minimum period of five (5) years, from the date of its issuance. Said file must include all the background information that served as the basis for the issuance of the certificate.

2. An exporter who requests a certificate of origin in accordance with Article 4.14, must keep for a minimum of five (5) years from the date of issuance of said certificate, all necessary records to demonstrate that the merchandise was original, including records relating to:

(a) the purchase, costs, value and payment for the exported merchandise;

(b) the purchase, costs, value and payment of all materials, including indirect materials, used in the production of the exported good; and

(c) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory.

3. An importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a merchandise must keep, for a minimum of five (5) years from the date of importation of the merchandise, the documentation that the customs authority requires, including a copy of the certificate of origin. .

Article 4.21: Procedures for Verification of Origin

1. The customs authority of the importing Party may request information about the origin of a good from the competent authority of the exporting Party.

2. The customs authority of the importing Party may require the importer to present information related to the importation of the merchandise for which preferential tariff treatment was requested.

3. For purposes of determining whether an imported good qualifies as originating, the customs authority of the importing Party may verify the origin of the good, through the competent authority of the exporting Party, through the following procedures:

(a) requests for information or written questionnaires to the exporter or producer of the good in the territory of the other Party, in which the good subject to verification must be specifically indicated;

(b) verification visits to the facilities of the exporter or producer of the good in the territory of the other Party, for the purpose of examining the records and documents referred to in Article 4.20 and inspecting the facilities and materials used in the production of the merchandise; either

(c) any other procedure that the Parties agree.

4. For the purposes of this article, any written communication sent by the customs authority of the importing Party to the exporter or producer for verification of origin through the competent authority of the exporting Party, shall be considered valid if it is made through :

(a) certified mail or other forms with acknowledgment of receipt confirming receipt of documents or communications; either

(b) any other way that the Parties agree.

5. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3, requests for information or written questionnaires must contain:

(a) the name, position and address of the customs authority requesting the information;

(b) the name and address of the exporter or producer from whom the information and documentation is requested;

(c) description of the information and documents required; and

(d) legal basis for requests for information or questionnaires.

6. The exporter or producer who receives a questionnaire or request for information pursuant to paragraph 3(a), shall duly complete and return the questionnaire or respond to the request for information within thirty (30) days from the date of reception. During the indicated period, the exporter or producer may make a request for extension in writing to the customs authority of the importing Party, not to exceed thirty (30) days. Said request will not have the consequence of denying the preferential tariff treatment.

7. The customs authority of the importing Party may request, through the competent authority of the exporting Party, additional information through a questionnaire or subsequent request from the exporter or producer, even if it has received the completed questionnaire or the information requested from referred to in paragraph 3(a). In this case, the exporter or producer will have thirty (30) days to respond to said request.

8. If the exporter or producer does not duly complete a questionnaire, does not return it, or does not provide the requested information within the period established in paragraphs 6 and 7, the customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the goods. subject to verification, sending to the importer and to the competent authority of the exporting Party, a resolution of origin that includes the facts and the legal basis for that decision.

9. Prior to carrying out a verification visit and in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3(b), the customs authority of the importing Party shall notify in writing its intention to carry out the verification visit. The notification shall be sent to the competent authority of the exporting Party by mail or any other means that indicates receipt of the notification. The customs authority of the importing Party will require the written consent of the exporter or producer to be visited to carry out the verification visit.

10. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 3(b), the notification of intention to carry out the origin verification visit referred to in paragraph 9 must contain:

(a) the name, title and address of the customs authority of the importing Party making the notification;

(b) the name of the exporter or producer to be visited;

(c) the date and place of the proposed verification visit;

(d) the objective and scope of the proposed verification visit, including the specific reference of the merchandise subject to verification;

(e) the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; and

(f) the legal basis for the verification visit.

11. If the exporter or producer of a merchandise does not grant their written consent to carry out the visit within a period of thirty (30) days, counted from the date of receipt of the notification referred to in the paragraph 9, the customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to said good, notifying the importer in writing, and the competent authority of the exporting Party of its resolution, including the facts and the legal basis thereof.

12. The customs authority of the importing Party shall not deny preferential tariff treatment to a good if within fifteen (15) days following the date of receipt of the notification, for a single time, the producer or exporter requests the postponement of the proposed verification visit with the corresponding justifications, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days from the proposed date in accordance with paragraph 10(c), or for a longer period agreed upon by the customs authority of the importing Party and the competent authority of the exporting Party.

13. Pursuant to paragraph 3(b), the customs authority of the importing Party shall permit an exporter or producer who is subject to a verification visit to designate up to two observers to be present during the visit and to just act like it. The non-appointment of observers will not be a reason for the visit to be postponed.

14. To verify compliance with any requirement established in Section A (Rules of Origin), the customs authority of the importing Party shall adopt, where applicable, the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles applied in the territory of the exporting Party.

15. The customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to a good subject to verification of origin when the exporter or producer of the good does not make the records and documents available to the customs authority of the importing Party. reference is made to Article 4.20.

16. When the verification visit has been completed, the customs authority of the importing Party may draw up a record of the visit, which will include the facts verified by it. The exporter or producer subject to the visit may sign this act.

17. Within a period of ninety (90) days from the conclusion of the verification of origin, the customs authority of the importing Party shall issue a resolution of origin that includes the facts and the legal basis of said resolution, and must notify the same to the importer and the competent authority of the exporting Party.

18. After the period established in the previous paragraph has elapsed, without the customs authority of the importing Party having issued a resolution of origin, the competent authority of the exporting Party may resort to the dispute resolution mechanism.

19. When, through a verification of origin, the customs authority of the importing Party determines that an exporter or a producer has provided more than once declarations to the competent authority of the exporting Party or false or unfounded information in the sense that a good qualifies as originating, the customs authority of the importing Party may suspend preferential tariff treatment to identical goods exported by that person. The customs authority of the importing Party will grant preferential tariff treatment to the goods once they comply with the provisions of this Chapter.

20. For the issuance of a resolution of origin of a merchandise subject to a verification process, the customs authority of the importing Party must consider the advance resolutions of origin and tariff classification issued by said authority before the date of issuance of the resolution. originally.

Article 4.22: Sanctions

Each Party shall impose criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for the violation of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 4.23: Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its laws, the confidentiality of information collected under this Chapter and shall protect such information from disclosure.

2. The confidential information collected in accordance with this Chapter may only be disclosed to the authorities in charge of the administration and application of resolutions of origin, and customs and tax matters in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 4.24: Consultations and Modifications

1. The Parties will consult regularly to ensure that this Chapter is administered effectively, uniformly, and in accordance with the spirit and objectives of this Agreement and will cooperate in the administration of this Chapter.

2. A Party that considers that one or more of the provisions of this Chapter needs to be modified, may submit a proposal for the consideration of the other Party.

3. The Committee of Origin must consider proposals to modify the rules of origin, which are due to changes in production processes, amendments to the Harmonized System, other matters related to the determination of the origin of a good or other matters related to this Chapter. .

4. The Origin Committee must meet to consider the proposals within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the communication or on another date that the Committee may decide.

5. The Origin Committee must provide a report to the Commission, presenting its conclusions and recommendations.

6. Upon receipt of the report, the Commission may take the pertinent actions in accordance with Article 15.1.3.

Article 4.25: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall grant the same rights of review and appeal with respect to rulings of origin to its importers, exporters or producers of the other Party who have been notified, through the competent authority of the exporting Party, of those decisions. resolutions pursuant to Article 4.21.

2. The rights referred to in the preceding paragraph include access to at least one administrative review, regardless of the official or office responsible for the original resolutions under review, and access to a judicial review of the same as the last instance of administrative measures, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 4.26: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

competent authority means the authority that, according to the respective laws of each Party, is responsible for issuing the certificate of origin or delegating the issuance to authorized entities. In the case of Chile, the General Directorate of International Economic Relations and in the case of Colombia, the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism;

CIF means the value of the imported merchandise that includes insurance and freight costs to the port or place of introduction in the importing country;

shipping containers and packing materials means merchandise used to protect the merchandise during its transportation and does not include the containers and materials in which the merchandise is packaged for retail sale;

exporter means the person who makes an export;

FOB means the value of the merchandise free on board, regardless of the means of transport, at the place of shipment abroad;

Importer means the person who makes an import;

material means a good or any material, substance, ingredient, part or component used or consumed in the production or processing of another good;

self-made material means material that is produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;

indirect material means a good used in the production, verification or inspection of another good, but that is not physically incorporated into it; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of other good, including:

(a) fuel, power, solvents and catalysts;

(b) equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;

(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and accessories;

(d) tools, dies and molds;

(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

(f) lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production, equipment operation, or building maintenance; and

(g) any other material that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can be shown to be a part of that production;

identical goods means goods that are the same in all respects relevant to the particular rule of origin that qualify the goods as originating;

fungible goods or materials means goods or materials interchangeable for commercial purposes whose properties are essentially identical and that it is not possible to differentiate one from the other, by a simple visual examination;

non-originating good or non-originating material means a good or a material that does not meet the requirements established in this Chapter to be considered originating;

goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or the other Party , means:

(a) minerals extracted or obtained in the territory of one or the other Party;

(b) products of the vegetable kingdom harvested, picked or gathered in the territory of one or the other Party;

(c) live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or the other Party;

(d) goods obtained from live animals in the territory of one or the other Party;

(e) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture, gathering or capture in the territory of one or the other Party;

(f) fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained from the sea outside the territory of the Parties by fishing vessels registered or registered in a Party and flying the flag of that Party or by fishing vessels leased by companies established in the territory of a Party ;

(g) the goods obtained or produced on board factory ships, exclusively from the goods identified in subparagraph f), provided that the factory ships are registered or enrolled in a Party and that they fly the flag of that Party or are leased by companies established in the territory of a Party;

(h) goods obtained from the seabed or subsoil outside the territorial waters of a Party, by a Party or a person of a Party, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;

(i) waste and scrap derived from:

(i) manufacturing or processing operations in the territory of one or the other Party; either

(ii) used goods, collected in the territory of one or the other Party, provided that these goods are used only for the recovery of raw materials; either

(j) goods produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties, exclusively from the goods mentioned in subparagraphs (a) to (i) or their derivatives, at any stage of production;

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles means those on which there is a recognized consensus or which enjoy substantial and authoritative support, in the territory of a Party and at a given time, with respect to the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements. The principles may cover procedures of general application as well as detailed rules, practices and procedures;

production means methods of obtaining goods including but not limited to growing, breeding, raising, mining, harvesting, fishing, hunting, trapping, aquaculture, gathering, extracting, manufacturing, processing, assembling or disassembling a good;

producer means person who carries out a production process;

resolution of origin means the written document issued by the customs authority as a result of a procedure that verifies whether a good qualifies as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

value means the value of a good or material for the purposes of applying this Chapter; and

transaction value means the price paid or payable for a good determined in accordance with the provisions of the Customs Valuation Agreement.

Annex 4.14: Certificate of OriginPDF

Annex 4.1: Specific rules of originPDF

 

Chapter 5

Trade Facilitation

Article 5.1: Publication

1. Each Party shall publish its customs laws, regulations, and administrative procedures on the Internet or in a comparable computer telecommunications network of its customs authority.

2. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, publish in advance any regulation of general application in customs matters that it proposes to adopt and provide an opportunity for comment prior to its adoption.

3. Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more consultation points to attend to the concerns of persons interested in customs matters, and shall make available on the internet information regarding the procedures adopted to formulate and attend to the consultations.

Article 5.2: Dispatch of Goods

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures to achieve efficient and prompt clearance of the goods.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Parties shall:

(a) in accordance with its customs legislation, allow the merchandise to be dispatched at the point of arrival, without temporary transfer to warehouses or other premises;

(b) to the extent possible, dispatch the goods within forty-eight (48) hours after their arrival;

(c) allow importers to remove the goods from customs before the liquidation and payment of customs duties, taxes and charges that are applicable, without prejudice to the final decision by your customs authority about them. For these purposes, a Party may require that an importer provide a guarantee, in the form of a bond, deposit or any other instrument that is appropriate and, to the satisfaction of the customs authority, covers the final payment of customs duties, taxes and charges related to the importation of the merchandise.

3. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, the Parties shall adopt or maintain customs procedures that allow them to notify the interested party of the rejection of clearance of the imported goods, when it does not comply with the required customs requirements and formalities. by the customs laws and regulations of the importing Party. Likewise, the Party that rejects the dispatch of the merchandise will indicate the reasons that generate it.

Article 5.3: Risk Management

Each Party shall endeavor to adopt or maintain risk management systems aimed at facilitating and simplifying the processing and procedures for the release of low-risk merchandise and direct its inspection and control activities towards the release of high-risk merchandise.

Article 5.4: Automation

The customs authorities will work on the adoption of information technology that allows the implementation of expedited procedures for the clearance of merchandise. In choosing the information technology to be used for that purpose, each Party:

(a) use international norms or standards;

(b) make electronic systems accessible to authorized Customs users;

(c) will provide for the electronic submission and processing of information and data prior to the arrival of the shipment, in order to allow the clearance of merchandise upon arrival;

(d) will use electronic or automated systems for the analysis and direction of risks;

(e) work on the development of electronic systems compatible with those of the customs authority of the other Party, in order to facilitate the exchange of international trade data between the Parties; and

(f) work to develop a set of common data elements and processes in accordance with the World Customs Organization Customs Data Model and related World Customs Organization (WCO) recommendations and guidelines .

Article 5.5: Paperless Commerce Administration

1. Each Party shall make available to the public electronically the forms that must be processed by an importer, exporter or their representatives in connection with the import or export of a good.

2. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, accept the forms, which must be processed by an importer, exporter or their representatives, that are submitted electronically, as the legal equivalent of the printed version.

Article 5.6: Customs Cooperation

1. In order to facilitate the effective operation of this Agreement, each Party shall endeavor to notify the other Party in advance of any significant changes to its customs laws or regulations that may affect the performance of this Agreement.

2. The Parties will promote and facilitate cooperation between their respective customs authorities and, particularly, with regard to the simplification of customs paperwork and procedures, without undermining their control powers.

3. The Parties will cooperate to achieve compliance with their respective laws and regulations with respect to:

(a) the implementation and application of the provisions of this Agreement regarding imports or exports, including the provisions related to merchandise trade, the release program, the regime of origin and this Chapter;

(b) the implementation and operation of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports; and

(d) other customs matters that the Parties may agree.

4. When a Party has reasonable suspicions of any illegal activity related to its legislation or regulations on imports and exports, it may request the other Party to provide it with specific confidential information, normally collected in the development of the export and import of goods. .

5. A request made by a Party under paragraph 4 must be in writing, specify the purpose for which the information is required, and identify the required information with sufficient specificity for the other Party to locate and provide it.

6. The Party from which the information is requested shall, in accordance with its law and any relevant international agreement to which it is a party, provide a written response containing such information.

7. For the purposes of paragraph 4, “reasonable suspicion of any unlawful activity” means a suspicion based on relevant factual information obtained from public or private sources, involving one or more of the following circumstances:

(a) historical evidence of non-compliance with the laws or regulations governing imports and exports by an importer or exporter;

(b) historical evidence of non-compliance with the laws or regulations governing imports and exports by a manufacturer, producer, or other person involved in the movement of goods from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;

(c) historical evidence that some or all of the persons involved in the movement of goods from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party, for a specific sector of goods, have not complied with the Party's legislation or regulations that govern imports and exports; or

(d) other information that the Parties agree is sufficient in the context of a particular request.

8. The requested Party shall endeavor to provide the requesting Party with any additional information that could assist it in determining whether imports or exports comply with the laws or regulations governing imports or exports of the other Party, especially those related to the prevention illegal activities, such as smuggling and similar offences.

9. In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, each Party shall endeavor to provide the other Party with advice and technical assistance for the purpose of improving risk assessment and management techniques, simplifying and expediting customs procedures for timely and efficient clearance of goods, improve the technical skills of personnel, and increase the use of technologies that may lead to better compliance with the laws or regulations governing imports from a Party.

10. The Parties will make efforts to cooperate to:

(a) strengthen the technical capacity of each Party to apply the regulations governing their imports and exports;

(b) achieve the simplification of the requirements and formalities regarding the clearance of merchandise;

(c) establish and maintain other communication channels in order to facilitate the secure and rapid exchange of information;

(d) provide assistance in the search for and adoption of mechanisms aimed at preventing and avoiding illegal activities; and

(e) improve coordination on import-related matters.

11. The Parties will cooperate to carry out a fast and efficient dispatch of merchandise. For these purposes, they will strive to take into account as additional elements the certification carried out throughout their foreign trade chain, in the country of export, by international business alliances that follow international standards and promote safe trade in cooperation with governments and International organizations.

12. The Parties agree to sign a Mutual Assistance Agreement between their customs authorities, within three (3) months following the signing of this Agreement.

Article 5.7: Confidentiality

1. When a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Chapter and designates it as confidential, the receiving Party will maintain the confidentiality of such information in accordance with the laws of that Party. The Party that has the information may demand from the Party that requests it a written guarantee, in the sense that the information will be kept confidential, that it will be used only for the purposes specified in the information request of the other Party, and that it will not be disclosed without the specific permission of the Party providing it.

2. A Party may refuse to provide the information requested by the other Party when the requesting Party does not provide the guarantee provided for in paragraph 1.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures to ensure that confidential information provided by a Party, including information the disclosure of which could harm the competitive position of the person providing it, is protected from unauthorized disclosure in accordance with its domestic law.

4. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and for greater certainty, the confidential information obtained in accordance with this Chapter may be made known to the judicial authorities and those responsible for the administration and application of customs and tax matters, when appropriate.

Article 5.8: Express Delivery Shipments

The Parties shall adopt or maintain separate and expedited customs procedures for express delivery shipments, maintaining appropriate control and selection systems. These procedures:

(a) provide for the electronic transmission and processing of information necessary for the clearance of an express delivery shipment, prior to the arrival of the express delivery shipment;

(b) allow the electronic presentation of a single manifest that covers all the merchandise contained in a shipment transported by an express delivery service;

(c) provide for the clearance of certain goods with a minimum of documentation, in accordance with the legislation of each Party;

(d) under normal circumstances, will provide for the clearance of express delivery shipments within six (6) hours of presentation of the necessary customs documents, provided the shipment has arrived;

Article 5.9: Review and Appeal

Each Party shall guarantee, with respect to its administrative acts on customs matters, that importers in its territory have access to:

(a) a level of administrative review independent of the employee or office issuing the administrative acts; and

(b) judicial review of administrative acts.

Article 5.10: Sanctions

The Parties shall adopt or maintain a system that allows the imposition of civil or administrative sanctions and, when appropriate, criminal sanctions for violation of their customs regulations, including those that govern tariff classification, customs valuation, rules of origin, and requests for tariff treatment. preferential under this Agreement.

Article 5.11: Advance Rulings

1. In order to guarantee the uniform application of customs regulations, provide predictability in customs actions, eliminate discretion and offer legal certainty to the customs user, the importing Party, through its customs authority or other competent governmental authority, to written request from an importer, exporter or producer 1 , before the importation of a good into its territory, it will issue an advance resolution in writing with respect to:

(a) tariff classification;

(b) the application of customs valuation criteria for a particular case, in accordance with the application of the provisions contained in the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) the application of returns, suspensions, exemptions from customs duties; or other

(d) if a good is originating in accordance with Chapter 4 (Regime of Origin); and

(e) all other matters that the Parties agree.

2. Each Party shall establish guidelines for the issuance of advance rulings, including:

(a) the obligation of the interested party to provide the information required, by the customs authority or other competent governmental authority, to process a request for advance ruling, including, if required, a sample of the merchandise, for which an advance ruling is being requested; advance resolution;

(b) the obligation of the customs authority or other competent government authority to issue an advance resolution within a maximum period of one hundred and twenty (120) days, once all the necessary information has been submitted by the applicant; and

(c) the obligation of the customs authority or other competent government authority to issue an advance resolution, considering the facts and circumstances that the applicant has presented.

3. When an importer requests that the treatment provided to an imported merchandise should be regulated by a previously issued advance resolution, the customs authority or other competent government authority may assess whether the facts or circumstances of the importation are consistent with the facts and circumstances on on which the advance resolution issued was based.

4. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings take effect from the date of their issuance, or another date specified in the ruling, provided that the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based have not changed.

5. The customs authority or other competent government authority issuing the advance ruling may modify or revoke it after the Party notifies the applicant. The Party issuing the advance resolution may modify or revoke it retroactively, with the purpose of collecting the customs duties, taxes and charges that are applicable, not received, if it was based on incorrect or false information, and must notify the applicant immediately.

6. Subject to the confidentiality requirements under its law, each Party shall make its advance rulings publicly available.

7. If an applicant provides false information or omits relevant facts or circumstances related to the advance ruling, or does not act in accordance with the terms and conditions of the ruling, the importing Party may apply the measures that are appropriate, including civil, criminal and administrative, monetary sanctions or other sanctions.

Article 5.12: Trade Facilitation Committee

1. The Parties establish the Trade Facilitation Committee, made up of two representatives of each of the Parties, which will meet when requested by the Commission or one of the Parties.

2. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) propose to the Commission the adoption of customs practices and guidelines that facilitate trade between the Parties, in accordance with the evolution of WCO and WTO guidelines;

(b) propose to the Commission solutions to differences that arise related to:

(i) the interpretation, application and administration of this Chapter;

(ii) matters of tariff classification and customs valuation; and

(iii) any other issues related to practices or procedures adopted by the Parties that prevent the prompt clearance of merchandise.

(c) ensure the correct application of customs regulations by the customs authorities;

(d) propose to the Commission alternative solutions to the obstacles or inconveniences related to this Chapter that arise between the Parties;

(e) propose to the Commission uniform guidelines, based on international standards, that lead to the improvement of customs procedures;

(f) examine proposals to modify customs regulations related to this Chapter, which may affect the flow of trade between the Parties;

(g) report to the Commission on the development of its activities;

(h) provide a report to the Commission, outlining its conclusions and recommendations, when, at its request and prior request by a Party, the modification of this Chapter is proposed; and

(i) any other matter that the Committee deems pertinent.

Article 5.13: Implementation

The obligations of Article 5.11.1(b) shall take effect three (3) years after the effective date of this Agreement.

Chapter 6

Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

Article 6.1: Objectives

1. This Chapter has the objectives of protecting human life and health, animal health and plant health, facilitating trade between the Parties and strengthening capacities for the implementation of the SPS Agreement.

2. The Parties undertake to prevent their sanitary and phytosanitary standards from constituting unjustified obstacles to trade.

Article 6.2: General Provisions

1. The Parties shall be governed by the provisions of the SPS Agreement and the Decisions adopted by the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures , regarding the adoption and application of all sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

2. The definitions of Annex A of the SPS Agreement shall apply to this Chapter, as well as those established in the glossaries of harmonized terms of the competent international organizations: the OIE, the IPPC and the Codex Alimentarius .

3. The animal health and food safety standards referred to in this Chapter are also understood to refer to hydrobiological resources, including products and by-products.

Article 6.3: Rights and Obligations

1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under the SPS Agreement. In addition to the foregoing, the Parties will be governed by the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The Parties agree to make joint efforts for the effective implementation of the SPS Agreement and the provisions of this Chapter, with the purpose of facilitating bilateral trade.

3. The Parties, through mutual cooperation, will endeavor to ensure food safety, prevent the entry and spread of pests and diseases, and improve plant and animal health.

Article 6.4: Harmonization

Pursuant to the provisions of Article 3 of the SPS Agreement and its Complementary Decisions, the Parties will agree on procedures regarding the harmonization of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, especially when there are differences in the adoption of standards established or recommended by the competent international organizations.

Article 6.5: Equivalence

1. Pursuant to the provisions of Article 4 of the SPS Agreement and its Complementary Decisions, the Parties may request the evaluation of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and sanitary and phytosanitary systems and structures, for the purpose of entering into equivalence agreements.

2. Equivalence may be recognized in relation to both an individual measure, group of measures and/or regimes applicable to a product or group of products.

3. The Parties will agree on a procedure for the process of recognition of equivalences and will begin the work to establish said procedure within a maximum period of six (6) months from the entry into force of the Agreement, which will be concluded within a period mutually agreed by the parts.

Article 6.6: Risk Assessment and Adequate Level of Protection

1. Pursuant to Article 5 of the SPS Agreement and its Complementary Decisions, when there is a need to carry out a risk assessment of a product or groups of products, the importing Party shall take international regulations into account or, when they do not exist and are of interest of the Parties, may agree on a procedure for this purpose.

2. Any update of a risk assessment in situations where there is a fluid, considerable and regular trade in goods between the Parties, shall not be a reason to interrupt trade in the products in question, except in the case of a situation of sanitary or phytosanitary emergency.

3. In the absence of the importing Party's risk analysis, the exporting Party may submit scientific evidence, including mitigation proposals, to support the importing Party's risk analysis process. Said information shall be considered within the framework of the procedures of the importing Party and in a manner consistent with Article 5 of the SPS Agreement. Once the documentation is received, the importing Party will initiate the corresponding risk analysis.

Article 6.7: Recognition of Free Zones and Zones of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence

1. Bilateral recognition of areas free and of low prevalence of pests or diseases will be based on the international regulations of the IPPC and the OIE.

2. In application of Article 6 of the SPS Agreement, the Parties will recognize in the most expeditious manner the free zones and zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases recognized by the competent international organizations.

3. When there is no recognition of a free zone or zone of low prevalence by the competent international organizations, the Parties agree to develop a bilateral procedure for the recognition of free zones and zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases, taking into account account existing international standards on the matter.

4. For those areas that are recognized as free or with a low prevalence of pests or diseases, in the event of outbreaks, upon recovering the recognized sanitary condition, the recognition procedure will be more expeditious, according to the guidelines of the organizations competent international

5. The Parties will agree on the procedures indicated in the previous numerals and will begin the work to establish said procedures within a maximum period of six (6) months from the entry into force of the Agreement, which will be concluded within a period mutually agreed by the Parties. .

Article 6.8: Control, Inspection, Approval and Certification Procedures

1. The control, inspection, approval and certification procedures in sanitary and phytosanitary matters will be harmonized with the international standards of the OIE, IPPC and the Codex Alimentarius .

2. Pursuant to the provisions of Article 8 and Annex C of the SPS Agreement and its Complementary Decisions, the Parties shall establish a procedure for claims related to the application of control, inspection, approval and certification procedures. The Parties will begin the work to establish said procedure within a maximum period of six (6) months from the entry into force of the Agreement, which will be concluded within a period mutually agreed by the Parties.

Article 6.9: Agreements between Competent Authorities

1. In order to facilitate the implementation of the SPS Agreement and this Chapter, the competent authorities in sanitary and phytosanitary matters of the Parties may sign cooperation and coordination agreements to promote the exchange of goods without presenting a sanitary risk to both. countries.

2. These agreements may deepen and/or establish the necessary mechanisms and instruments to achieve transparency, fluidity and deadlines in the procedures for determining equivalence, recognition of free areas or areas with low prevalence of pests or diseases, control, inspection, approval and certification, among others, and in all cases must be compatible with the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 6.10: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, with the objective of addressing issues related to the implementation of this Chapter.

2. The Committee will be made up of delegates from the competent authorities in sanitary and phytosanitary and trade matters, indicated in Annex 6.10

3. The Committee will meet at least once a year, in person, by teleconference, videoconference or email, or through another means that guarantees an adequate level of operation.

4. In its first session, the Committee will establish its rules of procedure and a work program, which will be updated according to the matters of interest proposed by the Parties.

5. The functions of the Committee will be:

(a) enhance bilateral understanding on specific implementation issues relating to the SPS Agreement;

(b) serve as a forum to monitor the commitments established in the work programs, evaluate progress regarding the treatment and resolution of sanitary and phytosanitary issues that may arise between the competent authorities of the Parties;

(c) Serve as a forum to encourage and facilitate technical consultations established in Article 6.11, when a Party so notifies the Committee;

(d) establish working groups or technical groups, when required, and determine their mandates, objectives, functions and the deadlines for presenting the results of their work;

(e) guarantee the preparation and implementation of the procedures established in the provisions of this Chapter;

(f) carry out consultations on issues, positions and agendas of the meetings of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO , of those that take place within the framework of the Codex Alimentarius , the IPPC, the OIE, as well as other international forums or regional of which both Parties are members;

(g) promote, coordinate, and monitor technical cooperation programs on sanitary and phytosanitary matters; and

(h) other functions that the Parties mutually agree.

6. The Committee shall have the power to adopt and implement decisions regarding the application of the provisions of this Chapter, which shall be incorporated by each Party in accordance with its legal system.1 where relevant. These decisions must be notified to the Commission.

Article 6.11: Technical Consultations

1. In the event that a Party considers that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure unduly affects its trade with the other Party and that consultations or the normal exchange of information between the competent authorities have not been able to resolve said situation, the complaining Party may notify the request for technical consultations to the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of this Agreement, through its coordinating competent authority, who will be in charge, together with the coordinating competent authority of the other Party, of facilitating the realization of the requested technical consultations.

2. Said technical consultations will be carried out within thirty (30) days of receiving the request, unless the Parties agree to another term, and may be carried out via teleconference, videoconference, or any other means, mutually agreed upon by the Parties.

3. When the Parties have resorted to technical consultations in accordance with this Article, without satisfactory results, such consultations shall replace those provided for in Article 16.4 (Consultations).

Article 6.12 Definitions For purposes of this Chapter:

Competent Authorities means the competent authorities of the Parties mentioned in Annex 6.10;

OIE stands for World Organization for Animal Health; and

IPPC stands for International Plant Protection Convention.

Annex 6.10

Competent Authorities

coordinators

(a) In the case of Chile:
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
General Directorate of International Economic Relations
Teatinos No. 180, Piso 12.
Santiago

(b) In the case of Colombia
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
Vice Ministry of Foreign Trade
Calle 28 No. 13 A – 15, Piso 7.
Bogotá, DC

In sanitary and phytosanitary matters

(a) In the case of Chile,
Agricultural and Livestock Service - SAG

(b) In the case of Colombia,
Colombian Agricultural Institute - ICA

Aquatic Animal Health

(a) In the case of Chile,
the National Fisheries Service – SERNAPESCA

(b) In the case of Colombia,
Colombian Agricultural Institute - ICA

Food Safety

(a) In the case of Chile,
Ministry of Health

(b) In the case of Colombia,
Ministry of Social Protection

Other

In the case of Colombia,
National Department of Planning
Directorate of Sustainable Rural Development
Calle 26 No. 13 – 19, 7th floor
. Bogotá, DC

Chapter 7

Technical Barriers to Trade

Article 7.1: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to increase and facilitate trade and gain effective market access by improving the implementation of the TBT Agreement, removing unnecessary technical barriers to trade, and increasing bilateral cooperation.

Article 7.2: Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures. 1 of the Parties, both nationally and locally, that may directly or indirectly affect the reciprocal trade of products between the Parties.

2. The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to sanitary and phytosanitary measures, which will be governed by Chapter 6 of this Agreement.

3. This Chapter shall not apply to purchase specifications established by government institutions, which shall be governed by Chapter 8 of this Agreement.

Article 7.3: Confirmation of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade

The Parties confirm the existing rights and obligations between them in accordance with the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.4: International Standards

In determining whether there is an international standard, guidance or recommendation within the meaning of Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement, each Party shall apply the principles set out in Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the Committee since January 1 of 1995 , G/TBT/1/Rev.8, of May 23, 2002, Section IX (Decision of the Committee on Principles for the Development of International Standards, Guidelines and Recommendations related to Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 of the Agreement), issued by the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade of the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.5: Trade Facilitation

The Parties will intensify their joint work in the field of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures with a view to facilitating access to their respective markets. In particular, the Parties will seek to identify, develop and promote bilateral initiatives that are appropriate for particular issues or sectors. Such initiatives may include cooperation on regulatory matters, such as convergence, or equivalence of regulations and technical standards, alignment with international standards, reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity, recognition and acceptance of results. of conformity assessment procedures,

Article 7.6: Technical Regulations

1. Technical regulations shall not be more trade restrictive than necessary to achieve a legitimate objective, taking into account the risks that would be created by not achieving them. Such legitimate objectives are among others: the imperatives of national security, the prevention of practices that may mislead; the protection of human health or safety, of animal or plant life or health, or of the environment. When evaluating these risks, the relevant elements to take into consideration are, among others: the available scientific and technical information, the related processing technology or the final uses to which the products are destined.

2. With regard to technical regulations, each Party shall grant national treatment to the products of the other Party and treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar products originating in a non-Party country.

3. The adopted technical regulations will not be maintained if the circumstances that gave rise to their adoption no longer exist, or if the determined objectives can be met in a less restrictive manner.

4. Each Party shall favorably consider accepting technical regulations of the other Party as equivalent, even when those regulations differ from its own, provided that those technical regulations produce results that are equivalent to those produced by its own technical regulations in achieving its objectives. legitimate and achieve the same level of protection.

5. A Party, at the request of the other Party, shall explain the reasons why it has not accepted a technical regulation of that Party as equivalent.

Article 7.7: Conformity Assessment

1. Acknowledging the existence of differences in the conformity assessment procedures in their respective territories, the Parties will make the conformity assessment procedures compatible to the greatest degree possible, in accordance with international standards in this area and with the provisions of this Chapter. conformity assessment.

2. The Parties recognize that there is a wide range of mechanisms that facilitate the acceptance of conformity assessment results, including:

(a) the importing Party's reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity;

(b) voluntary agreements between the conformity assessment bodies of the territory of each of the Parties;

(c) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures with respect to specific regulations, carried out by bodies located in the territory of the other Party;

(d) accreditation procedures to qualify conformity assessment bodies;

(e) the government designation of conformity assessment bodies; and

(f) the recognition by a Party of the results of conformity assessments carried out in the territory of the other Party.

3. The Parties will intensify their exchange of information on the range of mechanisms that facilitate the acceptance of conformity assessment results.

4. In the event that a Party does not accept the results of the conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, it shall, at the request of the other Party, explain the reasons for taking the necessary corrective actions.

5. Each Party shall accredit, approve, authorize or otherwise recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party, on terms no less favorable than those granted to conformity assessment bodies in its territory. If a Party accredits, approves, authorizes or otherwise recognizes a body that assesses conformity with a particular regulation or technical standard in its territory and refuses to accredit, approves, authorizes or otherwise recognizes a body that assesses conformity with that regulation or technical standard in the territory of the other Party must, upon request, explain the reasons for its rejection so that the necessary corrective actions are taken.

6. If a Party rejects a request by the other Party to enter into or conclude negotiations to reach an agreement that facilitates the recognition in its territory of the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out by bodies in the territory of the other Party, she shall, upon request, explain the reasons for her decision.

7. The Parties shall seek to ensure that the conformity assessment procedures applied between them facilitate trade, ensuring that they are not more restrictive than necessary to provide the importing Party with confidence that the products comply with the applicable technical regulations, taking into account Consideration of the risks that the nonconformity would create.

8. In order to enhance confidence in the sustained mutual reliability of conformity assessment results, the Parties may consult, as appropriate, to reach a mutually satisfactory understanding on issues such as the technical competence of the conformity assessment bodies involved.

Article 7.8: International System of Units

The Parties shall endeavor to use, for trade purposes, the International System of Units.

Article 7.9: Transparency

1. Each Party shall permit persons of the other Party to participate in the development of its standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures. Each Party will allow persons of the other Party to participate in the development of such measures on terms no less favorable than those granted to its own persons.

2. Each Party shall recommend that non-governmental standard-setting bodies located in its territory observe paragraph 1.

3. The Parties shall transmit electronically, through the contact point established for each Party under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, the draft technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that they intend to adopt, at the same time that the Party notifies to the other members of the WTO, in accordance with the TBT Agreement and this Agreement.

4. Each Party shall grant, at least a term of sixty (60) days from the transmission of the notification mentioned in paragraph 3, so that the interested parties can present and formulate observations and consultations on such measures so that the notifying Party can absolve them and take them into account. To the extent possible, the notifying Party will give favorable consideration to requests from the other Party to extend the period established for comments.

5. In the event that urgent problems related to legitimate objectives arise or threaten to arise to one of the Parties and it adopts a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure, it must notify the other Party electronically, through the aforementioned contact point. , at the same time as the other members of the WTO are notified.

6. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, publish and notify even those technical regulations that are consistent with the technical content of any relevant international standard.

7. Each Party shall publish, in print or electronically, or otherwise make available to the public, its responses to significant comments at the same time as the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure is published.

8. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, provide information about the objectives and reasons for a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that it has adopted or proposes to adopt.

9. Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one information center in its territory capable of responding to all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing relevant documentation in relation to all regarding this Chapter. The information center will be the same one that operates in the OTC Agreement.

10. Except for the preceding paragraph, each Party shall implement this Article as soon as possible and in no event later than three (3) years from the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 7.10: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade made up of representatives designated by each Party, in accordance with Annex 7.10.

2. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) promptly address matters that a Party proposes regarding the preparation, adoption, application, or enforcement of standards, technical regulations, or conformity assessment procedures, including authorization or approval procedures;

(c) increase cooperation for the development and improvement of standards, technical regulations, or conformity assessment procedures;

(d) as appropriate, facilitate sectoral cooperation between governmental and non-governmental entities on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures in the territories of the Parties, as well as facilitate the process of mutual recognition agreements and the equivalence of technical regulations;

(e) exchange information about the work carried out in non-governmental, regional, multilateral forums and cooperation programs involved in activities related to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(f) at the request of a Party, answer questions about any matter that arises under this Chapter;

(g) take any other action that the Parties consider will help them in the implementation of this Chapter, the TBT Agreement and in the facilitation of trade in products;

(h) review this Chapter in light of what has happened within the TBT Agreement Committee and prepare recommendations to modify this Chapter if necessary;

(i) report to the Commission on the implementation of this Chapter;

(j) establish, if necessary, for particular matters or sectors, working groups to deal with specific matters related to this Chapter and the TBT Agreement.

3. The Parties will make all efforts to reach a mutually satisfactory solution, regarding the consultations referred to in paragraph 1 (f), within a period of up to sixty (60) days.

4. Where the Parties have resorted to consultations pursuant to paragraph 1(f), such consultations shall constitute consultations pursuant to Article 16.4 (Consultations).

5. Upon request, a Party shall favorably consider any sector-specific proposal that the other Party makes to deepen cooperation under this Chapter.

6. The Committee will meet at least once a year, or more frequently at the request of one of the Parties, through videoconference, teleconference or other agreed means.

Article 7.11: Technical Cooperation

1. At the request of a Party, the other Party may provide cooperation and technical assistance under mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen its standardization systems, technical regulations and conformity assessment.

2. Each Party shall encourage standardization and conformity assessment bodies in its territory to cooperate with those of the other Party in its territory, as appropriate, in the development of their activities, such as through membership in international organizations for standardization and conformity assessment.

Article 7.12: Exchange of Information

1. Any information or explanation that is provided at the request of a Party, by virtue of the provisions of this Chapter, will be provided in print or electronically, within a period of sixty (60) days, which may be extended upon justification of the reporting party.

2. Regarding the exchange of information, in accordance with Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, the Parties shall apply the recommendations indicated in the document Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the Committee since January 1, 1995, G/TBT/1/Rev .8, May 23, 2002, Section IV (Information Exchange Procedure) issued by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, in its paragraphs 3 and 4.

Article 7.13: Definitions.

For purposes of this Chapter, the terms contained in Annex 1 of the OTC Agreement shall apply.

Annex 7.10

Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

For purposes of Article 7.10, the Committee will be coordinated by:

(a) in the case of Chile, the Ministry of Economy, through the Department of Foreign Trade, or its successor; and

(b) in the case of Colombia, the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism, or its successor.

Chapter 8

Commercial Defense

Section A – Safeguard Measures

Article 8.1: Imposition of a Safeguard Measure

1. A Party may apply a measure described in paragraph 2, only during the transition period, if as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, an originating good of the other Party is imported into its territory, in quantities that have increased by such amount in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production and under conditions such that they constitute a substantial cause of serious injury, or a threat thereof, to the domestic industry that produces a similar good or directly competitive.

2. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury, or threat thereof, and to facilitate adjustment, a Party may:

(a) suspend the future reduction of any rate of duty established in this Agreement for the good; either

(b) increase the rate of duty on the good to a level not to exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favoured-nation rate of duty applied at the time the measure is applied, and

(ii) the most favored nation rate of duty applied on the day immediately preceding the entry into force of this Agreement1 .

3. No party may simultaneously apply a safeguard measure under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and a bilateral Safeguard measure under this Chapter.

4. Neither Party may apply a global safeguard measure against a product originating from the other Party when the participation corresponding to the latter in the imports made by the importing Party of the product under consideration does not exceed three percent (3%), provided that the exporting Party and the other developing countries with a participation in imports of less than three percent (3%) do not together represent more than nine percent (9%) of the total imports of the product in question.

Article 8.2: Standards for a Safeguard Measure

1. No Party may maintain a safeguard measure:

(a) for a period exceeding two (2) years; except that this period is extended for one (1) additional year, if the competent authority determines, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 8.3, that the measure is still necessary to avoid or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment and that there is evidence that the domestic industry is adjusting; either

(b) after the expiration of the transition period.

2. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a safeguard measure is greater than one (1) year, the Party applying the measure shall progressively liberalize it, at regular intervals, during the period of application.

3. No Party may apply a safeguard measure more than once with respect to the same good.

4. Upon termination of the safeguard measure, the tariff rate will correspond to that which would be in effect in accordance with the Liberation Program, according to Article 22.3.3 (Validity), if the safeguard had never been applied.

Article 8.3: Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements

1. A Party may only apply a safeguard measure after an investigation by the Party's competent authority in accordance with Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the Agreement on Safeguards and, to this end, these Articles are incorporated into and form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis .

2. In the investigation described in paragraph 1, the Party shall comply with the requirements of Article 4.2(a) of the Agreement on Safeguards and, to this end, this Article is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis .

Article 8.4: Notification and Consultation

1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party in writing when:

(a) initiate a safeguard procedure in accordance with this Chapter;

(b) make a determination of serious injury, or threat thereof, caused by increased imports in accordance with Article 8.1; and

(c) takes a decision to apply, modify or extend a safeguard measure.

2. A Party shall provide the other Party with a copy of the public version of the report of its competent investigating authority, required in accordance with Article 8.3.1.

3. At the request of a Party, whose good is subject to a safeguard investigation in accordance with this Chapter, the Party conducting the procedure shall initiate consultations with the requesting Party to review the notifications under paragraph 1 or any public notification or report issued by the competent investigating authority in relation to said procedure.

Article 8.5: Compensation

1. A Party applying a safeguard measure, after consultation with the other Party against whose good the measure is applied, shall provide mutually agreed trade liberalization compensation in the form of concessions that have substantially equivalent effects in trade or equivalent in value. of the additional taxes expected as a result of the measure. The Party applying the safeguard measure will provide an opportunity for such consultations within thirty (30) days after the application of the safeguard measure.

2. If the consultations under paragraph 1 do not result in a trade liberalization compensation agreement within the term of thirty (30) days, the Party against whose good the measure is applied may suspend the application of trade concessions substantially equivalent to trade in the Party applying the safeguard measure.

3. A Party against whose good the measure is applied shall notify the Party applying the safeguard measure in writing at least thirty (30) days before suspending concessions pursuant to paragraph 2.

4. The obligation to compensate under paragraph 1 and the right to suspend concessions under paragraph 2 shall terminate when the duty rate returns to the duty rate established in the Party's Release Schedule under Article 22.3.3 (Term). .

Article 8.6: Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.

2. This Agreement does not confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with respect to actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.

Article 8.7: Definitions

For purposes of this Section:

Agreement on Safeguards means the Agreement on Safeguards , which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

competent investigating authority means:

(a) in the case of Chile, the National Commission in Charge of Investigating the Existence of Distortions in the Price of Imported Merchandise; and

(b) in the case of Colombia, Commercial Practices Subdirectorate of the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism.

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the group of producers of like or directly competitive goods operating in the territory of a Party, or those producers whose joint output of like or directly competitive goods constitutes a majority proportion of the total national production of said good;

safeguard measure means a measure described in Article 8.1.2;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment of the position of a domestic industry;

substantial cause means a cause that is important and not less than any other cause;

threat of serious harm means the clear imminence of serious harm on the basis of facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility;

transition period means the period in which a good reaches a zero tariff according to its reduction schedule.

Section B – Antidumping and Countervailing Duties

Article 8.8: Antidumping and Countervailing Duties

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement with respect to the application of antidumping and countervailing duties.

2. Nothing in this Agreement, including those in Chapter 16 (Dispute Settlement), shall be construed to impose any right or obligation on the Parties with respect to antidumping and countervailing duty measures.

Chapter 9 Investment

Section A – Investment

Article 9.1: Scope of Application1

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) investors of the other Party;

(b) the investments covered2 ; and

(c) with respect to Articles 9.6 and 9.13, to all investments in the territory of the Party.

2. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

3. The requirement of a Party that a service provider of the other Party post a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for providing a service in its territory, does not by itself make this Chapter applicable to the provision cross-border of that service. This Chapter applies to the measures that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to the financial guarantee or guarantee established, insofar as said financial guarantee or guarantee is a covered investment.

4. This Chapter does not apply to the measures that a Party adopts or maintains regarding investors of the other Party and the investments of said investors, in financial institutions in the territory of the Party.

5. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose an obligation on a Party to privatize any investment owned or controlled by it or to prohibit a Party from designating a monopoly, provided that, if a Party adopts or maintains a measure to privatize such investment or a measure to designate a monopoly, this Chapter shall apply to such measure.

Article 9.2: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant to the investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or otherwise. disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investments in its territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, and sale or other form of disposition of the investments.

Article 9.3: Most Favored Nation Treatment3

1. Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to investors of any non-Party country, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall grant covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to investments in its territory of investors from any non-Party country, with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct , operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments.

Article 9.4: Minimum Level of Treatment4

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes that the minimum level of treatment for aliens under customary international law is the minimum level of treatment to be accorded to covered investments. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that required by that level, and do not create additional substantive rights. The obligation in paragraph 1 to grant:

(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil, or administrative proceedings, in accordance with the principle of due process incorporated in the main legal systems of the world; and

(b) “full protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of police protection that is required by customary international law.

3. The determination that another provision of this Agreement, or of another international agreement, has been violated, does not establish that this Article has been violated.

Article 9.5: Treatment in case of Dispute

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 9.8.4(b), each Party shall grant investors of the other Party, and covered investments, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to the measures it adopts or maintains in relation to losses suffered. for investments in its territory due to armed conflicts or civil strife.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party who, in any of the situations referred to therein, suffers a loss in the territory of the other Party resulting from:

(a) the requisition of its covered investment or part of it by the forces or authorities of the latter Party; either

(b) the destruction of your covered investment or part of it by the forces or authorities of the latter Party, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,

this latter Party shall grant the investor restitution or compensation, or a combination of both, as appropriate, which in any of these cases shall be prompt, adequate, and effective and, with respect to compensation, shall be in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4 of Article 9.10.

3. Paragraph 1 does not apply to existing measures relating to subsidies or donations that might be inconsistent with Article 9.2, except for Article 9.8.4(b).

Article 9.6 Performance Requirements

Mandatory Performance Requirements

1. No Party may impose or enforce any of the following requirements, obligations or commitments in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation or sale or any other form of disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or from a non-Party country in its territory to5 :

(a) export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(c) acquire, use or give preference to goods produced in its territory, or acquire goods from persons in its territory;

(d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment;

(e) restrict the sales in its territory of the merchandise or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings that they generate in foreign currency;

(f) transfer to a person in their territory particular technology, a productive process or other knowledge of their property; either

(g) act as the exclusive supplier from the territory of the Party of the goods that the investment produces or the services it supplies to a specific regional market or to the world market.

Benefits subject to Performance Requirements

2. Neither Party may condition the receipt of an advantage or the continued receipt thereof, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, or sale or any other form of disposition of an investment in its territory by an investor from a Party country or from a non-Party country, upon compliance with any of the following requirements for:

(a) achieve a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(b) acquire, use or give preference to goods produced in its territory, or acquire goods from persons in its territory;

(c) relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; either

(d) restrict the sales in its territory of the merchandise or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings that they generate in foreign currency.

Exceptions and Exclusions

3.

(a) Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to condition the receipt of an advantage or the continuation of its receipt, in relation to an investment in its territory by an investor of a country Party or of a non-Party country, upon compliance with a requirement that it locate production, provide services, train or employ workers, build or expand particular facilities, or carry out research and development, in its territory.

(b) Paragraph 1(f) does not apply:

(i) when a Party authorizes the use of an intellectual property right in accordance with Article 31 6 of the TRIPS Agreement, or to measures that require the disclosure of proprietary information that is within the scope of application and is consistent with Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement; either

(ii) when the requirement is imposed or the obligation or commitment is enforced by a judicial or administrative court or a competition authority, to remedy a practice that has been determined after a judicial or administrative process as anticompetitive under the laws jurisdiction of the Party 7 .

(c) Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in paragraphs 1(b), (c) and (f), and paragraphs 2(a) and (b) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including those of an environmental nature:

(i) necessary to ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

(ii) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

(iii) related to the preservation of non-renewable natural resources alive or not.

(d) Paragraphs 1(a), (b) and (c), and paragraphs 2(a) and (b) shall not apply to the requirements for qualification of goods and services with respect to promotional programs to which exports and foreign aid.

(e) Paragraphs 1(b), (c), (f) and (g), and 2(a) and (b) do not apply to public procurement.

(f) Paragraphs 2(a) and (b) shall not apply to requirements imposed by an importing Party with respect to the contents of the goods, necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.

4. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to any requirements other than those listed in those paragraphs.

5. This article does not exclude the application of any commitment, obligation or requirement between private parties, when a Party did not impose or demand the commitment, obligation or requirement.

Article 9.7: Senior Executives and Boards 8

1. No Party may require that an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment appoint natural persons of any particular nationality to senior management positions.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of a board of directors or of any committee of such a board of directors of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment be of a particular nationality or resident in the territory of the Party , provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control of his or her investment.

Article 9.8: Non-conforming measures

1. Articles 9.2, 9.3, 9.6 and 9.7 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by:

(i) the government or national-level authorities of a Party, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I, or

(ii) a local level government of a Party;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that such modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 9.2, 9.3, 9.6 and 9.7.

2. Articles 9.2, 9.3, 9.6 and 9.7 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule in Annex II.

3. Neither Party may require, pursuant to any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and included in its Schedule in Annex II, an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an existing investment at the time the measure takes effect.

4. Articles 9.2, 9.3 and 9.7 do not apply to:

(a) public procurement; either

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including loans, guarantees and insurance, backed by the government.

Article 9.9: Transfers 9

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers related to a covered investment to be made freely and without delay to and from its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) capital contributions;

(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administrative expenses, technical assistance and other charges;

(c) the proceeds from the sale or liquidation, in whole or in part, of the covered investment;

(d) payments made pursuant to a contract to which the covered investment or investor is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

(e) payments made in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 9.5 and Article 9.10; and

(f) payments that come from the application of Section B.

2. Each Party shall permit transfers of in-kind earnings related to a covered investment to be made as authorized or specified in a written agreement. 10 .

3. Each Party shall permit transfers related to a covered investment to be made in a freely usable currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of the transfer.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 3, a Party may prevent a transfer through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) criminal offences;

(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist with law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities; and

(e) guarantee compliance with resolutions, rulings or awards issued in judicial, administrative or arbitration proceedings.

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may restrict transfers of in-kind earnings in circumstances where it could otherwise restrict such transfers as provided in this Agreement, including as provided in paragraph 4.

Article 9.10: Expropriation and Compensationeleven

1. No Party shall expropriate or nationalize a covered investment, whether directly or indirectly through measures tantamount to expropriation or nationalization (“expropriation”) unless it is:

(a) for reasons of public utility or social interest;

(b) in a non-discriminatory manner;

(c) by prompt, adequate and effective payment of compensation, in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4; and

(d) in accordance with the principle of due process and Article 9.4.

2. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c) shall:

(a) be paid promptly;

(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out (“date of expropriation”)

(c) not reflect any change in value because the intention to expropriate was known in advance of the expropriation date; and

(d) be fully liquidable and freely transferable.

3. If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c) shall not be less than the fair market value on the date of expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency, accumulated from the date of expropriation to the date of payment.

4. If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely usable, the compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c), converted to the currency of payment at the exchange rate prevailing in the market on the date of the payment, shall not be less than:

(a) the fair market value on the date of expropriation, converted into a freely usable currency, at the prevailing market rate of exchange on that date, plus

(b) interest, at a commercially reasonable rate for that freely usable currency, accrued from the date of expropriation to the date of payment.

5. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of such rights to the extent that the issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is compatible with the Agreement on TRIPS.

Article 9.11: Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 9.2 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities associated with a covered investment, such as the requirement that investors be residents of the Party or that the covered investments are constituted in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do not significantly undermine the protection granted by a Party to an investor of the other Party and to investments covered in accordance with this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 9.2 and 9.3, a Party may require an investor of the other Party or of a covered investment to provide information regarding that investment, exclusively for informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect confidential information from any disclosure that could negatively affect the competitive situation of the investor or of the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing a Party from obtaining or disclosing information regarding the fair and good faith application of its domestic law.

Article 9.12: Denial of Benefits

Subject to Article 16.4 (Consultation), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and investments of that investor, if an investor of a non-Party owns or controls the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party other part; either

(b) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and investments of that investor, if an investor of the denying Party owns or controls the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of The other part.

Article 9.13: Investment and Environment

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure, otherwise consistent with this Chapter, that it deems appropriate to ensure that investment activities in its territory are carried out taking into account environmental legislation in that Party.

Article 9.14: Implementation

1. The Parties shall consult annually, or as otherwise agreed, to review the implementation of this Chapter and consider investment matters of mutual interest, including consideration of the development of procedures that may contribute to greater transparency of the measures to which referred to in Article 9.8.1(c).

2. The Parties will promote cooperation in training and adequate representation in investor-State disputes, for which the Parties will promote specific training, representation services and technical cooperation to act in conciliation or arbitration procedures, through mechanisms investment consultants or a similar regional or multilateral center that provides such services.

Section B – Investor-State Dispute Settlement

Article 9.15: Consultations and Negotiation12

In the event of an investment dispute, the claimant and respondent must first try to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may include the use of non-binding procedures involving third parties.

Article 9.16: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot be resolved through consultation and negotiation:

(a) the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section alleging:

(i) that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A; and

(ii) that the claimant has suffered loss or damage by reason of, or as a result of, such breach; and

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the claimant, may, in accordance with this Section, submit a claim to arbitration alleging :

(i) that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A; and

(ii) that the business has suffered loss or damage by virtue of, or as a result of, such breach.

2. For greater certainty, the claimant may, pursuant to this Section, submit to arbitration a claim alleging that the respondent has breached an obligation pursuant to Section A, through the actions of a designated monopoly, state enterprise, or another person, who exercises any regulatory, administrative or other governmental power that the Party has delegated to him, in connection with the good or service, such as the power to expropriate, the power to grant import or export licenses, approve commercial transactions , impose quotas, rights and other charges.

3. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section alleging a violation of any provision of this Agreement other than an obligation of Section A.

4. At least one hundred eighty (180) days before a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section, the claimant shall give the respondent a written notice of its intention to submit the claim to arbitration (“notice of intent”). . The notification will specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and, in the event that the claim is brought on behalf of a company, the name, address and place of incorporation of the company;

(b) for each claim, the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been violated and any other applicable provisions;

(c) the issues of fact and law on which each claim is based; and

(d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

5. As long as six (6) months have elapsed since the events giving rise to the claim, the claimant may submit the claim referred to in paragraph 1:

(a) in accordance with the ICSID Convention and all its applicable instruments, provided that both the non-disputing Party and the respondent are parties thereto; either

(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the non-disputing Party or the respondent, but not both, are parties to the ICSID Convention; either

(c) in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; either

(d) if the disputing parties agree, an ad-hoc arbitration tribunal , under any other arbitration institution or in accordance with any other arbitration rules.

6. A claim shall be deemed to be submitted to arbitration under this Section when the claimant's notice or request for arbitration (“Request for Arbitration”):

(a) referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention is received by the Secretary General;

(b) referred to in Article 2 of Annex C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules is received by the Secretary-General;

(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together with the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, is received by the respondent; either

(d) referred to by any other arbitral institution or any other arbitral rules chosen under paragraph 5 (d), is received by the respondent.

7. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 5, and in effect on the date of the claim or claims that have been submitted to arbitration under this Section, shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by this Agreement. .

8. The claimant shall deliver in the request for arbitration referred to in paragraph 6:

(a) the name of the arbitrator appointed by the claimant; either

(b) the written consent of the claimant for the Secretary General to appoint such an arbitrator.

Article 9.17: Consent of each of the Parties to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to submit a claim to arbitration, in accordance with this Section and in accordance with this Agreement.

2. The consent referred to in paragraph 1 and the submission of the claim to arbitration in accordance with this Section shall comply with the requirements indicated in:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the parties to the dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention which requires a "written agreement"; and

(c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention which requires an “agreement”.

Article 9.18: Conditions and Limitations to the Consent of the Parties

1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration, pursuant to this Section, if more than thirty-nine (39) months have elapsed from the date the claimant knew or should have known of the alleged violation, as established under Article 9.16.1 and knowledge that the claimant (for claims brought under Article 9.16.1(a)), or the company (for claims brought under Article 9.16.1(b)) suffered loss or damage.

2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration, in accordance with the procedures provided in this Agreement; and

(b) the request for arbitration referred to in Article 9.16.6 is accompanied by:

(i) the claimant's written waiver of claims submitted to arbitration under Article 9.16.1(a),

(ii) the claimant's and company's written waivers of claims submitted to arbitration under Article 9.16.1(b),

of any right to initiate or continue before any judicial or administrative court in accordance with the law of any of the Parties, or other dispute resolution procedures, any action with respect to the facts or measures that are alleged to have given rise to the claimed violation.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims submitted under Article 9.16.1(a)) and the claimant or company (for claims submitted under Article 9.16.1(b)) ) may initiate or continue an action in which the application of the precautionary measures that are applicable is requested, and that does not imply the payment of monetary damages before a judicial or administrative court of the defendant, and provided that the action is filed with the sole purpose of preserve the rights and interests of the claimant or the company during the arbitration waiting period13 .

4. No claim may be submitted to arbitration if the claimant (in the case of claims submitted under Article 9.16.1(a)) or the claimant or the company (in the case of claims submitted under Article 9.16.1 (b)) have previously submitted the same alleged breach to an administrative or judicial tribunal of the Party complained against, or to any other binding dispute resolution procedure.

Article 9.19: Selection of Arbitrators

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the Tribunal will be made up of three arbitrators, one arbitrator designated by each of the disputing parties and the third, who will be the presiding arbitrator, will be appointed by agreement of the disputing parties.

2. The Secretary General shall appoint the arbitrators in the arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this Section.

3. When a Tribunal is not established within a period of seventy-five (75) days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, in accordance with this Section, the Secretary General, at the request of any of the parties contestants, will appoint, after consulting them, the arbitrator or arbitrators who have not yet been appointed.

4. For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator on grounds other than nationality:

(a) the respondent accepts the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

(b) the claimant referred to in Article 9.16.1(a) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or pursue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only at condition that the claimant consents in writing to the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal; and

(c) the claimant referred to in Article 9.16.1(b) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or pursue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only at condition that the plaintiff and the company express their consent in writing on the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal.

Article 9.20 Conduct of Arbitration

1. The disputing parties may agree on the legal venue where any arbitration is to be held pursuant to the arbitration rules applicable in accordance with Article 9.16.5(b), (c) or (d). In the absence of agreement between the disputing parties, the Tribunal will determine said place in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place is in the territory of a State that is party to the New York Convention.

2. The non-disputing Party may make oral or written submissions to the Tribunal regarding the interpretation of this Agreement.

3. The Tribunal shall be empowered to accept and consider amicus curiae submissions from a person or entity that is not a disputing party (“the submission holder”). Such submissions must be made in Spanish and identify the holder and any Party or other government, person or organization, other than the holder of the submission, that has provided or will provide any financial or other assistance in the preparation of the submission.

4. Without prejudice to the Tribunal's power to hear other objections as preliminary questions, such as an objection that the dispute is not within the Tribunal's jurisdiction, a Tribunal shall hear and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that , as a matter of law, the claim submitted is not a claim in respect of which an award favorable to the claimant can be rendered in accordance with Article 9.26 14 .

(a) Such objection shall be filed with the Tribunal as soon as possible after the Tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date the Tribunal sets for the respondent to file its answer to the complaint (or in the case of a modification of the request for arbitration referred to in Article 9.16.6, the date that the Tribunal sets for the respondent to submit its response to the modification).

(b) At the time such objection is received, the Court will suspend any proceeding on the merits of the dispute, establish a schedule for the consideration of the objection that will be compatible with any schedule that has been established for the consideration of any other matter preliminary, and will issue a decision or award on said objection, exposing the grounds thereof.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the Tribunal will assume as true the allegations of fact advanced by the claimant for the purpose of supporting any claim appearing in the request for arbitration (or any amendment thereto), and , in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The Tribunal may also consider any other relevant fact that is not the subject of dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection with respect to jurisdiction or any substantive argument, simply because it has or has not raised an objection under this paragraph, or makes use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5.

5. In the event that the respondent so requests, within forty-five (45) days after the constitution of the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall decide, in an expeditious manner, on an objection in accordance with paragraph 4 or any other objection that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The Tribunal will suspend any action on the merits of the litigation, and will issue, no later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the date of the request, a decision or award on said objection, stating the bases thereof. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the Tribunal may take an additional thirty (30) days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing has been requested, the Court may,

6. When the Tribunal decides a respondent's objection pursuant to paragraph 4 or 5, it shall, if it considers it appropriate and justified, award to the successful disputing party reasonable fees and costs incurred in filing the objection or oppose it. In making such a decision, the Court will consider whether the plaintiff's claim or respondent's objection was frivolous, and will give the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

7. The defendant shall not oppose as a defense, counterclaim or compensatory right or for any other reason that, in accordance with an insurance or guarantee contract, the plaintiff has received or will receive compensation or other compensation for all or part of the alleged damages. .

8. The Tribunal may order a provisional measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or in order to ensure the full exercise of the Tribunal's jurisdiction, including an order to preserve evidence in its possession or under the control of the Tribunal. control of a disputing party or to protect the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The Court may not order the seizure or prevent the application of a measure that is considered a violation mentioned in Article 9.16.

9.

(a) At the request of any of the disputing parties, the Tribunal, before issuing the award on liability, shall communicate its proposed decision or award to the disputing parties and to the non-disputing Party. Within sixty (60) days of the communication of said proposed decision or award, only the disputing parties may submit written comments to the Tribunal in relation to any aspect of their proposed decision or award. The Tribunal will consider said comments and issue its award no later than forty-five (45) days after the expiration of the sixty (60) day term to submit comments.

(b) Subparagraph (a) shall not apply to any arbitration in which an appeal is available under paragraph 10.

10. If a separate multilateral treaty establishing an appellate body for the purpose of reviewing awards rendered by tribunals constituted pursuant to international trade or investment treaties to hear investment disputes is brought into force between the Parties, the Parties they will try to reach an agreement that such appellate body would have for the review of the awards rendered in accordance with Article 9.26 in arbitrations that may have been initiated after the appellate body was established.

Article 9.21: Transparency of Arbitration Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent shall, upon receipt of the following documents, promptly deliver them to the non-disputing Party and make them publicly available:

(a) the notice of intent referred to in Article 9.16.4;

(b) the request for arbitration referred to in Article 9.16.6;

(c) the pleadings, statements of claim and explanatory notes submitted to the Tribunal by a disputing party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Article 9.20.2 and 3 and Article 9.25;

(d) the minutes or transcripts of the Tribunal hearings, when available; and

(e) the orders, rulings or decisions, and awards of the Tribunal.

2. The Tribunal will hold hearings open to the public and will determine, in consultation with the disputing parties, the pertinent logistical arrangements. However, any disputing party that intends to use in a hearing information classified as business confidential information or proprietary information or that is otherwise protected from disclosure under a Party's law must notify the Tribunal. The Court will make appropriate arrangements to protect the information from disclosure.

3. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent to make available business confidential or proprietary information or information that is otherwise protected from disclosure under the law of a Party or to provide or allow access to information that could retain in accordance with Article 21.2 (Essential Security) or with Article 20.5 (Disclosure of Information).

4. Confidential business information or information that is privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure in accordance with the law of a Party shall, if such information is submitted to the Tribunal, be protected from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) Subject to subparagraph (d), neither the disputing parties nor the Tribunal shall disclose to the non-disputing Party or the public any business confidential information or information that is proprietary or otherwise protected from disclosure under the laws of a Party when the disputing party providing the information clearly so designates it in accordance with subparagraph (b);

(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes business confidential information or inside information or is otherwise protected from disclosure under a Party's law shall clearly designate this at the time it is submitted to the Tribunal;

(c) a disputing party shall, at the time it submits a document containing information claimed to be business confidential information or inside information or information otherwise protected from disclosure under the law of a Party, submit a redacted version of the document that does not contain the information. Only the redacted version will be provided to the non-disputing Party and will be made public in accordance with paragraph 1; and

(d) the Tribunal shall decide on any objection in relation to the designation of alleged information as business confidential information or inside information or information that is otherwise protected from disclosure under the law of a Party. If the Tribunal determines that such information was not properly designated, the disputing party that submitted the information may:

(i) remove all or part of the presentation containing such information, or

(ii) agree to resubmit complete and redacted documents with corrected designations in accordance with the Court's determination and subparagraph (c).

In any event, the other disputing party shall, where necessary, resubmit complete and redacted documents, which omit the information withdrawn pursuant to subparagraph (d)(i) by the disputing party that first submitted the information, or redesignate the information consistent with the designation made pursuant to subparagraph (d)(ii) of the disputing party that first submitted the information.

5. Nothing in this Section authorizes or requires the respondent to deny public access to information that, according to its law, must be disclosed.

Article 9.22: Applicable Law

1. Subject to paragraph 2, where a claim is submitted under Article 9.16.1(a)(i), or under Article 9.16.1(b)(i) the Tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and with the applicable norms of international law.

2. A decision of the Commission declaring the interpretation of a provision of this Agreement, pursuant to Article 15.1.2 (Free Trade Commission), shall be binding on a Tribunal established pursuant to this Section, and any decision or award issued by a court must be compatible with that decision of the Commission.

Article 9.23: Interpretation of Annexes

1. When the defendant presents as a defense that the measure alleged to be in violation is within the scope of application of a non-conforming measure listed in Annex I or Annex II, at the request of the defendant, the Court will request the Commission to interpretation on the matter. Within sixty (60) days after delivery of the request, the Commission will submit to the Tribunal in writing any decision declaring its interpretation, pursuant to Article 15.1.2 (Free Trade Commission).

2. The decision rendered by the Commission under paragraph 1 shall be binding on the Tribunal and any decision or award rendered by the Tribunal shall be consistent with that decision. If the Commission does not issue said decision within the term of sixty (60) days, the Tribunal will decide on the matter.

Article 9.24: Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the Tribunal, at the request of a disputing party or on its own initiative, unless the disputing parties do not accept it, may appoint one or more experts to report in writing any matter of fact relating to environmental, health, safety or other scientific matters that a disputing party has raised in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.

Article 9.25: Accumulation of Procedures

1. In cases where two or more separate claims have been submitted to arbitration under Article 9.16.1, and the claims raise a common issue of fact or law and arise out of the same facts or circumstances, any disputing party may seek to obtain a consolidation order, in accordance with the agreement of all the disputing parties, in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought, or with the terms of paragraphs 2 to 10.

2. The disputing party that seeks to obtain a consolidation order in accordance with this Article, shall deliver a request, in writing, to the Secretary General and all the disputing parties in respect of which the consolidation order is sought and shall specify in it the following :

(a) the name and address of all disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

3. Unless the Secretary General, within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request under paragraph 2, determines that the request is manifestly unfounded, a Tribunal shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought agree otherwise, the Tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall consist of three arbitrators:

(a) an arbitrator appointed by agreement of the claimants;

(b) an arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the presiding arbitrator appointed by the Secretary General, who shall not be a national of either Party.

5. If, within sixty (60) days of the receipt by the Secretary General of the request made pursuant to paragraph 2, the respondent or claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator pursuant to paragraph 4, the Secretary General, at the request of any disputing party in respect of which the accumulation order is sought, will appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators that have not yet been appointed. In the event that the respondent fails to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary General shall appoint a national of the respondent, and in the event that the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary General shall appoint a national of the non-disputing Party.

6. In the event that the Tribunal established pursuant to this Article has found that two or more claims have been submitted to arbitration pursuant to Article 9.16.1, which raise a common issue of fact or law, and which arise out of the same facts or circumstances, the Tribunal may, in the interest of achieving a fair and efficient resolution of the claims and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction, and hear and determine jointly, over all or part of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction, and know and determine one or more claims, whose determination it considers would contribute to the resolution of the others; either

(c) instruct a Tribunal established pursuant to Article 9.19 to assume jurisdiction, hear and determine jointly, over all or part of the claims, provided that:

(i) that Tribunal, at the request of any claimant not previously a disputing party before that Tribunal, be reinstated with its original members, unless the arbitrator is appointed by the claimants pursuant to paragraphs 4(a) and 5; and

(ii) that Tribunal decides whether to repeat any previous hearing.

7. In the event that a Tribunal has been established under this Article, a claimant who has submitted a claim to arbitration under Article 9.16.1, and whose name is not mentioned in a request made under paragraph 2, may make a written request to the Court that such claimant be included in any order made under paragraph 6, specifying in the request:

(a) the name and address of the claimant;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order requested, and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based. The claimant shall deliver a copy of his request to the Secretary General.

8. The Tribunal established under this Article shall direct the proceedings in accordance with the provisions of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

9. A Tribunal established pursuant to Article 9.19 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, over which a Tribunal established or directed pursuant to this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

10. At the request of a disputing party, a Tribunal established under this Article may, pending its decision under paragraph 6, order that the proceedings of a Tribunal established under Article 9.19 be adjourned, unless the latter Tribunal has suspended its proceedings.

Article 9.26: Awards fifteen

1. When a Tribunal renders a final award unfavorable to the respondent, the Tribunal may grant, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and applicable interest;

(b) restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the defendant may pay pecuniary damages, plus any applicable interest in lieu of restitution.

The Court may award costs and attorneys' fees in accordance with this Section and the applicable arbitration rules.

2. Subject to paragraph 1, when a claim under Article 9.16.1(b) is submitted to arbitration:

(a) the award that provides for the restitution of the property, will provide that the restitution be granted to the company;

(b) the award that awards pecuniary damages and applicable interest, will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company; and

(c) the award will provide that it be rendered without prejudice to any right that any person may have to redress under applicable domestic law.

3. A Tribunal may not order a disputing party to pay damages that are punitive in nature.

4. The award rendered by a Court will be binding only for the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.

5. Subject to paragraph 6 and the review procedure applicable to an interim award, the disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.

6. The disputing party may not request the enforcement of the final award until:

(a) in the case of a final award rendered in accordance with the ICSID Convention:

(i) one hundred and twenty (120) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested its review or annulment; either

(ii) the review or annulment procedures have been completed; and

(b) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or the rules selected under Article 9.16.5(d):

(i) ninety (90) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has initiated a proceeding to review, revoke or annul it; either

(ii) a court has dismissed or admitted a request for review, revocation or annulment of the award and this decision cannot be appealed.

7. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.

8. When the respondent fails to comply with or comply with a final award, upon delivery of a request by the non-disputing Party, an arbitral tribunal shall be established in accordance with Article 16.7 (Establishment of an Arbitral Tribunal). The requesting Party may invoke said procedures to adopt:

(a) a determination that the breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement; and

(b) a decision in the sense that the defendant abides by or complies with the final award, in accordance with Article 16.11 (Preliminary Report).

9. A disputing party may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention, or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the proceedings contemplated in paragraph 8 have been initiated.

10. For the purposes of Article 1 of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or operation.

Article 9.27: Delivery of Documents

Service of notice and other documents on a Party shall be made at the place designated by it in Annex 9-E (Service of Documents on a Party Pursuant to Section B).

Section C – Definitions

Article 9.28: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Written agreement means a written agreement, signed and put into effect, between the Party and a covered investment or an investor of the other Party, in which an exchange of rights and obligations with pecuniary value is established. No unilateral act of a judicial or administrative authority, such as a decree, an order, a judicial sentence, a permit, a license, nor an authorization issued by a Party, in the exercise of its regulatory powers, shall be considered as a written agreement. ;

Center means the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) established by the ICSID Convention;

New York Convention means the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards , done at New York on June 10, 1958;

Inter-American Convention means the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration , held in Panama on January 30, 1975;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States , concluded at Washington on March 18, 1965;

respondent means the Party that is a party to a dispute relating to an investment;

claimant means an investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute with the other Party. For the purposes of submitting a claim to arbitration by a natural person in accordance with Section B of this Chapter, only a natural person of nationality of a Party may submit to arbitration in accordance with the Political Constitution of a Party and not a resident of said Party. A permanent resident shall be understood as a natural person who has a permanent residence in accordance with the legislation of a Party.

company means a "company" as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application), and a branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party, and a branch located in the territory of a Party, carrying on business in that territory;

investment means any asset owned or controlled by an investor, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including at least the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of profit or profit, and that is assumed risk. Forms an investment can take include:

(a) a company;

(b) shares, capital and other forms of participation in the patrimony of a company;

(c) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments and loans 16 of a company, but does not include a debt instrument or loans from or to a State company;

(d) futures, options and other derivatives;

(e) contractual rights, including turnkey, construction, management, production, concession, revenue sharing and other similar contracts;

(f) intellectual property rights;

(g) rights granted in accordance with domestic law, such as concessions, licences, authorizations and permits 17 ; and

(h) other property rights, tangible or intangible, movable or immovable, and related property rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges;

but investment does not mean:

(a) a performance in a judicial or administrative proceeding;

(b) a loan from one Party to the other Party; neither

(c) the debt of the State and its public institutions.

non-Party investor means, with respect to a Party, an investor who intends to carry out 18 , which is making or has made an investment in the territory of that Party, which is not an investor of either Party;

investor of a Party means a Party or a State enterprise thereof, or a national or enterprise of such Party, that has the purpose of carrying out 19 , is making or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party; considering, however, that a natural person who has dual nationality shall be considered exclusively a national of the State of his dominant and effective nationality;

freely usable currency means the “freely usable currency” as determined in accordance with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund ;

designated monopoly means an entity, including a consortium or a government agency, that in any relevant market in the territory of a Party is designated or has been designated as the exclusive supplier or purchaser of a good or service, but does not include an entity to which an intellectual property right has been granted solely by virtue of such grant;

Non-disputing Party means the Party that is not a party to an investment dispute;

disputing party means either the plaintiff or the defendant;

disputing parties means the plaintiff and the defendant;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Additional Facility Rules for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes ;

Secretary General means the Secretary General of ICSID; and

Tribunal means an arbitral tribunal established under Articles 9.16 or 9.25.

Annex 9A

Customary International Law

The Parties confirm their common understanding that the “customary international law” referred to in Article 9.4 results from a general and consistent practice of the States, followed by them in the sense of a legal obligation. With respect to Article 9.4, the minimum level of treatment accorded to aliens by customary international law refers to all principles of customary international law that protect the rights and economic interests of aliens.

Annex 9–B

Payments and Transfers

With respect to the obligations contained in Article 9.9, each Party reserves the attributions and faculties of its central banks, to maintain or adopt measures in accordance with its applicable legislation, in the case of Chile, Law No. 18,840, Constitutional Organic of the Central Bank of Chile, or other legal norms; and, in the case of Colombia, Law No. 31 of 1992, or other legal norms; to ensure the stability of the currency and the normal functioning of internal and external payments, granting them as powers for these purposes, the regulation of the amount of money and credit in circulation, the execution of credit operations and international exchanges, such as , likewise, to dictate norms in monetary, credit, financial and international exchange matters.

Part of these measures, among others, is the establishment of requirements that restrict or limit current payments and transfers (capital movements) from or to each Party, as well as the operations that are related to them, such as establishing that the deposits, investments or credits that come from or are destined abroad are subject to the obligation to maintain a reserve or deposit. In applying the measures under this Annex in accordance with their domestic law, the Parties may not discriminate between the other Party and a non-Party with respect to operations of the same nature.

Annex 9–C

Expropriation

The Parties confirm their common understanding that:

1. An act or series of acts by a Party may not constitute an expropriation unless it interferes with a tangible or intangible property right or with the essential attributes or faculties of ownership of an investment.

2. Article 9.10.1 addresses two situations. The first is direct expropriation, where an investment is nationalized or otherwise expropriated directly through the formal transfer of title or ownership.

3. The second situation addressed by Article 9.10.1 is indirect expropriation, where an act or series of acts by a Party has an effect equivalent to that of a direct expropriation without formal transfer of ownership.

(a) The determination of whether or not an act or series of acts by a Party, in a specific factual situation, constitutes an indirect expropriation, requires a factual investigation, on a case-by-case basis, which considers, among other factors:

(i) the economic impact of the governmental act, although the fact that an act or series of acts of a Party has an adverse effect on the economic value of an investment, by itself, does not establish that an indirect expropriation has occurred;

(ii) the degree to which the government's action interferes with unambiguous and reasonable expectations of the investment; and

(iii) the nature of the government action.

(b) Except in exceptional circumstances, non-discriminatory regulatory acts by a Party that are designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives do not constitute indirect expropriations 20 .

Annex 9–D

+Decree Law 600

Chili

1. Decree Law 600 (1974), Foreign Investment Statute, is a voluntary and special investment regime for Chile.

2. As an alternative to the ordinary regime for the entry of capital into Chile, to invest in Chile, potential investors can request the Foreign Investment Committee to be subject to the regime established by Decree Law 600.

3. The obligations and commitments contained in this Chapter do not apply to Decree Law 600, Foreign Investment Statute, to Law 18,657 on Foreign Capital Investment Funds, to the continuation or prompt renewal of such laws and to their modifications. or to any special and/or voluntary investment regime that may be adopted in the future by Chile.

4. For greater certainty, the Chilean Foreign Investment Committee has the right to reject investment applications through Decree Law 600 and Law 18,657. Additionally, the Chilean Foreign Investment Committee has the right to regulate the terms and conditions to which the foreign investment carried out in accordance with Decree Law 600 and Law 18,657 will be subject.

Annex 9–E

Delivery of documents to a Party pursuant to Section B

Chili

The place of delivery of notifications and other documents referring to differences in accordance with Section B, in Chile is:

Legal Affairs Directorate
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Chile
Teatinos 180 Piso 16 Santiago, Chile

Colombia

The place of delivery of notifications and other documents referring to differences in accordance with Section B, in Colombia is:

Directorate of Foreign Investment and Services
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
Calle 28 # 13 A – 15
Bogotá DC – Colombia

Annex 9–F

Possibility of an Appellate Body or Similar Mechanism

Within three (3) years from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall consider establishing an appellate body or similar mechanism to review awards made pursuant to Article 9.26, in arbitrations commenced after the establishment of an appeals body or similar mechanism.

Annex 9.3

Most Favored Nation Treatment

The Parties agree that the scope of application of Article 9.3 only includes matters related to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale or other provision related to investment and, therefore, shall not be applicable to procedural matters. , including dispute resolution mechanisms such as those contained in Section B of this Chapter.

Chapter 10

Cross-Border Trade in Services

Article 10.1: Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect cross-border trade in services supplied by service providers of the other Party. Such measures include those that affect:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and supply of a service;

(b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

(c) access to and use of distribution and transportation systems, or telecommunications networks and services related to the provision of a service;

(d) the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; and

(e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, measures adopted or maintained by a Party means the measures adopted or maintained by a Party means the measures adopted or maintained by::

(a) governments and authorities at the national or local level; and

(b) non-governmental institutions exercising powers delegated to them by governments or authorities at the national or local level.

3. Articles 10.5, 10.7 and 10.8 shall apply to measures of a Party that affect the supply of a service in its territory by an investor of the other Party, as defined in Article 9.28 (Definitions), or by a covered investment.1

4. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) financial services, as defined in Article 10.12;

(b) air services, including scheduled and non-scheduled domestic and international air transport services, as well as related support services for air services, except:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;

(ii) specialized air services; and

(iii) the services of computerized reservation systems2 ;

(c) public procurement; either

(d) subsidies or donations granted by a Party3 , including government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance4 .

5. This Chapter does not impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor does it confer any right on that national, with respect to such access or employment.

6. This Chapter does not apply to services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority in the territory of a Party. A service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service that is not supplied on commercial terms or in competition with one or more service providers.

Article 10.2: National Treatment

Each Party shall grant service providers5 of the other Party a treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its service providers.

Article 10.3: Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall grant service providers6 of the other Party a treatment no less favorable than that granted, in similar circumstances, to service providers of a non-Party country.

Article 10.4: Local Presence

Neither Party may require the service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of business, or to reside in its territory as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.

Article 10.5: Market Access

No Party may adopt or maintain measures that:

(a) impose limitations on:

(i) the number of service providers 7 , whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service providers or the requirement of an economic needs test,

(ii) the total value of assets or service transactions in the form of numerical quotas or by requiring an economic needs test,

(iii) the total number of service operations or the total quantity of service production, expressed in terms of designated numerical units, in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test, 8th or

(iv) the total number of natural persons that can be employed in a certain service sector or that a service provider can employ and that are necessary for the supply of a specific service and are directly related to it, in the form of contingents numerical or the requirement of an economic needs test; either

(b) restrict or prescribe the specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service provider may supply a service.

Article 10.6: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 and 10.5 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by:

(i) the government or national-level authorities of a Party, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I; either

(ii) a local level government of a Party;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that such modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 and 10.5.

2. Articles 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 and 10.5 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, with respect to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

Article 10.7: Transparency in the Development and Application of Regulations 9

In addition to Chapter 14 (Transparency):

(a) each Party shall establish or maintain adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations relating to the subject matter of this Chapter;

(b) at the time of adopting final regulations regarding the subject matter of this Chapter, each Party shall respond in writing, to the extent possible, including upon request, to substantive comments received from interested persons regarding the proposed regulations; and

(c) to the extent possible, each Party will allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of final regulations and the date they come into force.

Article 10.8: National Regulation

1. When a Party requires authorization for the supply of a service, the competent authorities of that Party shall, within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application considered complete in accordance with national laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision regarding your application. At the request of the applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information regarding the status of the application. This obligation shall not apply to authorization requirements that fall within the scope of Article 10.6.2.

2. In order to ensure that measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary obstacles to trade in services, each Party shall endeavor to ensure, as appropriate for each sector specifically, that any such measure it adopts or maintains:

(a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability to supply the service;

(b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, do not in themselves constitute a restriction on the supply of the service.

3. If the results of the negotiations related to GATS Article VI:4 (or the results of any similar negotiations conducted in another multilateral forum in which the Parties participate) enter into force, this Article shall be modified, as appropriate. , after consultations between the Parties, so that those results are incorporated into this Agreement. The Parties shall coordinate their positions in such negotiations.

Article 10.9: Mutual recognition

1. For the purposes of compliance, in whole or in part, with its standards or criteria for the authorization or certification of service providers or the granting of licenses to them, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4 of this Article , a Party may recognize the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the other Party. This recognition, which may be carried out through harmonization or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or convention between the Parties or may be granted autonomously.

2. When a Party recognizes, autonomously or through an agreement or agreement, the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the territory of a non-Party country, nothing in Article 10.3 shall be interpreted in the sense of requiring that the Party grant such recognition to the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. A Party that is a party to an existing or future agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall provide appropriate opportunities to the other Party, if that other Party is interested, in negotiating its accession to such agreement or agreement or to negotiate agreements or agreements comparable to this one. When a Party grants recognition autonomously, it shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunities to demonstrate that education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained or requirements fulfilled in the territory of that other Party should be recognized.

4. No Party shall grant recognition in a way that constitutes a means of discrimination between the Parties in the application of its standards or criteria for the authorization or certification of service providers or the granting of licenses to them, or a disguised restriction on trade of services.

5. Annex 10.9 applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party in connection with the granting of licenses or certificates to professional service providers of the other Party, as provided for in the provisions of that Annex.

Article 10.10: Implementation

The Parties shall consult annually, or as otherwise agreed, to review the implementation of this Chapter and consider other matters of mutual interest that affect cross-border trade in services. Among other matters, the Parties shall consult with a view to determining the feasibility of removing any remaining requirement of nationality or permanent residence for the granting of licenses or certificates to each Party's service providers.

Article 10.11: Denial of Benefits

Subject to Article 16.4 (Consultation), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) service providers of the other Party where the service is being supplied by a company owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party and the company has no substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) service providers of the other Party when the service is supplied by a company owned or controlled by persons of the refusing Party and the company does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party.

Article 10.12: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services means the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party, by a person of that Party, to a consumer of the other Party; either

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by an investor of the other Party, as defined in Article 9.28 (Definitions), or by a covered investment;

company means a "company" as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application), and a branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party and branches located in the territory of a Party, and carrying on business activities in that territory;

service provider of a Party means a person of the Party who intends to supply or supplies a service;

specialized air services means any air service other than transport, such as firefighting, spraying, scenic flights, aerial surveying, aerial mapping, aerial photography, skydiving service, glider towing, logging and construction services , and others linked to agriculture, industry and inspection;

financial service means any service of a financial nature. Financial services include all insurance and insurance-related services, and all banking and other financial services (with the exception of insurance), as well as all accessory or auxiliary services to a service of a financial nature. Financial services include the following activities:

Insurance and insurance-related services

(a) direct insurance (including coinsurance):

(i) life insurance,

(ii) insurance other than life;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) insurance intermediation activities, for example those of insurance brokers and agents;

(d) services auxiliary to insurance, for example those of consultants, actuaries, risk assessment and compensation of claims.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

(e) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

(f) loans of all types, including personal loans, mortgage loans, factoring and financing of commercial transactions;

(g) financial leasing services;

(h) all payment services and money transfers, including credit, payment and similar cards, traveler's checks and bank drafts;

(i) guarantees and commitments;

(j) trading for own account or for the account of clients, whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, of the following:

(i) money market instruments (including checks, bills and certificates of deposit);

(ii) currencies;

(iii) derivative products, including futures and options;

(iv) currency and money market instruments, for example, swaps and forward interest rate agreements;

(v) transferable securities;

(vi) other negotiable financial instruments and assets, metal included;

(k) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including subscription and placement as agents (publicly or privately), and the provision of services related to those issues;

(l) exchange brokerage;

(m) asset management, for example, cash or portfolio management, collective investment management in all its forms, pension fund management, depository and custody services, and trust services;

(n) payment and clearing services in respect of financial assets, including securities, derivative products and other negotiable instruments;

(o) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, by providers of other financial services; and

(p) advisory and intermediation services and other auxiliary financial services with respect to any of the activities indicated in subparagraphs (e) to (o), including credit reports and analysis, studies and advice on investments and securities portfolios, and advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy; and

professional services means services that require higher education related to a specific area of ​​knowledge, equivalent training or experience to be rendered10 and whose exercise is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft.

Annex 10.1.4(d)

The Parties understand that if a Party establishes or maintains a fund to promote the development of a particular service within its territory, disbursements from that fund shall be subject to the same treatment as a measure covered by Article 10.1.4(d), even if a privately owned entity is wholly or partially responsible for managing the fund11 .

ANNEX 10.9

PROFESSIONAL SERVICES

Development of Standards for the provision of Professional Services

1. Each Party shall encourage the relevant bodies in its respective territory to develop mutually acceptable standards and criteria for the granting of licenses and certificates to professional service providers, as well as to submit to the Commission recommendations on their mutual recognition.

2. The standards and criteria referred to in paragraph 1 may be developed in relation to the following aspects:

(a) education – accreditation of educational institutions or academic programs;

(b) examinations – licensing examinations, including alternative methods of assessment, such as oral examinations and interviews;

(c) experience – length and nature of experience required to obtain a license;

(d) conduct and ethics – standards of professional conduct and the nature of disciplinary measures should professional service providers contravene them;

(e) professional development and recertification – continuing education and the corresponding requirements to maintain the professional certificate;

(f) scope of action, scope or limits of authorized activities;

(g) local knowledge – requirements on knowledge of aspects such as local laws, regulations, language, geography or climate; and

(h) consumer protection – alternative requirements to residency, such as bond, professional liability insurance and client reimbursement funds to ensure consumer protection.

3. Upon receipt of a recommendation referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall review it within a reasonable time to decide whether it is consistent with the provisions of this Agreement. Based on the review carried out by the Commission, each Party will encourage their respective competent authorities to put this recommendation into practice, in the corresponding cases, within a mutually agreed term.

Temporary Licenses

4. For each of the professional services, when the Parties so agree and in accordance with their internal legislation, each of them will encourage the competent bodies of their respective territories to develop procedures for the granting of temporary licenses to providers of professional services of the other Party.

Working Group on Professional Services

5. The Parties shall form a Professional Services Working Group (Working Group), including representatives of each Party, to facilitate the activities listed in paragraphs 1 and 4.

6. To achieve this objective, the Working Group shall consider, as appropriate, relevant bilateral, plurilateral, and multilateral agreements related to professional services.

7. The Task Force shall consider, for professional services in general and, as appropriate, for each of the professional services, the following issues:

(a) procedures to encourage the development of mutual recognition agreements or arrangements between their relevant professional bodies;

(b) the feasibility of developing model procedures for the licensing and certification of professional service providers; and

(c) other matters of mutual interest related to the provision of professional services.

8. To facilitate the efforts of the Working Group, each Party shall consult with the relevant agencies in its territory to seek the identification of professional services to which the Working Group should give priority.

9. The Working Group shall report to the Commission on its progress, including any recommendations for initiatives to promote mutual recognition of standards and criteria and temporary licensing, and on its future direction regarding its work, within two (2) years following the entry into force of this Agreement.

10. The Working Group shall be established no later than one year after the entry into force of the Agreement.

Granting of temporary licenses for engineers

11. At its first meeting, the Working Group shall consider establishing a work program jointly with the relevant professional bodies in the territories of the Parties to develop the procedures related to the granting of temporary licenses by the competent authorities of a Party to the engineers of the other Party.

12. To this end, each Party shall consult with relevant professional bodies in its territory to obtain their recommendations on:

(a) the development of procedures to grant temporary licenses to engineers of the other Party to practice their engineering specialties in the territory of the consulting Party;

(b) the development of model procedures for their competent authorities to adopt throughout their territory in order to facilitate the granting of temporary licenses to engineers of the other Party;

(c) the engineering specialties to which priority should be given in terms of the development of procedures for granting temporary licences; and

(d) other matters of mutual interest to the Parties regarding the granting of temporary licenses to engineers that the consulting Party has identified in said consultations.

13. Each Party shall request the relevant professional bodies in its territory to submit recommendations to the Commission on the matters referred to in paragraph 12 within eighteen (18) months after the date of establishment of the Working Group. .

14. Each Party shall encourage the relevant professional bodies in its territory to hold meetings as soon as possible with the relevant professional bodies located in the territory of the other Party, in order to cooperate in developing joint recommendations on the matters mentioned in paragraph 12 within eighteen (18) months of the establishment of the Working Group. Each Party shall request from relevant professional bodies in its territory an annual report on the progress made in developing those recommendations.

15. The Parties will promptly review any recommendation under paragraph 13 or 14 to ensure its compatibility with this Agreement. Based on the Commission's review, each Party shall encourage its respective competent authorities, as appropriate, to implement the recommendation within a mutually agreed time frame.

Revision

16. The Commission will review the implementation of this annex at least once every three (3) years.

Chapter 11

Temporary Entry for Business Persons

Article 11.1: General Principles

1. This Chapter reflects the preferential commercial relationship that exists between the Parties, the mutual objective of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the provisions of Annex 11.3, according to the principle of reciprocity and the need to establish criteria and procedures transparent, secure, effective and understandable for temporary entry. Likewise, it reflects the need to guarantee the security of the borders and to protect the national labor force and permanent employment in their respective territories.

2. This Chapter does not apply to the measures contemplated in the legislation of each of the Parties related to the acquisition of nationality, citizenship, access to permanent residence or permanent employment.

Article 11.2: General Obligations

1. Each Party shall apply its measures relating to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with Article 11.1 and, in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or impairment in trade in goods or services, or in carrying out marketing activities. investment in accordance with this Agreement.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in the sense of preventing the Parties from applying migratory measures, necessary to protect the integrity of their borders and guarantee the orderly movement of people through them, provided that those measures are not applied in a manner that unduly delays or impairs trade in goods or services or the conduct of investment activities in accordance with this Agreement.

Article 11.3: Temporary Entry Authorization

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry to business persons who are also qualified to enter in accordance with the applicable measures related to public health and public safety, as well as those related to national security, in accordance with this Chapter, including the provisions contained in Annex 11.3.1.

2. Each Party shall limit the value of fees for processing applications for temporary entry by business persons, in a manner consistent with Article 11.2, based on the principle of reciprocity.

3. For greater certainty, the authorization of temporary entry under this Chapter does not replace the requirements for the exercise of a profession or activity in accordance with the specific regulations in force in the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry.

Article 11.4: Delivery of Information

1. In addition to Article 14.2 (Advertising), each Party shall:

(a) provide the other Party with the information material that allows it to know the measures related to this Chapter; and

(b) no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its own territory and in that of the other Party, a consolidated document with material that explain the requirements for temporary entry, including references to laws and regulations, in accordance with the rules of this Chapter, so that business persons of the other Party can be aware of them.

2. Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to the other Party, upon request, in accordance with their respective domestic legislation, the information related to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this Chapter, to business persons of the another Party to whom migration documentation has been issued, in order to include specific information referring to each occupation, profession or activity.

Article 11.5: Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons

1. The Parties establish a Committee for the Temporary Entry of Business Persons, made up of representatives of each Party, which will include migration officials and other competent authorities.

2. The Committee shall:

(a) establish a calendar for its meetings that will be held at least once a year;

(b) establish the procedures for the exchange of information on the measures that affect the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with this Chapter;

(c) consider the development of measures to facilitate the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the provisions of Annex 11.3 on the basis of the principle of reciprocity;

(d) consider the implementation and administration of this Chapter; and

(e) consider the development of common criteria, definitions and recommendations for the implementation of this Chapter, which may be included in the consolidated document referred to in Article 11.4.1(b).

Article 11.6: Settlement of Disputes

1. A Party may not initiate proceedings pursuant to Article 16.6.3(b) (Commission Intervention) in respect of a refusal to grant temporary entry pursuant to this Chapter, nor in respect of a particular case arising pursuant to to Article 11.2, unless:

(a) the matter concerns a recurring practice; and

(b) the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him with respect to that particular matter.

2. The remedies referred to in paragraph 1(b) shall be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution within six (6) months from the start of an administrative proceeding, and the resolution has been delayed. for causes that are not attributable to the affected business person.

Article 11.7: Relationship with other Chapters

1. Except as provided in this Chapter and in Chapter 1 (Initial Provisions), Chapter 2 (General Definitions), Chapter 15 (Administration), Chapter 16 (Dispute Resolution) and Chapter 22 (Final Provisions), and in Article 14.1 (Points of Contact), in Article 14.2 (Publicity), in Article 14.3 (Notification and Provision of Information) and in Article 14.4 (Administrative Procedures), nothing in this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties regarding their immigration measures.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or commitments with respect to other Chapters of this Agreement.

Article 11.8: Transparency in the Development and Application of Regulations

1. In addition to Chapter 14 (Transparency), each Party will maintain or establish adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from interested persons regarding the regulations regarding the temporary entry of business persons.

2. Each Party shall, within a reasonable period not exceeding thirty-five (35) days, after considering that the application for temporary entry is complete in accordance with domestic laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision taken regarding your request. At the request of the applicant, the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information regarding the status of the application. For greater certainty, during the term of resolution of the permit, the business person may continue to develop their activities in accordance with the national legislation of each of the Parties.

Article 11.9: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

temporary entry means the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;

labor certification means any procedure prior to the application for migratory authorization that implies a government permit or authorization related to the labor market;

migratory measure means any law, regulation or procedure that affects the entry and stay of foreigners;

national has the same meaning as the term “national”, but only with respect to natural persons who have the nationality of a Party in accordance with its Political Constitution, and does not include permanent residents of a Party;

business person means a national of a Party who participates in the trade of goods or provision of services, or in investment activities in the other Party;

recurring practice means a practice carried out by the migration authorities of a Party on a repetitive basis during a representative period prior to and immediately after its execution;

professional means a national of a Party who carries out a specialized occupation that requires:

(a) the theoretical and practical application of a body of specialized knowledge; and

(b) Obtaining a post-secondary degree, which requires four (4) or more years of studies (or the equivalent of said degree) as a minimum for the exercise of the occupation.

technician means a national of a Party who carries out a specialized occupation that requires:

(a) the theoretical and practical application of a body of specialized knowledge; and

(b) Obtaining a post-secondary or technical degree that requires two (2) or more years of study (or the equivalent of said degree), as a minimum for the exercise of the occupation.

Annex 11.3

Temporary Entry for Business Persons

Section A – Business Visitors

1. Each Party shall grant temporary entry to a business person who intends to carry out any of the business activities listed in Appendix 11.3.A.1, without requiring the person to obtain employment authorization, provided that such person In addition to complying with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry, display:

(a) evidence establishing the nationality of a Party;

(b) documentation that proves that the business person will undertake such activities and indicates the purpose of their entry; and

(c) evidence of the international character of the proposed business activity and that the business person does not intend to enter the local labor market.

2. Each Party shall provide that a business person meets the requirements set forth in paragraph 1(c), when it demonstrates that:

(a) the principal source of remuneration for that business activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; and

(b) the principal place of business and where most of the profits are actually earned is outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry.

Normally, a Party will accept an oral statement as to the principal place of business and the place where profits are actually earned. In the event that the Party requires any additional verification, it will normally consider a letter from the employer or the organization to which it provides its services or represents to be sufficient proof, stating such circumstances.

3. Neither Party may:

(a) require, as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1, prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests, or other procedures of similar effect; neither

(b) impose or maintain any numerical restriction on temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1.

Section B – Traders and Investors

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to a business person who intends to:

(a) carry on a significant trade in goods or services, principally between the territory of the Party of which he is a national and the territory of the other Party to which entry is sought; either

(b) establish, develop, or manage an investment in which the person or his company has committed, or is in the process of committing, a significant amount of capital, which exercises supervisory or executive functions or which involves essential skills, provided that the Business person also complies with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.

2. Neither Party may:

(a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither

(b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry under paragraph 1.

Section C – Intra-Company Personnel Transfers

1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to the business person employed by a company, who intends to perform managerial or executive functions or which involves specialized knowledge in that company, in one of the subsidiaries, affiliates or parent company, provided that comply with the immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. The party may require that the business person has been employed by the company continuously for one year within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of submission of the application for admission.

2. Neither Party may:

(a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither

(b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry under paragraph 1.

Section D – Professionals and Technicians

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to the business person who intends to carry out activities as a professional or technician, under a subordinate relationship or independently, or perform training functions related to a profession or technical occupation. in particular, including conducting seminars, when the business person, in addition to complying with current immigration requirements applicable to temporary entry, exhibits:

(a) proof of nationality of a Party;

(b) documentation that proves that the person will undertake such activities and indicates the purpose of their entry; and

(c) documentation proving that said person has the relevant minimum academic requirements or alternative degrees.

2. Neither Party may:

(a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither

(b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry under paragraph 1.

3. For greater certainty, a Party may require the business person who seeks temporary entry pursuant to this Section, to comply with the requirements demanded by domestic legislation for the exercise of that profession.

Annex 11.3.1

In the case of Chile:

1. Business persons entering Chile under any of the categories established in Annex 11.3 will be considered to carry out activities that are useful or advantageous to the country.

2. Business persons who enter Chile under any of the categories established in Annex 11.3 and who are holders of a temporary residence visa may renew that same visa for consecutive periods to the extent that the conditions that motivated their entry are maintained. grant. However, they will not be able to apply for Permanent Residency, unless they comply with the general provisions on Immigration (Decree Law 1094 and Supreme Decree 597 of the Ministry of the Interior, Official Gazette, November 24, 1984).

3. Business people who enter Chile may also obtain an identity card for foreigners.

In the case of Colombia:

1. Business persons who enter Colombia under any of the categories established in Annex 11.3 will be considered to contribute to the development of economic, scientific, cultural or educational activities of utility or benefit to the country, or to be incorporated into activities or economic development programs.

2. Business persons who enter Colombia under any of the categories established in Annex 11.3 and who are holders of a special temporary visa in the categories "For the exercise of trades or activities of an independent nature" and "For the exercise of occupations or unforeseen activities", may request a new visa in that same class and category before the expiration of its validity for consecutive periods to the extent that the conditions that motivated its granting are maintained. However, they will not be able to request the permanent resident visa, unless they comply with the general migration provisions (Decree 4000 of 2004 and Resolution 0255 of 2005).

3. Business people who enter Colombia may also obtain a foreigner identification card for foreigners.

4. In application of the principle of reciprocity contained in this Chapter, Colombia will allow Chilean nationals to change their migratory status from tourist and temporary visitor to the classes and categories contemplated in paragraph 2, without the need to leave Colombian national territory.

Appendix 11.3.A.1

Business Activities

Meetings and consultancies

Business people who attend meetings, seminars, conferences, workshops or who carry out advisory or consulting activities for clients.

research and design

Technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out independent research or research for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

Cultivation, manufacturing and production

Procurement and production personnel, at the managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

Commercialization

Market researchers and analysts who carry out research or analysis independently or for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

Trade show and promotional staff who attend trade conventions.

Sales

Sales representatives and agents who take orders or negotiate contracts for goods or services for a company established in the territory of the other Party, but who do not deliver the goods or provide the services.

Buyers who make purchases for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

Distribution

Customs agents that provide advisory services to facilitate the import or export of merchandise.

After sales services

Installation, repair and maintenance personnel and supervisors, who have the specialized technical knowledge essential to fulfill the contractual obligation of the seller; and who supply services or train workers to supply such services pursuant to a warranty or other service contract in connection with the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company established outside the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, during the term of the warranty or service contract.

General services

Management and supervisory personnel involved in commercial operations for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

Financial services personnel (insurance agents, banking personnel or investment brokers) involved in commercial operations for a company established in the territory of the other party.

Public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions.

Tourism personnel (excursion and travel agents, tourist guides or travel operators) who attend or participate in conventions or conduct any excursion that has started in the territory of the other Party.

Translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company established in the territory of the other Party.

Definitions

For purposes of this Appendix, territory of the other Party means the territory of the Party other than the Party to which temporary entry is sought.

Chapter 12

Electronic Commerce

Article 12.1: General Provisions

1. The Parties recognize the economic growth and opportunities generated by electronic commerce, as well as the importance of avoiding unnecessary obstacles to its use and development.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from imposing internal taxes, directly or indirectly, on digitized products, provided they are imposed in a manner consistent with this Agreement.

3. This Chapter is subject to any other provisions, exceptions or non-conforming measures established in other chapters or annexes of this Agreement that are relevant.

Article 12.2: Electronic Supply of Services

For greater certainty, the Parties affirm that measures affecting the supply of a service through the use of an electronic means are within the scope of the obligations contained in the relevant provisions of Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services).1 , and subject to any exceptions or non-conforming measures established in this Agreement, which are applicable to said obligations.

Article 12.3: Customs Duties on Digital Products

1. Neither Party may apply customs duties to digital products of the other Party.

2. For purposes of determining the applicable customs duties, each Party shall determine the customs value of the imported carrier medium containing a digital product based solely on the customs value of the carrier medium, regardless of the value of the digital product stored on the carrier medium.

Article 12.4: Non-Discrimination for Digital Products

1. A Party shall not accord less favorable treatment to digital products than it accords to other similar digital products, on the basis that:

(a) the digital product that receives the least favorable treatment is created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned, or is first available on commercial terms in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) the author, performer, producer, manager or distributor of such digital products is a person of the other Party2 .

2.

(a) A Party shall not accord less favorable treatment to a digital product created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned, or first made available on commercial terms in the territory of the other Party than it accords. to a similar digital product created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned, or made available for the first time on commercial terms in the territory of a non-Party country.

(b) A Party shall not grant less favorable treatment to digital products whose author, performer, producer, manager, or distributor is a person of the other Party than it accords to similar digital products whose author, performer, producer, manager, or distributor is a person from a non-Party country3 .

Article 12.5: Cooperation

Taking into consideration the global nature of electronic commerce, the Parties recognize the importance of:

(a) work together to overcome the obstacles faced by small and medium-sized enterprises in the use of electronic commerce;

(b) share information and experiences on laws, regulations and programs in the field of electronic commerce, including those related to data privacy, consumer trust, cyber security, electronic signature, intellectual property rights and electronic forms of government;

(c) work to maintain cross-border flows of information as an essential element of a dynamic environment for electronic commerce;

(d) stimulate the development by the private sector of methods of self-regulation, including codes of conduct, model contracts, guidelines and compliance mechanisms that encourage electronic commerce; and

(e) actively participate in international forums, both at the hemispheric and multilateral levels, with the purpose of promoting the development of electronic commerce.

Article 12.6: Consumer Protection

The Parties recognize the importance of maintaining and adopting transparent and effective measures to protect consumers from fraudulent and deceptive commercial practices, when they carry out transactions through electronic commerce.

Article 12.7: Authentication and Digital Certificates

No Party may adopt or maintain legislation on electronic authentication, which prevents the parties from having the opportunity to establish before judicial or administrative instances that the electronic transaction complies with any legal requirement with respect to authentication.

Article 12.8: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

authentication means the process or act of establishing the identity of a party to an electronic communication or transaction or ensuring the integrity of an electronic communication;

electronic media means employing computer processing;

carrier medium means any physical object designed primarily for the use of storing a digital product by any method now known or later developed, and from which a digital product can be directly or indirectly perceived, reproduced, or communicated, including, but not limited to a, an optical, magnetic or electronic medium;

digital products means computer programs, text, video, images, sound recordings, and other products that are digitally encoded and transmitted electronically, regardless of whether a Party treats such products as a good or as a service under its domestic law;4 and

electronic transmission or electronically transmitted means the transfer of digital products using any electromagnetic or photonic means.

Chapter 13

Public Procurement

Article 13.1: Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains related to public procurement, by an entity listed in Annex 13.1:

(a) through any contractual modality, including purchase and rental or lease, with or without a purchase option, build-operate-transfer contracts and public works concession contracts; and

(b) subject to the conditions set out in Annex 13.1.

2. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) non-contractual agreements or any other form of assistance provided by a Party or by a State enterprise, including donations, loans, capital increases, tax incentives, subsidies, guarantees, cooperation agreements, public supply of goods and services to individuals or governments at the regional or local level, and acquisitions made for the direct purpose of providing foreign assistance;

(b) purchases financed by donations, loans or other forms of international assistance, when the delivery of such assistance is subject to conditions incompatible with the provisions of this Chapter;

(c) the hiring of public employees, and measures related to employment;

(d) the acquisition of agency services or fiscal deposit services, liquidation and administration services for regulated financial institutions, nor the sale and distribution services of public debt; and

(e) financial services1 .

3. Each Party shall ensure that its procuring entities, listed in Annex 13.1, comply with this Chapter in the performance of covered public procurement.

4. When an entity awards a contract that is not covered by this Chapter, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to cover any merchandise or service that is part of that contract.

5. No entity may prepare, design, or otherwise structure or divide any public procurement, at any stage thereof, in order to evade the obligations of this Chapter.

6. When calculating the value of a contract, for the purpose of verifying whether public procurement is covered by this Chapter, an entity shall include the estimated total maximum value for the entire period of duration of the public procurement, taking into account all the options, awards, fees, commissions, interest and other streams of income or other forms of remuneration provided for in such contracts.

7. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from developing new procurement policies, procedures or contractual modalities, provided they are not contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 13.2: General Principles

National Treatment and Non-Discrimination

1. With respect to any measure covered by this Chapter, each Party shall accord to the goods and services of the other Party, and to the suppliers of such goods and services, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that the Party accords to its own goods, services and suppliers.

2. With respect to any measure regulating public procurement covered by this Chapter, neither Party may:

(a) treat a locally established supplier less favorably than another locally established supplier, by reason of its degree of foreign affiliation or ownership; either

(b) discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the goods or services offered by said supplier for a particular public procurement are goods or services of the other Party.

Determination of Origin

3. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, the determination of origin of the goods will be made on a non-preferential basis.

Special Compensatory Conditions

4. Entities may not consider, request or impose special compensatory conditions at any stage of a public procurement.

Non-Specific Measures of Public Procurement

5. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to measures relating to customs duties or other charges of any kind imposed upon or in connection with importation, the method of collection of such duties and charges, or other import regulations, including restrictions and formalities, or measures that affect trade in services, other than measures that specifically regulate public procurement covered by this Chapter.

Article 13.3: Publication of Public Procurement Measures

Each Party shall promptly publish:

(a) its measures of general application, which specifically regulate public procurement covered by this Chapter; and

(b) any modifications to such measures, in the same manner as the original publication.

Article 13.4: Publication of a Notice of Future Public Procurement

1. For each procurement covered by this Chapter, an entity shall publish in advance a notice inviting interested suppliers to submit bids for that procurement (“procurement notice”), or where applicable, a request to participate in the procurement. public procurement, except as provided in Article 13.9.2. Each of these notices will be accessible throughout the period established for the presentation of offers for the corresponding contracting.

2. Each announcement of a future contract must include at least a description of it, the type of contract, the conditions that the suppliers must meet to participate in the contract, the name of the entity that issued the notice, the address where the suppliers they can obtain all the documents related to public procurement and the deadlines for the presentation of offers.

Article 13.5: Deadlines for the Bid Submission Process

1. The deadlines established by the entities during a public procurement process will have an appropriate duration to allow suppliers to prepare and present adequate offers according to the nature and degree of complexity of the public procurement.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of the previous paragraph, the entities will establish no less than ten (10) days between the date on which the notice of future contracting is published and the final date for the presentation of offers.

Article 13.6: Information on Future Public Contracts

1. An entity shall provide interested suppliers with all the information necessary to enable them to prepare and submit suitable offers. The documentation will include all the criteria that the entity will consider for the award of the contract, including technical requirements, cost factors and their weightings or, when applicable, the relative values ​​that the entity will assign to those criteria when evaluating the offers.

2. When an entity does not publish all the bidding documentation by electronic means, it must ensure that it is available to any supplier that requests it.

3. When an entity, during the course of a public procurement, modifies the criteria referred to in paragraph 1, it shall transmit such modifications in writing:

(a) to all suppliers that are participating in the procurement at the time of the criteria change, if the identities of such suppliers are known, and in all other cases, in the same manner in which the original information was transmitted; and

(b) in sufficient time to allow such suppliers to modify and resubmit their offers, as appropriate.

Article 13.7: Technical Specifications

1. An entity shall not prepare, adopt or apply technical specifications or require any conformity assessment procedures with the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

2. Any technical specification prescribed by an entity shall, where applicable:

(a) be specified in terms of performance and functional requirements, rather than descriptive or design characteristics; and

(b) be based on international standards, where applicable, or otherwise on national technical regulations, recognized national standards, or building codes.

3. An entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or refer to a trademark or trade name, patent, design or type, specific origin or producer or supplier, unless there is no sufficiently precise or intelligible way to describe, otherwise , the requirements of public procurement, and provided that, in such cases, expressions such as "or equivalent" are included in the bidding documentation.

4. An entity shall not solicit or accept, in a manner that may have the effect of preventing competition, advice that may be used in the preparation or adoption of any technical specification for a specific public procurement, from a person who may have commercial interests in that public procurement.

Article 13.8: Conditions for Participation

1. When an entity requires suppliers to meet registration, qualification or other conditions for participation (“conditions for participation”), in order to participate in a public procurement, the entity will publish a notice inviting suppliers to apply for such participation. The entity will publish the notice sufficiently in advance so that interested suppliers have sufficient time to prepare and submit their applications and for the entity to evaluate and make its determinations based on said applications.

2. Each entity shall:

(a) limit the conditions for participation in public procurement to those that are essential to ensure that the eventual supplier has the legal, commercial, technical and financial capacities to comply with the requirements and technical requirements of public procurement, which they will be evaluated on the basis of the overall business activities of the supplier.

(b) base your qualification decisions solely on the conditions for participation that you have specified in advance in notices or in solicitation documentation; and

(c) recognize as qualified all suppliers of the Parties, who meet the requirements of the conditions to participate in a public procurement covered by this Chapter.

3. Entities may establish publicly available permanent lists of qualified suppliers to participate in contracting. When an entity requires suppliers to qualify on such a list to participate in a public procurement, and a supplier that has not yet qualified requests to be included on the list, the Parties shall ensure that the registration procedure on the list is initiated without delay and allow for the supplier to participate in the public procurement, provided that the registration procedures can be completed within the deadline established for the submission of offers.

4. No entity may impose as a condition for a supplier to participate in a public procurement, that the supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts by an entity of that Party or that said supplier has prior work experience in the territory of that Party. .

5. An entity will promptly notify any supplier that has applied for qualification of its decision as to whether the supplier is qualified. When an entity rejects a qualification request or ceases to recognize a supplier as qualified, that entity shall, at the supplier's request, promptly provide the supplier with a written explanation of the reasons for its decision.

6. Nothing in this article shall prevent an entity from excluding a supplier from a public procurement for reasons such as bankruptcy, liquidation or insolvency, false declarations within a public procurement process or significant deficiencies in the fulfillment of an obligation. subject to a prior contract.

Article 13.9: Procurement Modalities

1. Entities shall award contracts through open bidding procedures, in the course of which any interested supplier may submit an offer, or where appropriate, an application to participate in a public procurement.

2. Provided that a procuring entity does not use this provision to avoid competition or to protect its domestic suppliers, or to discriminate against suppliers of the other Party, the entities may award contracts by other means, other than the procedures of open tender, in any of the following circumstances:

(a) in the absence of bids meeting the essential requirements of the bid documentation, provided upon invitation to bid, including all conditions for participation, provided that the requirements for initial procurement are not substantially modified in the awarded contract;

(b) when, in the case of works of art, or for reasons related to the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive intellectual property rights, or in the absence of competition for technical reasons, the goods or services can only be be provided by a particular supplier and there is no reasonable alternative or substitute;

(c) to additional deliveries by the original supplier that are intended to be used as spare parts, extensions or continuity of existing equipment, computer programs, services or existing facilities, when the change of supplier would oblige the entity to acquire merchandise or services that do not meet compatibility requirements with existing equipment, software, services or facilities;

(d) for acquisitions made in a commodity market ;

(e) when an entity acquires a prototype or a first good or service, which has been developed at its request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for original research, experimentation, study, or development. When said contracts have been fulfilled, the subsequent contracting of said merchandise or said services will be awarded through open bidding procedures;

(f) when in the case of public works additional construction services are required to those originally contracted, which respond to unforeseen circumstances and which are necessary for the fulfillment of the objectives of the contract that originated them. However, the total value of the contracts awarded for said additional construction services may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the main contract; either

(g) to the extent strictly necessary when, for reasons of extreme urgency caused by unforeseen events for the entity, the goods or services cannot be obtained on time through open bidding procedures and the use of that procedure could result in serious damage to the entity or to the fulfillment of its functions. For purposes of this subparagraph, an entity's failure to plan, relative to funds available within a specified period, shall not constitute an unforeseen event.

3. An entity shall maintain a record or prepare a written report stating the specific justification for any contract awarded by means other than an open bidding procedure as provided under paragraph 2.

Article 13.10: Treatment of Bids and Award of Contracts

Reception and Opening of Offers

1. A procuring entity will receive and open all bids under procedures that guarantee equality and impartiality between suppliers of the Parties in the public procurement process and will treat bids confidentially, at least until they are opened.

Contract Award

2. An entity will require that a bid, in order to be considered for an award, must be submitted in writing, and must at the time of bid opening:

(a) conform to the essential requirements of the tender documentation; and

(b) be submitted by a supplier that has satisfied the conditions for participation, which the entity has provided to all participating suppliers.

3. Unless an entity determines that awarding a contract is against the public interest, it shall award the contract to the supplier that the entity has determined to be fully capable of performing the contract and whose offer has been determined to be the most advantageous in regarding the requirements and evaluation criteria stipulated in the bidding documents.

4. No entity may cancel a public contract, or terminate or modify awarded contracts, in order to evade the obligations of this Chapter.

Article 13.11: Information on Awards

Information Provided to Suppliers

1. Subject to Article 13.15, an entity shall promptly inform suppliers participating in a tender of its decision to award a contract. Upon request, an entity will provide to a supplier whose offer was not selected for award, the reasons for not selecting its offer and the relative advantages of the offer that the entity has selected.

Publication of Award Information

2. After awarding a contract covered by this Chapter, an entity shall promptly publish at least the following information about the award:

(a) the name of the entity;

(b) the description of the contracted goods or services;

(c) the date of the award;

(d) the name of the winning supplier;

(e) the value of the contract awarded; and

(f) in cases where open tendering procedures are not used, an indication of the circumstances justifying the use of the procedures used.

Registry mantenance

3. An entity shall maintain records and reports related to bidding procedures and the award of contracts covered by this Chapter, including the records and reports provided for in Article 13.9.3, for a period of at least three (3) years.

Article 13.12: Integrity in Public Procurement Practices

Each Party shall guarantee the existence of administrative or criminal sanctions to combat corruption in its public procurement, and that its entities establish policies and procedures to eliminate any potential conflict of interest on the part of those who are involved in public procurement or have influence over it. .

Article 13.13: National Review of Challenges presented by Providers

Independent Review Authorities

1. Each Party shall establish or designate at least one impartial administrative or judicial authority, independent of its entities, to receive and review challenges filed by suppliers in relation to the measures of a Party that implement this Chapter, in connection with a public procurement. covered by this Chapter, and formulate the pertinent conclusions and recommendations. Where a supplier's challenge is initially reviewed by a body other than such impartial authority, the Party shall ensure that the supplier may appeal the initial decision before an impartial administrative or judicial authority that is independent of the entity that is the subject of the challenge.

2. Each Party shall provide that the authority established or designated pursuant to paragraph 1 has the power to promptly take injunctive relief pending resolution of the challenge, to preserve the supplier's opportunity to engage in procurement and to ensure that the Party comply with its measures that implement this Chapter, including suspending the award of a contract or the performance of a contract that has already been awarded.2

3. Each Party shall ensure that its review procedures are timely, transparent, effective, and consistent with the principle of due process.

4. Each Party shall ensure that all documents related to a challenge to a public procurement covered by this Chapter are available to any authority established or designated pursuant to paragraph 1.

5. Without prejudice to other review procedures arranged or developed by each of the Parties, each Party shall ensure that the authorities established or designated in accordance with paragraph 1, provide at least the following:

(a) an opportunity for the supplier to examine the relevant documents and to be heard by the authority in a timely manner;

(b) sufficient time for the supplier to prepare and submit written challenges, which in no case shall be less than ten (10) days, from the moment the basis of the claim was known by the supplier or when it reasonably it should have been known by this one;

(c) a requirement for the entity to respond in writing to the provider's challenge; and

(d) prompt delivery in writing of decisions relating to the challenge, with an explanation of the rationale for each decision.

6. Each Party shall ensure that the supplier's submission of a challenge will not prejudice the supplier's participation in ongoing or future procurement.

Article 13.14: Modifications and Rectifications

1. Either Party may modify its coverage in accordance with this Chapter, provided that:

(a) notify the other Party in writing and simultaneously offer compensatory adjustments to maintain an acceptable level of coverage, comparable to that existing before the modification, except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 3; and

(b) the other Party does not object in writing within thirty (30) days of notification.

2. Any Party may make rectifications of a purely formal nature to its coverage in accordance with this Chapter, or minor amendments to its Schedules in Sections A to C of Annex 13.1, provided that it notifies the other Party in writing and the other Party does not objects in writing within thirty (30) days of notification. The Party making such minor rectifications or amendments shall not be required to provide compensatory adjustments.

3. A Party need not provide compensatory adjustments in circumstances where the Parties agree that the proposed modification covers an entity over which the Party has effectively eliminated its control or influence. Where the Parties do not agree that such governmental control or influence has been effectively removed, the objecting Party may request additional information or consultations with a view to clarifying the nature of any governmental control or influence and reaching agreement on the entity's continuance in the coverage under this Chapter.

4. When the Parties have agreed to a proposed modification, rectification or minor amendment, including the case when a Party has not objected within thirty (30) days in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, the Commission shall give effect to the agreement by the immediate modification of the relevant Section of Annex 13.1.

Article 13.15: Non-Disclosable Information

1. The Parties, their entities and their review authorities, shall not disclose confidential information without the formal authorization of the person who provided it when such disclosure could harm the legitimate commercial interests of a specific person or could harm fair competition between providers. .

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party or its entities to disclose confidential information that would impede compliance with the law or otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

Article 13.16: Exceptions

1. As long as these measures are not applied in such a way as to constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties or imply a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopt or maintain the measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; either

(d) related to the goods or services of disabled people, charitable institutions or prison labor.

2. The Parties understand that subparagraph (b) includes environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

Article 13.17: Public Information

Entities listed in Exhibit 13.1 will use their best efforts to publish their notices of future public procurement in an electronic publication that has a single point of entry for the entire government and is accessible via the Internet or a similar computer telecommunication network. .

Article 13.18: Point of Contact

Each Party shall designate a contact point to address matters related to the implementation of this Chapter, such as:

(a) bilateral cooperation related to the development and use of electronic communications in public procurement systems;

(b) the exchange of statistics and other information to assist the Parties in monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(c) examine possibilities of expanding the coverage of this Chapter; and

(d) efforts to increase understanding of their respective public procurement systems, with a view to maximizing access to public procurement opportunities, especially for small and medium-sized business providers.

Article 13.19: Future Negotiations

At the request of either Party, the Parties shall initiate negotiations in order to expand the coverage of this Chapter on a reciprocal basis, when the other Party grants to suppliers of a non-Party country, through an international treaty that enters into force after the entry into force of this Agreement, greater access to its government procurement market than that granted to suppliers of the other Party in accordance with this Agreement.

Article 13.20: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

special compensatory conditions means the conditions imposed or considered by an entity before or during its public procurement processes, which promote local development or improve the balance of payments accounts of the Party, through local content requirements, technology licences, investment, countertrade, or similar requirements;

Build-operate-transfer contract and public works concession contract means any contractual agreement whose main objective is to provide for the construction or rehabilitation of physical infrastructure, plants, buildings, facilities or other public works, and pursuant to which, in consideration of a supplier's performance of a contract, a procuring entity grants that supplier, for a specified period, temporary ownership or the right to control, operate, and require payment for the use of such works during the term of the contract ;

entity means an entity listed in Annex 13.1;

written or written means any expression of information in words, numbers or other symbols, including electronic expressions, that can be read, reproduced and stored;

technical specification means a requirement for the submission of offers that:

(a) prescribes the characteristics of:

(i) the goods to be procured, such as quality, performance, safety and dimensions, or production processes and methods, or

(ii) the services to be contracted, or their supply processes and methods, including any applicable administrative provisions; either

(b) includes terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good or service;

supplier means a person who provides or may provide goods or services to an entity; and

publish means to disseminate information in an electronic or paper medium that is widely distributed and readily available to the public.

ANNEX 13.1

Section A – Entities of the Central Level of Government

1. This Chapter applies to central government level entities listed by each Party in this Section, when the value of the procurement has been estimated, in accordance with Article 13.1.6, to be equal to or greater than the following amounts :

(a) For the contracting of goods and services: 50,000 SDRs; and

(b) For the contracting of construction services: 5,000,000 SDRs.

Notes to the Schedule of Colombia

1. Logistics Agency of the Military Forces, Revolving Fund of the National Police, and Revolving Fund of the Administrative Department of Security . Procurement of goods contained in Section 2 (Food, Beverages and Tobacco; Textiles and Clothing and Leather Products) of the Central Product Classifier (CPC version 1.0) of the United Nations, for the General Command, are not covered by this Chapter. of the Military Forces, National Army, National Navy, National Air Force, and National Police.

Section D – Assets

This Chapter applies to all goods acquired by the entities listed in Sections A to C, subject to the Notes of the respective Annexes and the General Notes.

Section E – Services

This Chapter applies to all services contracted by the entities listed in Sections A to C, subject to the Notes of the respective Annexes, the General Notes, and the Notes to this Section, with the exception of the services excluded in the list. of each Party.

Chilean Roster

The following services, as detailed in the Common Classification System, are excluded:

L. Financial Services and Related Services

All classes

Colombian roster

This Chapter does not cover the contracting of the following services, according to the Central Product Classification Version 1.0. (For a complete list of the Central Product Classification Version 1.0, see: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cr/registry/regcst.asp?Cl=3):

1. Research and Development Services

Division 81. Research and Development Services.
Group: 835. Scientific Services and Other Technical Services.
Data processing services (8596) and organization of events (8597), required in the execution of scientific and technological activities.
2. Engineering and Architecture Services

Class 8321. Architectural services.
Class 8334. Engineering design services.
Class 8335. Engineering services during the construction and installation phase
3. Public Services

Division: 69. Electricity distribution services; piped gas and water distribution services.
Division: 94. Sewerage and waste disposal services, sanitation services and other environmental protection services
Basic telecommunications (does not include value-added telecommunications services).
4. Social Services

Division 91. Public administration and other services for the community in general; Social security services with mandatory affiliation.
Division 92. Educational services.
Group 931. Human health services
5. Printing Services

6. Elaboration of television programs

Subclass 96121. Motion picture, videotape, and television program production services.
Section F – Construction Services

The Chapter applies to all construction services, in accordance with Division 54 of the United Nations Central Product Classifier (CPC version 1.0), contracted by the entities listed in Sections A to C, subject to the Notes of the respective Annexes, the General Notes, and the Notes to this Section.

chili notes

Without prejudice to the provisions of any provision of this Chapter:

1. For the purposes of construction-operation-transfer contracts and public works concession contracts, only articles 2 and 4 of this Chapter shall be applicable.

2. This Chapter does not apply to all construction services for Easter Island.

Colombian Notes

Notwithstanding the provisions of any provision of the Chapter, a Colombian contracting entity may apply conditions related to the hiring of local personnel in rural areas, in the contracting of construction services for the construction, maintenance or rehabilitation of roads and highways, with in order to promote employment and improve living conditions in such areas.

Section G – General Notes

Unless otherwise provided, the following General Notes apply without exception to this Chapter, including all Sections of this Annex.

Chilean Roster

This Chapter does not apply to:

1. Contracts made by a Chilean entity for a good or service obtained or acquired from another Chilean entity.

2. The lease or acquisition of real estate.

3, The contracts and acquisitions carried out by the foreign service missions of the Republic of Chile, exclusively for its operation and management.

Colombian roster

This Chapter does not apply to:

1. Procurements made by a Colombian entity of a merchandise or service obtained or acquired from another Colombian entity.

2. The lease or acquisition of real estate.

3. Contracts related to defense and national security.

4. The reservation of contracts for up to US$125,000 for the benefit of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MIPYMES), including any type of preferences, such as the exclusive right to provide a good or service; as well as measures leading to facilitating technological unbundling and subcontracting.

5. Programs for reinsertion into civilian life originating from peace processes, aid to those displaced by violence, support for residents of conflict zones, and in general programs derived from the solution of the armed conflict.

6. Contracts and acquisitions carried out by the foreign service missions of the Republic of Colombia, exclusively for its operation and
management.

7. The acquisition of goods required in the execution of research and development services.

Section H – Expression of the Thresholds in National Currency

The convertibility rate will be the daily average value of the respective national currency in terms of SDRs during the two years prior to September 1 of the previous year in which the thresholds in national currency begin to apply, a fact that will be verified as of September 1. January.

The thresholds expressed in national currency will be set for two years, that is, calendar years, for both Parties.

Chapter 14 Transparency

Article 14.1: Contact Points

1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. At the request of the other Party, the contact point will indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.

Article 14.2: Advertising

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement, are promptly published or made available in such a way as to allow interested persons and the other part have knowledge of them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party:

(a) publish in advance any measure, referred to in paragraph 1, that it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures.

Article 14.3: Notification and Provision of Information

1. Each Party shall notify the other Party, to the extent possible, of any current or proposed measures that the Party considers could materially affect the operation of this Agreement, or otherwise materially affect the interests of the other Party in accordance with this Agreement.

2. A Party, at the request of the other Party, shall provide information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any current or proposed measure, whether or not the other Party has been previously notified of that measure.

3. Any notification or provision of information referred to in this article will be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

Article 14.4: Administrative Procedures

In order to administer in a compatible, impartial and reasonable manner all the measures of general application that affect the aspects covered by this Agreement, each Party will guarantee that, in its administrative procedures in which the measures mentioned in Article 14.2 are applied with respect to persons particular goods or services of the other Party in specific cases:

(a) whenever possible, the persons of the other Party who are directly affected by a procedure, receive, in accordance with the internal provisions, reasonable notice of the initiation of the same, including a description of its nature, the exposition of the legal basis according to at which the procedure is initiated and a general description of all the issues in dispute;

(b) when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest permit, such persons are given a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their positions, prior to any final administrative action; and

(c) its procedures conform to the domestic law of that Party.

Article 14.5: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of prompt review and, where warranted, correction of final administrative actions related to matters covered by this Agreement. These courts will be impartial and will not be linked to the agency or authority in charge of the administrative application of the law, and will not have a substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, before such courts or in such proceedings, the parties have the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a resolution or ruling based on the evidence and presentations or, in cases where it is required by its internal legislation, on the file compiled by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to challenge or subsequent review as provided by its domestic law, that such resolutions or rulings are enforced by, and govern the practice of, the agency or authority with respect to the administrative action that is the subject of the dispute. decision.

Article 14.6: Definition

For the purposes of this Chapter:

administrative resolution of general application means an administrative resolution or interpretation that applies to all persons and events that are generally within its scope and that establishes a standard of conduct, but does not include:

(a) a determination, ruling or ruling made in an administrative proceeding that applies to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party, in a specific case; either

(b) a resolution or ruling that decides with respect to a particular act or practice.

Chapter 15

Administration

Article 15.1: Free Trade Commission

1. The Parties establish the Free Trade Commission, (the Commission) made up of the representatives referred to in Annex 15.1.1, or by the persons they designate.

2. The Commission will have the following functions:

(a) ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement;

(b) supervise the implementation of the Agreement and evaluate the results achieved in its application;

(c) try to resolve disputes that may arise in relation to the interpretation or application of this Agreement;

(d) supervise the work of all committees and working groups established pursuant to this Agreement and recommend appropriate action;

(e) determine the amount of remuneration and expenses to be paid to the arbitrators; and

(f) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this Agreement.

3. The Commission may:

(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to committees and working groups;

(b) advance in the application of the objectives of this Agreement, through the approval of any modification in accordance with its internal legislation1 :

(i) in the commercial liberalization program through tariff reduction as established in Article 22.3 (Validity);

(ii) the regime of origin, and

(iii) the sections of Annex 13.1 (public procurement).

(c) request the advice of non-governmental persons or groups;

(d) approve and modify the Model Rules of Procedure mentioned in Article 16.10 (Rules of Procedure of Arbitral Tribunals); and

(e) if agreed by the Parties, take any other action in the exercise of their functions.

4. The Commission will establish its rules and procedures. All decisions of the Commission will be adopted by mutual agreement.

5. The Commission will meet at least once a year in a regular meeting. The ordinary meetings of the Commission will be successively chaired by each Party.

Article 15.2: Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement

Each Party must designate a Coordinator, who will work together in the preparations for the meetings of the Commission and will give the appropriate follow-up to the decisions of the Commission.

Annex 15.1.1

Members of the Free Trade Commission

For purposes of Article 15.1, the Commission shall be made up of the following representatives:

(a) in the case of Chile, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and

(b) in the case of Colombia, the Minister of Commerce, Industry and Tourism.

Annex 15.2

Agreement Coordinators

The coordination bodies of each Party will be:

(a) in the case of Chile,

the dependency designated by the General Director of International Economic Relations or whoever acts as such; and

(b) in the case of Colombia,

the agency designated by the Vice Minister of Foreign Trade or whoever acts as such.

Chapter 16

Dispute Resolution

Article 16.1: Objectives

1. The Parties shall at all times endeavor to reach an agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement and shall make every effort, through cooperation and consultation or otherwise, to reach a mutually satisfactory solution on any matter that might affect their functioning.

2. The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective, efficient and transparent dispute resolution process between the Parties regarding their rights and obligations under this Agreement.

Article 16.2: Scope of Application

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute resolution provisions of this Chapter shall apply:

(a) to the prevention or settlement of disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement; either

(b) when a Party considers that a measure of the other Party is or could be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement, or that another Party is otherwise in breach of its obligations under this Agreement; either

(c) when a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of the other Party causes nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 16.2.1.

2. Pursuant to Article 16.3, this Chapter is without prejudice to the rights of the Parties to resort to existing dispute settlement procedures under other agreements to which they are a party.

3. Any matter related to the interpretation, application or compliance of the Labor and Environmental Chapters will be resolved through the application of the procedures contemplated in the respective Chapters.

Article 16.3: Choice of forum

1. In the event of any dispute arising under this Agreement and under another free trade agreement to which the disputing Parties belong or the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party may choose the forum to resolve the dispute.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested the establishment of an arbitral tribunal under the Agreement referred to in paragraph 1, the selected forum shall be exclusive of the others.

Article 16.4: Consultations

1. Any Party may request in writing consultations with any other Party regarding any current or proposed measure of that Party that it considers inconsistent with this Agreement, or regarding any other matter that it considers might affect the operation of this Agreement.

2. All requests to hold consultations must indicate the reasons for the request, including identification of the current or proposed measure or other matter in question and indicating the legal grounds of the claim.

3. The Party to whom the request for consultations was addressed must respond in writing within a period of ten (10) days from the date of receipt.

4. The Parties shall hold consultations within a period not exceeding:

(a) a period of fifteen (15) days after the date of receipt of the request in matters related to perishable goods; either

(b) a period of thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of the request for all other matters.

5. During consultations, the Parties to the dispute shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter submitted to consultations in accordance with this Article. For such purposes, the Parties involved in the consultations must provide sufficient information to allow a complete examination of how the existing or proposed measure, or any other matter, could affect the operation and application of this Agreement. Consultations will be confidential and will not prejudice the rights of any of the Parties.

6. With a view to obtaining a mutually agreed solution to the matter, the consulting Party may make proposals to the consulted Party, who shall give due consideration to said proposals made.

7. Consultations may be carried out in person or by any technological means available to the Parties. If they are in person, the consultations must be held in the capital of the consulted Party, unless otherwise agreed.

Article 16.5: Refusal to Consultations

If the consulted Party does not respond to the request for consultations within ten (10) days of receipt of the request, the consulting Party may resort to the Commission without having to wait for the periods referred to in Article 16.6 to elapse. .

Article 16.6: Intervention of the Commission

1. Any consulting Party may request in writing that the Commission meet, provided that a matter is not resolved in any of the following cases:

(a) in the case established in Article 16.5;

(a) within thirty (30) days after delivery of the request for consultations;

(b) within fifteen (15) days following the delivery of a request for consultations in matters related to perishable merchandise; or

(d) another term agreed by the Parties,

2. The Party requesting the Intervention of the Commission will explain the reasons for the request, including the identification of the measure or other matter in question, and an indication of the legal bases of the dispute.

3. Unless it decides otherwise, the Commission will meet within ten (10) days following the delivery of the request, and will promptly resolve the dispute.

4. In order to help the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, the Commission may:

(a) convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary;

(b) resort to good offices, conciliation or mediation; either

(c) make recommendations.

4. Unless it decides otherwise, the Commission will combine two or more proceedings that it hears under this Article relating to the same measure or matter. The Commission may consolidate two or more proceedings regarding other matters that it hears in accordance with this Article, when it deems it convenient to examine them jointly.

5. A Party may also request in writing a meeting of the Commission when consultations have been carried out in accordance with Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade), which will replace the consultations established in Article 16.4. .

6. The Commission may meet in person or through any technological means available to the Parties that allows them to comply with this stage of the procedure.

Article 16.7: Establishment of an Arbitral Tribunal

1. The complaining Party may request, through a written notification addressed to the other Party, the establishment of an arbitral tribunal, if the Parties involved in the consultations fail to resolve the matter within:

(a) the fifteen (15) days following the meeting of the Commission in accordance with Article 16.6;

(b) the fifteen (15) days following the meeting of the Commission to address the most recent matter that has been submitted to it, when several proceedings have been accumulated in accordance with Article 16.6.4;

(c) thirty (30) days after a Party has delivered a request for consultations under Article 16.6 in a matter relating to perishable goods, if the Commission has not met in accordance with Article 16.6;

(d) fifty-five (55) days after a Party has delivered a request for consultations under Article 16.4, if the Commission has not met under Article 16.6.3; either

(e) any other term that the consulting Parties agree.

2. The complaining Party shall deliver the request to the other Party stating the reasons for the request, including identification of the measure or other matter at issue and an indication of the legal grounds for the claim.

3. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties to the dispute, the arbitral tribunal must be constituted and perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

4. The date of establishment of the arbitral tribunal will be the date on which its President is appointed.

5. An arbitral tribunal may not be established to review a proposed measure.

Article 16.8: Composition of Arbitral Tribunals

1. The arbitral tribunals will be made up of three members.

2. In the written notification pursuant to Article 16.7, the complaining Party that has requested the establishment of an arbitral tribunal shall designate a member to form the arbitral tribunal.

3. Within fifteen (15) days following receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2, the Party complained against shall designate another member to form the arbitral tribunal.

4. Within fifteen (15) days following the appointment of the second arbitrator, the Parties to the dispute will appoint the third arbitrator by mutual agreement, who will perform the functions of the president of the arbitral tribunal.

5. If the three (3) arbitrators have not been appointed or appointed within thirty (30) days following the date of receipt of the notice of request from the arbitral tribunal indicated in paragraph 2, the necessary appointments will be made, at the request of any of the Parties, by the Secretary General of ALADI within three (3) days after the expiration of the thirty (30) day period.

6. The President of the arbitral tribunal may not be a national of any of the Parties, nor have his permanent residence in the territories of any of them, nor may he be an employee of any of the Parties or have had any participation in the case at any time. quality.

7. Each disputing Party shall endeavor to select panelists who have relevant knowledge or experience in the subject matter of the dispute.

8. All referees must:

(a) have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;

(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of their objectivity, impartiality, reliability and good judgment;

(c) be independent, not related to any of the Parties and not receive instructions from them; and

(d) comply with the code of conduct for arbitrators established in the Understanding Regarding the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes of the Agreement on the WTO.

9. Those individuals who have participated in accordance with the provisions of Article 16.6.3 cannot be arbitrators in a dispute.

10. If any of the arbitrators appointed in accordance with this Article resigns or is unable to serve as such, a replacement arbitrator will be appointed within a period of fifteen (15) days in accordance with the election procedure used to select the original arbitrator. , and the replacement shall have all the authority and obligations of the original arbitrator. If it has not been possible to appoint him within said period, the appointment will be made, at the request of any of the Parties, by the Secretary General of ALADI within the following thirty (30) days.

Article 16.9: Functions of Arbitral Tribunals

1. The function of the arbitral tribunal is to make an objective evaluation of the controversy that has been submitted to it, and to formulate the necessary conclusions for the solution of the controversy submitted to it.

2. The conclusions and the report of the arbitral tribunal shall be binding on the Parties to the dispute.

3. The arbitral tribunal will adopt its decisions by consensus. If the arbitral tribunal is unable to reach consensus, it may adopt its decisions by a majority of its members.

Article 16.12: Rules of Procedure of Arbitral Tribunals

1. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the proceedings of the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure.

2. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise within twenty (20) days from the date of sending the request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal shall be:

"To examine, in light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement, the matter indicated in the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal in accordance with the provisions of Article 16.7 and issue the conclusions and determinations to resolve the dispute."

3. If a Party in its request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal has identified that a measure has caused nullification or impairment of benefits, in accordance with Annex 16.2.1, the terms of reference must indicate so.

4. At the request of a Party to the dispute or on its own initiative, the arbitral tribunal may require scientific information and expert technical advice, as it deems appropriate. Any information obtained in this way shall be provided to the Parties to the dispute for their comments.

5. Unless the arbitral tribunal determines otherwise based on the particular circumstances of the case, each Party to the dispute shall bear the expenses of its designated arbitrator. The expenses of the President of the arbitral tribunal and other expenses associated with the process must be borne in equal parts by the Parties in the dispute.

6. If a Party wishes the arbitral tribunal to make findings as to the level of adverse trade effects caused to the other Party by a breach of its obligations under this Agreement, or a measure found to have caused nullification or impairment pursuant to with Article 16.2.1, the Mandate shall indicate so.

Article 16.11: Preliminary report

1. The report of the arbitral tribunal shall be drawn up without the presence of the Parties and shall be based on the relevant provisions of this Agreement and on the submissions and arguments of the Parties.

2. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the arbitral tribunal shall:

(a) within a period of ninety (90) days following the appointment of the last selected arbitrator; either

(b) in urgent cases, including those related to perishable goods, within a period of forty-five (45) days following the appointment of the last selected arbitrator,

submit to the Parties to the dispute a preliminary report.

3. The preliminary report must contain:

(a) findings of fact; including any arising from a request made pursuant to Article 16.10.6

(b) the determination of the arbitral tribunal as to whether one of the Parties to the dispute is in breach of its obligations under this Agreement or whether that Party's action is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 16.2.1 or any other determination requested in the mandate; and

(c) the decision of the arbitral tribunal in settling the dispute.

4. In exceptional cases, when the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot issue its preliminary report within a period of ninety (90) days, or within a period of forty-five (45) days in urgent cases, it will inform in writing the Parties to the dispute of the reasons for the delay and will at the same time provide an estimate of the period in which it will issue its report. In no case may the period of delay exceed an additional period of thirty (30) days unless the Parties to the dispute provide otherwise.

5. A Party to the dispute may submit written comments on the preliminary report to the arbitral tribunal, within fifteen (15) days following the presentation of said report, or within any other term agreed by the Parties. in the controversy.

6. After examining the written observations on the preliminary report, the arbitral tribunal may reconsider its report and carry out any further examination it deems appropriate.

Article 16.12: Final Report

The arbitral tribunal must present a final report to the Parties in the dispute and, where appropriate, the particular opinions on the issues in which there has been no unanimous decision, within a period of thirty (30) days following the presentation of the report. preliminary, unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise. The Parties to the dispute will make the final report available to the public within the following fifteen (15) days, subject to the protection of confidential information.

Article 16.13: Implementation of the Final Report

1. The final report of the arbitral tribunal will be final and binding for the Parties to the dispute and will not be subject to appeal.

2. If the arbitral tribunal determines in its final report that a Party to the dispute has failed to comply with its obligations under this Agreement or that a measure of that Party is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 16.2.1, the decision will be, whenever possible, to remove the breach or nullification or impairment.

3. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, they must implement the decision of the arbitral tribunal contained in the final report within a reasonable period of time in case it is not feasible to comply immediately.

4. If the arbitral tribunal determines that a measure of a Party is not in conformity with its obligations under this Agreement, that Party shall notify the other Party of those steps, whether legislative, regulatory or administrative, that that Party shall adopt. in order to implement the decision of the arbitral tribunal.

5. The reasonable period of time must be set by mutual agreement between the Parties to the dispute, or in the absence of said agreement within a period of forty-five (45) days following the public disclosure of the final report, any of the Parties to the dispute may refer the matter to the arbitral tribunal, which shall determine the reasonable period of time after consulting with the other party to the dispute.

Article 16.14: Compliance within the Prudential Period

1. In the event of disagreement as to the existence or consistency of measures intended to comply with the decision or the compatibility of such measures with this Agreement adopted within the reasonable period of time, this difference will be resolved in accordance with the dispute settlement procedure of this Chapter. , with the intervention, whenever possible, of the arbitral tribunal that initially took cognizance of the matter.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall distribute its report to the Parties in the controversy within sixty (60) days following the date on which the matter was submitted to it. If the arbitral tribunal considers that it is not possible to present its report within that period, it will notify the Parties in the dispute in writing of the reasons for its delay, indicating the period in which it deems it may present it. In no case may the period of delay exceed an additional period of thirty (30) days unless the Parties to the dispute provide otherwise.

Article 16.15: Compensation and Suspension of Benefits

1. If the affected Party does not bring into conformity with this Agreement the measure found inconsistent by the decision of the arbitral tribunal pursuant to Article 16.12 within the reasonable period of time determined pursuant to Article 16.13, that Party shall, if required to do so , enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a view to finding mutually acceptable compensation.

2. If the arbitral tribunal decides that the measure taken by a Party is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 16.2.1, and its inconsistency has not been removed within the reasonable period of time established in accordance with Article 16.13, that Party shall, if so required, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a view to finding mutually acceptable compensation.

3. If the Parties do not agree on compensation within thirty (30) days following the expiration of the reasonable term in accordance with Article 16.13, the complaining Party may suspend, with respect to the defendant Party, the application of benefits of equivalent effect. The notice will specify the level of benefits that the Party intends to suspend. Benefits may not be suspended while the complaining Party is in negotiations pursuant to Paragraphs 1 or 2.

4. If the Parties have agreed to mutually satisfactory compensation and one Party considers that the other Party has not complied with the terms of the agreement, it may, from that moment, notify the other Party in writing of its intention to suspend the application of benefits of equivalent effect in respect of the Party complained against. The notice will specify the level of benefits that the Party intends to suspend.

5. Compensation and suspension of benefits are temporary measures. Neither compensation nor suspension of benefits is preferable to the implementation of the decision to bring an action into conformity with this Agreement. Compensation and suspension of benefits will only apply until the measure declared inconsistent with this Agreement has been removed, or the Party that must implement the decision of the arbitral tribunal has done so, or until a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.

6. When considering which benefits to suspend pursuant to paragraph 3:

(a) the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors affected by the measure that the arbitral tribunal determined to be inconsistent with this Agreement or to cause nullification or impairment in accordance with Annex 16.2.1; and

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, it may suspend benefits in other sectors. The communication by virtue of which said decision is announced must indicate the reasons on which said decision is based.

7. At the written request of the affected Party, the original arbitral tribunal shall determine whether the level of benefits that the complaining Party has suspended is excessive, in accordance with paragraph 3. If the arbitral tribunal cannot be constituted with its original members, it shall apply the procedure established in Article 16.8.

8. The arbitral tribunal shall issue its resolution within sixty (60) days following the request made in accordance with paragraph 6, or if the arbitral tribunal cannot be constituted with its original members, from the date on which the arbitral tribunal was appointed. last referee. The resolution of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and binding. The resolution will be communicated to the Parties in the dispute and made publicly available.

Article 16.16: Compliance Review

1. Without prejudice to the procedures established in Article 16.15, if the Party complained against considers that it has eliminated the non-conformity or the annulment or impairment found by the arbitral tribunal, it may submit the matter to the arbitral tribunal by written notification to the other Party. The arbitral tribunal shall issue its report on the matter within a period of 90 days from said notification.

2. If the arbitral tribunal decides that the Party complained against has eliminated the non-conformity or the annulment or impairment, the complaining Party shall restore, without delay, the benefits that it has suspended in accordance with Article 16.15.

Annex 16.2.1

Nullification or Impairment

1. A Party may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism under this Chapter when, by virtue of the application of a measure that does not contravene this Agreement, it considers that the benefits that it could reasonably have expected to receive from the application are nullified or impaired. of any of the following provisions:

(a) Chapters 3 to 5 (Trade in Goods, Origin Regime and Trade Facilitation); Release Program, according to Article 22.3.3 (Validity);

(b) Chapter 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade);

(c) Chapter 13 (Government Procurement); either

(d) Chapter 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services);

2. No Party may invoke paragraph 1(d), with respect to any measure subject to an exception pursuant to Article 21.1 (General Exceptions).

Chapter 17

Labor

Article 17.1: Shared Commitments

1. The Parties reaffirm their obligations as members of the International Labor Organization (ILO) and their commitments under the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up (1998) . Each Party shall endeavor to ensure that such principles, as well as the rights set forth in Article 17.5, are recognized and protected by its national law.

2. Recognizing the right of each Party to establish its own internal labor standards and, consequently, to adopt or modify its labor laws, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that its laws establish labor standards consistent with internationally recognized labor rights, set forth in Article 17.5. .

Article 17.2: Compliance with National Legislation

1. Without prejudice to the sovereign rights of the Parties to establish their own national policies and priorities and to establish, administer and supervise their own labor laws and regulations, the Parties undertake to apply their own labor legislation.

2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to promote trade or investment by weakening or reducing the protection provided in their domestic labor laws.

Article 17.3: Labor Cooperation

1. The Parties recognize the importance of bilateral cooperation to strengthen actions in labor matters. In this sense, the Parties agree to develop activities in the areas of cooperation listed in the following list, which is not exclusive:

(a) fundamental labor rights and their effective application;

(b) decent work;

(c) labor relations;

(d) working conditions;

(e) labor inspection and surveillance;

(f) matters related to small and medium enterprises;

(g) migrant workers;

(h) development of human resources and job training;

(i) social security;

(j) labor retraining and social protection programs;

(k) promotion of technological innovation;

(l) ications of economic integration and openness, and

(m) social dialogue.

In the same way, they will work to promote mutual support mechanisms, in the various bilateral and multilateral labor forums that they share.

2. The Parties undertake to define, through the contact points designated for this purpose, the specific cooperation projects and schedules of activities.

3. The Parties may invite the participation of trade union and business organizations, as well as non-governmental sectors and other organizations, to identify areas and activities of cooperation and incorporate them in the development of said activities.

4. Cooperation activities must consider the priorities and needs of each Party and the available human and financial resources, and their financing will be decided by both Parties.

Article 17.4: Institutional Provisions

1. Each Party shall designate a Contact Point within its Ministry of Labor or Social Protection, as appropriate, which will serve as a link with the other Party and with society and which will channel all matters that arise in relation to this Chapter. .

2. The Parties will meet periodically through senior government officials, when they deem it necessary, in order to:

(a) identify potential areas of cooperation;

(b) serve as a forum for dialogue on matters of common interest;

(c) review the implementation, operation and results of the agreement;

(d) inform the Commission of the results of its work and deliberations, and

(e) take care of any other matters that may arise.

3. If any matter arises regarding the application of this Chapter, a Party may request consultations with the other Party, by delivering a written request to the contact point that the other Party has designated pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article. .

4. The Parties will make all efforts to reach satisfactory arrangements through dialogue and cooperation, which may include consultancies.

5. If the Parties fail to resolve the matter through the Contact Points, it may be discussed at the meetings of senior officials mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article.

Article 17.5: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

Domestic legislation means laws or regulations of each Party, or provisions thereof, that are directly related to the following internationally recognized rights:

(a) the right of association;

(b) the right to organize and bargain collectively;

(c) the prohibition of the use of any form of forced or compulsory labor;

(d) a minimum age for the employment of children, and the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labor;

(e) the elimination of discrimination in employment and occupation; and

(f) acceptable working conditions with respect to minimum wages, working hours, and occupational health and safety.

Chapter 18

Environmental

Article 18.1: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to contribute to the efforts of the Parties to ensure that trade and environmental policies are mutually supportive and to collaborate in promoting the best forms of sustainable use of natural resources and the protection of ecosystems, in accordance with with the objective of sustainable development and with those of this Agreement.

Article 18.2: Principles and Commitments

1. The Parties reaffirm the sovereign right of each of them over their natural resources and reiterate their sovereign right to establish their own levels of environmental protection, their environmental development priorities and to adopt or modify their environmental laws and policies accordingly.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its policies and laws promote and establish high levels of environmental protection and the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources; and will strive to continue improving its levels of protection in these matters.

3. Each Party shall endeavor to ensure that its environmental policies, laws, regulations, and management are consistent with and comply with its international environmental commitments emanating from multilateral environmental agreements, as well as with international action plans aimed at achieving sustainable development.

4. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to promote trade or investment by weakening or reducing the levels of protection provided for in their environmental legislation. In turn, the Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to use their environmental policies, laws, regulations and management as a disguised barrier to trade.

5. The Parties reaffirm the need for greater promotion of environmental education and culture; including the dissemination of knowledge of its policies, laws, regulations and environmental management.

6. The Parties recognize the importance of their environmental legislation contemplating fair, equitable and transparent participation and enforcement mechanisms.

Article 18.3: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognize that cooperation contributes to their respective efforts to ensure that trade and environmental policies are mutually supportive and promote the best ways of using natural resources in accordance with the objective of sustainable development.

2 Likewise, the Parties recognize the long and fruitful history of cooperation between their governments.

3 In order to consolidate said cooperation, in order to improve their capacities to protect the environment and promote sustainable development consistent with the deepening of their trade and investment relations, the Parties will endeavor to strengthen said cooperation in the various bilateral, regional and multilateral that share.

4. The Parties agree to promote cooperation activities in areas of mutual interest such as:

(a) forest development and natural resources;

(b) management of hydrobiological resources;

(c) desertification and recovery of vegetation cover;

(d) green markets;

(e) ecotourism and sustainable tourism;

(f) biodiversity;

(g) institutional and regulatory strengthening;

(h) control and monitoring of environmental pollution;

(i) water quality management policy and technologies for its treatment;

(j) conservation of marine and coastal areas;

(k) watershed management;

(l) strengthening of mechanisms to promote environmental education and public participation;

(m) environmental liabilities;

(n) strategic environmental assessments; and

(or) others that the Parties may agree.

5. Cooperation between the Parties may be carried out in the following ways:

(a) exchange of relevant environmental documentation and information;

(b) exchange of experts in areas of mutual interest;

(c) joint organization of seminars, workshops and meetings;

(d) joint research on topics of mutual interest; either

(e) any other form of cooperation that the Parties agree.

6. To address cooperation activities, the Parties define as Coordinators the National Environmental Commission on behalf of Chile, and the Ministry of Environment, Housing and Territorial Development - Vice Ministry of Environment on the part of Colombia.

7. The Coordinators will have among their functions:

(a) the preparation of the joint work plan;

(b) the definition of specific cooperation projects and schedules of activities;

(c) the coordination and facilitation of the cooperation activities that are developed; and

(d) submitting periodic reports to the National Contact Points established in Article 18.4.

8. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Parties may develop cooperation activities in environmental matters through the mechanisms and forms provided in Chapter 19 (Cooperation).

9. The aforementioned cooperation will be subject to the legislation and the availability of human and financial resources of the Parties.

Article 18.4: Institutional Provisions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Parties have designated a National Contact Point to attend queries and requests from the other Party, promote the exchange of information and evaluate possible actions in matters of cooperation.

2. The designated National Contact Points are:

(a) for Chile, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and

(b) by Colombia,

the Ministry of Environment, Housing and Territorial Development, Vice Ministry of Environment.

3. The Parties may change their National Contact Point by written notification to the other Party.

4. The National Contact Points will inform the Commission of the development and implementation of this Chapter each time it meets.

Article 18.5: Consultations

1. The Parties will make their best efforts to resolve any matter that could affect the application of this Chapter.

2. If any question arises regarding the interpretation or application of this Chapter, the Parties shall, in good faith, resolve the matter amicably through dialogue, consultation and cooperation.

3. A Party may request consultations with the other Party through the National Contact Point regarding any question that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of this Chapter. The National Contact Point will identify the institution or official responsible for the matter and will help, if necessary, to facilitate the Party's communications with the requesting Party.

Chapter 19 Cooperation

Article 19.1: Objectives

The Parties agree to broaden and deepen the Basic Cooperation Agreement, in accordance with the following additional objectives thereof:

(a) adapting the framework for cooperation as an instrument to expand and enhance the benefits of this Agreement;

(b) strengthening and developing existing cooperative relationships between the Parties, including focusing on innovation, research and development, especially when they provide added value to the relationships established in this Agreement;

(c) creating new opportunities for trade and investment, promoting competitiveness and innovation and including the participation of the public, private and academic sectors;

(d) supporting the role of the private sector in promoting and building strategic alliances in order to promote economic growth and mutual development, especially in relation to small and medium-sized enterprises; and

(e) strengthening the commercial capacity of the Parties, understanding as such the set of activities aimed at building institutional, physical and human capacity, to benefit more widely from world commercial exchange, with special emphasis on economic cooperation, and on research, science , innovation and technology.

Article 19.2: Scope of application

1. To contribute to the achievement of the objectives and principles of this Agreement, the Parties reaffirm the importance of all forms of cooperation, with special emphasis on cooperation:

(a) economic;

(b) innovation, research and development; and

(c) energetic.

2. The Parties will contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the Agreement, through the identification and development of innovative cooperation activities, projects and programs, capable of adding value to their relations.

3. The cooperation between the Parties specified in this Chapter complements the cooperation and cooperative activities defined in other Chapters of this Agreement and in the Basic Cooperation Agreement.

Article 19.3: Economic Cooperation

1. The objective of economic cooperation will be to facilitate trade and investment between the Parties and promote relations between their economic agents, with special emphasis on small and medium-sized enterprises.

2. In order to fulfill the objective indicated in paragraph 1, the Parties will encourage and facilitate, as appropriate, the following activities including, but not limited to:

(a) policy dialogues and regular exchanges of information and views on ways in which trade in goods and services between the Parties can be promoted and expanded;

(b) development of projects tending to strengthen the commercial capacity of the Parties;

(c) keep each other informed about important economic and trade issues, as well as obstacles to expanding economic cooperation;

(d) provide support and facilitate business visits and trade missions with the knowledge and support of the agencies involved;

(e) support the dialogue and exchange of experiences between the respective communities of business persons of the Parties;

(f) establish and develop mechanisms to deliver information and identify opportunities for business cooperation, trade in goods and services, investment, and government purchases;

(g) stimulate and facilitate the actions of the public and private sectors in areas of economic interest, including the exploration of opportunities in third markets;

(h) promote tourism, especially through the joint promotion of regional integrated circuits that offer services to third countries and/or through reciprocal technical assistance; and

(i) promote business development with special emphasis on small and medium-sized enterprises.

Article 19.4: Cooperation in Innovation, Research and Development

1. The objectives of cooperation in the fields of innovation, research and development, with special reference to science and technology, will be:

(a) encourage, where appropriate, government agencies, research institutions, universities, private companies and other research organizations in the respective countries to establish direct agreements to develop cooperative activities, joint programs and projects within the framework of this Agreement; and

(b) focus cooperation activities on sectors where there are mutual and complementary interests.

2. In order to achieve the objectives indicated in paragraph 1, the Parties shall encourage and facilitate, as appropriate, the following activities including, but not limited to:

(a) promote, in consultation with universities and research centers, the development of strategic alliances that encourage joint postgraduate studies and research visits;

(b) the exchange of scientists, researchers and technical experts;

(c) the exchange of information and documentation;

(d) the promotion of the association between the public, private and academic sectors to support the development of innovative goods and services; and

(e) support the development of networks that lead to joint projects and technology-based businesses that incorporate the Parties, as well as third countries.

Article 19.5: Energy Cooperation

1. The objective of cooperation in the energy field will be to deepen the integration, complementation and energy development in the areas of electricity, geothermal, hydrocarbons and their derivatives, and alternative fuels.

2. To achieve the objectives indicated in paragraph 1, the Parties will carry out the following joint activities, which will be carried out through the competent authorities in energy matters, including, but not limited to:

(a) exchange of experts;

(b) training and formation;

(c) studies; and

(d) project development.

(e) promotion and facilitation of agreements that can be made at the business level for the commercial exchange of energy and investments in the energy sector in the Parties.

3. The Parties establish the Binational Technical Committee on energy, whose function will be to design, supervise, coordinate and evaluate the performance of cooperation activities on energy, whose decisions must be reported to the Commission.

4. The Binational Technical Committee on energy matters is made up of:

(a) in the case of Chile, the National Energy Commission and the General Directorate of International Economic Relations; and

(b) in the case of Colombia, the Ministry of Mines and Energy and the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism.

5. The resources to finance the expenses generated by the cooperation covered by this Article, will come from the competent authority in energy matters interested in receiving said cooperation, or in equal parts if they are topics of common interest. The Parties may agree on other modalities in specific cases.

Article 19.6: Mechanisms for Cooperation

1. To carry out the cooperation provided for in this Chapter, the Parties agree to extend the competence of the mechanisms created in the Basic Cooperation Agreement to the objectives and activities provided for in it.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, future inter-institutional agreements complementary to the Basic Cooperation Agreement on specific matters remain in force and may be agreed upon, in coordination with the respective public agencies.

Article 19.7: Cooperation with non-Party countries

The Parties agree to promote, where appropriate, projects of mutual interest, towards countries that are not part of this Agreement.

Article 19.8: Resources

With a view to contributing to the fulfillment of the cooperation objectives established in this Agreement, the Parties undertake to provide, within the limits of their own capacities and through their own channels, the appropriate resources, including both human and financial resources. These resources may be provided by international agencies or third countries.

Article 19.9: Institutional Aspects:

1. The Parties agree to extend the competence granted to the Mixed Commission with the following functions:

(a) supervise the implementation of the cooperation framework agreed in this Agreement by the Parties;

(b) make recommendations about the cooperative activities included in this Chapter, in accordance with the strategic priorities of the Parties. For this purpose, it will be advised by specialists in the respective areas and topics and may form permanent or ad hoc subcommittees;

(c) inform the Commission of their agreements, as well as the results of their work and deliberations within the framework of this Agreement, and of the specific cooperation activities carried out under this Agreement;

(d) review, through regular reports from each Party, the operation of this Chapter and the application and fulfillment of its objectives.

2. For the purposes of implementing this Chapter, the Mixed Commission may include among its members representatives of the General Directorate of International Economic Relations of Chile and the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism of Colombia or of the institutions that act as such. .

Article 19.10: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

competent authorities in energy matters , means:

(a) in the case of Chile, the National Energy Commission; and

(b) in the case of Colombia, the Ministry of Mines and Energy.

Mixed Commission means the Mixed Commission mentioned in Article VI of the Basic Cooperation Agreement;

Basic Cooperation Agreement means the Basic Technical and Scientific Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Chile, signed on July 16, 1991;

Chapter 20

General disposition

Article 20.1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

The annexes, appendices and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.

Article 20.2: Relationship with other International Agreements

The Parties confirm the existing rights and obligations between them in accordance with the WTO Agreement, the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, and other international agreements to which both Parties are party.

Article 20.3: Succession of Agreements

Any reference to any other international agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms as to a successor agreement to which the Parties are party.

Article 20.4: Scope of Obligations

The Parties will guarantee the adoption of all necessary measures to give effect to the provisions of this Agreement in their respective territories.

Article 20.5: Disclosure of Information

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to disclose or permit access to information the disclosure of which may be:

(a) contrary to the public interest in accordance with its law;

(b) contrary to its laws including, but not limited to, the protection of privacy or financial affairs and individual customer accounts of financial institutions;

(c) constitutes an obstacle to compliance with the laws; either

(d) that may harm the legitimate commercial interests of public or private companies in accordance with their internal legislation.

Article 20.6: Confidentiality

When a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and indicates that this information is confidential, the other Party must maintain the confidentiality of said information, in accordance with its domestic legislation. This information will only be used for the specific purposes indicated, and may not be disclosed without the express authorization of the Party providing the information, unless said information must be disclosed in the context of a legal proceeding.

Article 20.7: Anti-corruption

Declaration of Principles

1. The Parties affirm their commitment to prevent and combat corruption, including bribery, in international trade and investment.

2. The Parties undertake to promote, facilitate and support international cooperation in the prevention and fight against corruption.

Cooperation in International Forums

3. The Parties recognize the importance of regional and multilateral initiatives to prevent and combat corruption, including bribery, in international trade and investment. The Parties will work together to promote and support appropriate initiatives in the relevant international fora.

4. The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations under the 1996 Inter-American Convention against Corruption and will work to implement measures to prevent and combat corruption in a manner consistent with the 2003 United Nations Convention against Corruption .

Article 20.8: Activities supported by capital or assets of illicit origin

The Parties undertake to combat activities based on capital or assets of illicit origin, avoiding extending protection to foreign investments related to such activities.

Chapter 21

exceptions

Article 21.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapters 3 to 7 (Trade in Goods, Regime of Origin, Trade Facilitation, Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and Technical Barriers to Trade) and the Liberation Program, according to Article 22.3.3 (Validity), Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis . The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX (b) of the GATT 1994 include the environmental measures necessary to protect the health and life of people and animals or to preserve plants, and that Article XX (g) of the GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources.

2. For the purposes of Chapters 10 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), GATS Article XIV (including its footnotes) is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement1 . The Parties understand that the measures referred to in GATS Article XIV (b) include environmental measures necessary to protect human and animal life and health or to preserve plants.

Article 21.2: Essential Security

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) require a Party to provide information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;

(b) prevent a Party from taking measures it deems necessary for the protection of its essential security interests

(i) related to the trafficking of arms, ammunition and instruments of war, and the trafficking of other goods and materials of this type or related to the provision of services, carried out directly or indirectly with the purpose of supplying or supplying a military establishment,

(ii) taken in time of war or other emergencies in international relations,

(iii) relating to fissionable or fusionable materials or those from which they are derived; either

(c) prevent a Party from taking action in pursuance of its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Article 21.3: Public Order

For greater certainty, the Parties understand that nothing in the provisions of this Agreement shall be interpreted in the sense of preventing a Party from adopting or maintaining measures with respect to natural persons of the other Party aimed at preserving public order,2 . provided that the indicated measure is not applied in a way that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination.

Article 21.4: Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party arising from any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any of these agreements, the agreement will control to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax agreement signed between the Parties, the competent authorities in accordance with said agreement, will have the exclusive responsibility of determining if there is any incompatibility between this Agreement and that agreement.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 3.1 (National Treatment), and those other provisions of this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same extent as Article III of the GATT 1994; and

(b) Article 3.2 (Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 10.2 (National Treatment) shall apply to tax measures on income, capital gains, or on the taxable capital of companies referring to the acquisition or consumption of specific services, except that nothing provided in this literal will prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt of an advantage or that it continues to be received regarding the acquisition or consumption of specific services, to the requirement of supplying the service in its territory; and

(b) Articles 9.2 (National Treatment) and 9.3 (Most Favored Nation Treatment), Articles 10.2 (National Treatment) and 10.3 (Most Favored Nation Treatment) shall apply to all tax measures, except those on income , capital gains, or on the taxable capital of companies, taxes on wealth, inheritance, donations, and transfers with skipping generations ( generation-skipping transfers ),

none of the articles cited in subparagraphs (a) and (b), apply:

(c) to any most-favored-nation obligation in respect of benefits granted by a Party under a tax treaty;

(d) to any non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure;

(e) to the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure;

(f) to an amendment to a non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure, as long as that amendment does not reduce, at the time of effecting it, its degree of conformity with any of those articles;

(g) to the adoption or imposition of a tax measure aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective application or collection of taxes (as permitted under GATS Article XIV(d)); either

(h) to a provision that conditions the obtaining of an advantage or the continued obtaining of the same, in relation to contributions to, or income from, plans or pension funds, provided that the Party maintains permanent jurisdiction over the plan or pension funds.

5. Subject to paragraph 2 and without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under paragraph 3, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Article 9.6 (Performance Requirements), shall apply to tax measures .

6. Articles 9.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) and 9.16 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) shall apply to a tax measure that is alleged to be expropriatory. However, no investor may invoke Article 9.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) as the basis of a claim, when it has been determined in accordance with this paragraph that the measure does not constitute an expropriation. An investor who intends to invoke Article 9.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) with respect to a tax measure, must first submit the matter to the competent authorities indicated in Annex 21.4, at the time of making the notice of intent pursuant to Article 9.16 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), for said authorities to determine whether the measure constitutes an expropriation. If the competent authorities do not agree to examine the matter or if, having agreed to examine it, they do not agree that the measure does not constitute an expropriation, within a period of six (6) months after the matter has been submitted to them, the investor may submit your claim to arbitration, in accordance with Article 9.16 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).

Article 21.5: Difficulties in the balance of payments

1. If a Party experiences serious external balance of payments and financial difficulties or the threat thereof, or is at risk of experiencing them, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures with respect to trade in goods and services and with respect to payments and movements of capital, including those related to investment.

2. The Parties shall endeavor to avoid the application of the restrictive measures referred to in paragraph 1.

3. Restrictive measures adopted or maintained under this Article shall be non-discriminatory and of limited duration and shall not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments and external financial situation. They must be in accordance with the conditions established in the Agreements on the WTO and coherent with the articles of the Agreement or Constitutive Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, as appropriate.

Article 21.6: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

tax treaty means an international double taxation avoidance treaty or other international taxation treaty or arrangement; and

Taxes and tax measures does not include:

(a) liens;

(b) antidumping or countervailing duties; neither

(c) duties or other charges related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered.

Annex 21.4

Competent Authorities

For purposes of Article 21.4

competent authorities means:

(a) in the case of Chile,
the Director of the Internal Revenue Service, Ministry of Finance, and

(b) in the case of Colombia,
the Technical Vice Ministry of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit

Chapter 22

Final Provisions

Article 22.1: Amendments, Modifications and Additions

1. The Parties may agree to any amendment, modification or addition to this Agreement.

2. The previously agreed and approved amendments, modifications and additions in accordance with the corresponding legal procedures of each Party shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 22.2: Amendment to the WTO Agreement

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into this Agreement is amended, the Parties will consult as to whether to amend this Agreement.

Article 22.3: Validity

1. The entry into force of this Agreement is subject to the conclusion of the necessary internal legal procedures of each Party.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force sixty (60) days after the date on which the Parties exchange written notifications indicating that the aforementioned procedures have been completed or in such other period as the Parties agree.

3. The Parties will be governed by this Free Trade Agreement, which constitutes an additional protocol to ACE 24, keeping only the following articles, protocols and annexes in force.1 :

(a) Articles 3 to 6 of Chapter II (Release Schedule) and Article 10;

(b) Annexes 1 to 5;

(c) the protocols: First Additional Protocol; Second Additional Protocol; Third Additional Protocol; Fourth Additional Protocol, except for the third Article (certification of origin form);

Fifth Additional Protocol; Sixth Additional Protocol and Seventh Additional Protocol; and

(e) Resolution 06/2006, which appears as Annex I to the Minutes of the IV Extraordinary Meeting of the Administrative Commission of ACE 24.

4. Regarding Chapter 4 (Regime of Origin), importers may request the application of ACE 24, for a period of thirty (30) days, counted from the entry into force of this Agreement. For these purposes, the certificates of origin issued in accordance with ACE 24, must have been filled out prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, be in force and be enforced for up to the indicated period.

Article 22.4: Provisional Application

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 22.3, Colombia may provisionally apply this Agreement before its final entry into force. The provisional application will also cease when Colombia notifies Chile of its intention not to become a Party to the Agreement, or its intention to suspend the provisional application.

Article 22.5: Complaint

1. Either Party may terminate this Agreement by giving written notice to the other Party. Termination of this Agreement shall take effect one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of such notification.

2. The rights and obligations derived from Chapter 9 (Investments) will remain in force for an additional period of ten (10) years counted from the date of the notification of the denunciation of the Agreement for the covered investments.

Article 22.6: Accession

1. In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement is open to accession, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries.

2. The adhesion will be formalized once its terms have been negotiated between the Parties and the adhering country, through the execution of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement that will enter into force thirty (30) days after being deposited in the General Secretariat of ALADI.

Article 22.7: Convergence

The Parties will promote the convergence of this Agreement with other integration agreements of the Latin American countries, in accordance with the mechanisms established in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty.

Article 22.8: Future Negotiations

Tourism

1. The Parties agree to sign an agreement between the respective competent bodies of the tourism sector, in order to develop joint cooperation and technical assistance activities.

Financial services

2. The Parties will meet no later than two (2) years after the entry into force of this Agreement, to negotiate a chapter on financial services on a mutually convenient basis. For this purpose, the competent authorities will previously carry out the corresponding coordination.

Telecommunications

3. The Parties undertake that in a period not exceeding six (6) months after the entry into force of this Agreement, they will initiate contacts to negotiate a chapter on telecommunications services on a mutually convenient basis, which will be determined by the competent authorities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement in two equally authentic copies.

DONE in Santiago, Chile, on the twenty-seventh day of November 2006.

 

 

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE:

 

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA: