AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN SERVICES
BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC
OF CHINA
AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
PAKISTAN 

Preamble
The Government of the People’s Republic of China (“China”) and the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“Pakistan”) hereinafter
referred to collectively as “the Parties” and individually as “a Party”.
Committed to strengthening the all-weather friendship between the
Parties;
Recalling the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the
People’s Republic of China and the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan (“the Free Trade Agreement”) signed between the Parties in
the witness of the Presidents of China and Pakistan in Islamabad on the
twenty- fourth day of November two thousand and six;
Recalling Article 83 of the Free Trade Agreement which writes “ Unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties, they shall negotiate trade in services
after the conclusion of the negotiations of this Agreement” so as to
progressively liberalize and eliminate substantially all discrimination and
/or prohibition of new or more discriminatory measures with respect to
trade in services between the Parties;
Resolved to enhance co-operation in trade in services between the Parties
to improve efficiency and competitiveness, as well as to diversify the
supply and distribution of services of the respective service suppliers of
the Parties;
Recognizing the right of the Parties to regulate, and to introduce new
regulations, on the supply of services in the territories of the Parties in
order to meet national policy objectives;
 2

Have agreed as follows:
Part I DEFINITIONS AND SCOPE
Article 1 Definitions
“GATS” means the General Agreement on Trade in Services;
"measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other
form;
“person” means a natural or a juridical person;
“juridical person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and
whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any
corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or
association;1
“juridical person of another Party” means a juridical person which is
either:
(i) constituted or otherwise organised under the law of the country
of that other Party, and is engaged in substantive business
operations in the territory of the country of that Party; or

1 In order to prevent the possibility of companies of a third party unduly benefiting from this Agreement,
companies of a third party registered in the territory of the country of the other Party, their offices, liaison offices,
“shell companies” and “mail box companies” are not service suppliers of the other Party under this Agreement.
 3

(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial
presence, owned or controlled by:
(a) natural persons of the country of that Party; or
(b) juridical persons of the country of that other Party
identified under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph;
a juridical person is;
(i) “owned” by persons of the country of a Party if more than 50
per cent of the equity interest in it is beneficially owned by
persons of that country;
(ii) “controlled” by persons of the country of a Party if such
persons have the power to name a majority of its directors or
otherwise to legally direct its actions; and
(iii) “affiliated” with another person when it controls, or is
controlled by, that other person, or when it and the other
person are both controlled by the same person;
"supply of a service" includes the production, distribution, marketing,
sale and delivery of a service;
"commercial presence" means any type of business or professional
establishment, including, inter alia, through the constitution, acquisition
or maintenance of a juridical person, as well as branches or
representative offices within the territory of a Party for the purpose of
supplying a service;
 4

"natural person of a Party" means a natural person who resides in the
territory of a Party, and who under the law of that Party is a national of
that Party;
"services" means any service in any sector except services supplied in
the exercise of governmental authority;
"service supplier" means any person that supplies a service;
“trade in services” is defined as the supply of a service
(i) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other
Party (“cross-border”);
(ii) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the
other Party (“consumption abroad”);
(iii) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial
presence in the territory of the other Party (“commercial
presence”);
(iv) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural
persons of a Party in the territory of the other Party
(“presence of natural persons”);
Article 2 Scope and Coverage
1. This Agreement applies to measures by the Parties affecting trade in
services.
2. This Agreement shall not apply to:
 5

(a) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority
within the territory of each Party;
(b) regulations or requirements governing the procurement by
governmental agencies of services purchased for
governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial
resale or with a view to use in the supply of services for
commercial sale.

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party;
(d) in respect of air transport services, traffic rights, however
granted, or services directly related to the exercise of traffic
rights, except measures affecting:
i) aircraft repair and maintenance services
ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services; and
iii) computer reservation system services
(e) cabotage in maritime transport services; and
(f) measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the
employment market of a Party, or measures regarding
citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from applying
measures to regulate the entry of natural persons of the country of the
other Party into, or their temporary stay in, its country’s territory,
including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to
ensure the orderly movement of natural persons across its borders,
provided that such measures are not applied in such a manner as to
nullify or impair the benefits accruing to the other Party under the terms
of this Agreement.
 6

4. Article 53 (Settlement of Disputes between the Parties) of the Free
Trade Agreement shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to measures affecting the
supply of service by a service supplier of the country of a Party through
commercial presence in the territory of the other Party, in sectors which
are scheduled in a Party’s Schedule of Specific Commitments in Annex I
to this Agreement.
Part II OBLIGATIONS AND DISCIPLINES
Article 3 Transparency
Article III of the GATS is, mutatis mutandis, incorporated into and shall
form an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 4 Disclosure of Confidential Information
Article III bis of the GATS is, mutatis mutandis, incorporated into and
shall form an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 5 Domestic Regulation
1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party
shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade in
services:
(a) are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial
manner;
(b) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as
competence and the ability to supply the service;
 7

(c) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of
the service;
(d) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a
restriction on the supply of the service.
2. The disciplines of paragraph 1 may be reviewed, in order to take
into account the disciplines agreed under Article VI of the GATS, with a
view to their incorporation into this Agreement.
3. Where authorization is required for the supply of a service on which
a specific commitment has been made, the competent authorities of a
Party shall, within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an
application considered complete under its domestic laws and regulations,
inform the applicant of the decision concerning the application. At the
request of the applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall
provide, without undue delay, information concerning the status of the
application.
4. The Parties shall consult periodically with a view to determining the
feasibility of removing any remaining citizenship requirement for the
licensing or certification of each other's service suppliers.
Article 6 Mutual Recognition
1. A Party may recognise the education or experience obtained,
requirements met, or licences or certification granted in the country of
the other Party for purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of its
standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing, or certification of
service suppliers of the other Party.
 8

2. Recognition referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, which may be
achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon an
agreement or arrangement between the Parties or may be accorded
unilaterally.
3. Both Parties shall facilitate development of mutual recognition
arrangements among professional or regulatory bodies through
facilitating discussion among these bodies and exchange of information
on focal points to be appointed by both Parties.
Article 7 Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers
1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in
its country’s territory does not, in the supply of the monopoly service in
the relevant market, act in a manner inconsistent with the Party’s
commitments under this Agreement.
2. Where a Party’s monopoly supplier competes, either directly or
through an affiliated company, in the supply of a service outside the
scope of its monopoly rights and which is subject to that Party’s specific
commitments, the Party shall ensure that such a supplier does not abuse
its monopoly position to act in its country’s territory in a manner
inconsistent with such commitments.
3. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive
service suppliers, where a Party, formally or in effect:
(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service
suppliers; and
(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in
its country’s territory.
 9

Article 8 Business Practices
1. The Parties recognise that certain business practices of services
suppliers, other than those falling under Article 7 (Monopolies and
Exclusive Service Suppliers), may restrain competition and thereby
restrict trade in services.
2. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, enter into
consultations with a view to eliminating practices referred to in
paragraph 1 of this Article. The Party addressed shall accord full and
sympathetic consideration to such a request and shall cooperate through
the supply of publicly available non-confidential information of
relevance to the matter in question. The Party addressed shall also
provide other information available to the other Party, subject to its
domestic law and to the conclusion of satisfactory agreement concerning
the safeguarding of its confidentiality by the requesting Party.
Article 9 Emergency Safeguards Measures

1. The Parties note that the multilateral negotiations pursuant to Article
X of the GATS on the question of emergency safeguard measures are
based on the principle of non-discrimination. Upon the conclusion of
such multilateral negotiations, the Parties shall conduct a review for the
purpose of discussing appropriate amendments to this Agreement so as to
incorporate the results of such multilateral negotiations.
2. In the event that the implementation of this Agreement causes
substantial adverse impact to a service sector of a Party before the
conclusion of the multilateral negotiations referred to in paragraph 1 of
this Article, the affected Party may request for consultations with the
other Party for the purposes of discussing any measure with respect to the
affected service sector. Any measure taken pursuant to this paragraph
 10

shall be mutually agreed by the Parties concerned. The Parties concerned
shall take into account the circumstances of the particular case and give
sympathetic consideration to the Party seeking to take a measure.

Article 10 Payments and Transfers
1. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 11
(Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments), a Party shall not
apply restrictions on international transfers and payments for current
transactions relating to trade in services.
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of
the Parties as members of the International Monetary Fund (hereinafter
referred to in this Article as “the Fund”) under the Articles of Agreement
of the International Monetary Fund, as may be amended, including the
use of exchange actions which are in conformity with the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, provided that a Party
shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions inconsistently
with its commitments under this Agreement regarding such transactions,
except under Article 11, or at the request of the Fund.
Article 11 Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
Where a Party is in serious balance of payments and external financial
difficulties or threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain restrictions on
trade in services in accordance with Article XII of the GATS.
Article 12 General Exceptions and Security Related
Article XIV and XIV bis of the GATS, including any footnotes, are
incorporated into and shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
 11

Article 13 Cooperation
The Parties shall strengthen cooperation efforts in services sectors,
including sectors which are not covered by existing cooperation
arrangements. The Parties shall discuss and mutually agree on the sectors
for cooperation and develop cooperation programmes in these sectors in
order to improve their domestic capacities, efficiencies and
competitiveness.
Part III Specific Commitments
Article 14 Market Access
1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified
in Article 1, a Party shall accord services and service suppliers of the
other Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the
terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its Schedule.
2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the
measures which a Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of
a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory2 3 , unless
otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined as:
(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the
form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service
suppliers or the requirements of an economic needs test;
(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in
the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test;

2 The “territory” shall have the same meaning as Article 4 and Article 5 of the Free Trade Agreement
 12

(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the
total quantity of service output expressed in terms of
designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test;
(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a particular service sector or that a service
supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and directly
related to, the supply of a specific service in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity
or joint venture through which a service supplier may supply a
service; and
(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
Article 15 National Treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule, and subject to any conditions
and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and
service suppliers of any other Party, in respect of all measures affecting
the supply of services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to
its own like services and service suppliers.
2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 of this Article by
according to services and service suppliers of the other Party, either
formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to that it
accords to its own like services and service suppliers.
 13

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered
to be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in
favour of services or service suppliers of the Party compared to like
services or service suppliers of any other Party.
4. Commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to
require either Party to compensate for any inherent competitive
disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant
services or service suppliers.
Article 16 Additional Commitments
The Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures
affecting trade in services not subject to scheduling under Articles 14
(Market Access) and 15 (National Treatment) including those regarding
qualifications, standards or licensing matters. Such commitments shall
be inscribed in a Party’s Schedule.
Article 17 Schedule of Specific Commitments
1. The specific commitments undertaken by each Party under Article
14 (Market Access), Articles 15 (National Treatment), and Article 16
(Additional Commitments) are set out in the schedule included in Annex
I. With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each
Schedule specifies:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments; and
 14

(d) where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such
commitments and the date of entry into force of such
commitments.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Article 14(Market Access) and
Article 15 (National Treatment) shall be inscribed in both the columns
relating to Articles 14 and 15.
3. The Parties’ schedules of specific commitments shall be annexed to
this Agreement upon completion of the negotiations and shall form an
integral part thereof.
Part IV OTHER PROVISIONS
Article 18 Contact Point
1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate
communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this
Agreement, including the exchange of information relevant to the
implementation and operation of this Agreement.
2. At the request of any Party, the contact point of the requested Party
shall identify the office or official responsible for the matter and assist in
facilitating communication with the requesting Party.
Article 19 Review
1. Three years after the entry into force of this Agreement and in pursuit
of the objectives and purposes of this Agreement, the Free Trade
Commission may review this Agreement, taking into account the
developments and regulations on trade in services of the Parties as well
 15

as the progress made at the World Trade Organization and other
Specialized Forums.
2. At the request of the other Party, both Parties may review and modify
the Agreement when necessary.
Article 20 Committee on Trade in Services
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of
this Agreement, the Committee on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred
to in this Article as “the Committee”) shall be established.
2. The Committee shall perform the following functions:
(a) reviewing commitments, with respect to measures affecting
trade in services in this Agreement, with a view to achieving
further liberalisation on a mutually advantageous basis and
securing an overall balance of rights and obligations;
(b) reviewing the implementation and operation of this
Agreement;
(c) reviewing and discussing issues concerning the effective
implementation of Articles 6 (Mutual Recognition) and 9
(Emergency Safeguard Measures);
(d) reporting the outcome of discussions of the Committee to
the Free Trade Commission; and
(e) carrying out any other functions as may be delegated by the
Free Trade Commission in accordance with Article 75 (Free
Trade Commission) of the Free Trade Agreement.
 16

3. The Committee shall be:
(a) composed of representatives of the Parties;
(b) co-chaired by officials of the Parties.
4. The Committee shall hold its inaugural meeting within one year of
the entry into force of this Agreement. Subsequent meetings shall be held
at such venues and times as the Parties may mutually agree.
5. The Committee may establish working groups to address specific
issues.
Article 21 Amendments
This Agreement may be amended by agreement in writing by the Parties
and such amendments shall enter into force in accordance with the
provisions of Article 25.
Article 22 Miscellaneous Provisions
1. The GATS Annexes, namely: Annex on Movement of Natural
Persons Supplying Services, Annex on Air Transport Services, Annex on
Financial Services, and Annex on Telecommunications, unless otherwise
agreed by the Parties, shall apply to this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
2. This Agreement shall include (a) the Annexes and the contents
therein which shall form an integral part of this Agreement, and (b) all
future legal instruments agreed pursuant to this Agreement.
 17

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Agreement or
any action taken under it shall not affect or nullify the rights and
obligations of a Party under existing agreements to which it is a party.
Article 23 Dispute Settlement
For settlement of disputes, the provisions of Chapter X (Dispute
Settlement) of the Free Trade Agreement shall apply to this Agreement.
Article 24 Denial of benefits
1. Subject to prior notification and consultation, a Party may deny the
benefits of this Agreement to:
(a) service suppliers of the other Party where the service is
being supplied by a juridical person that is owned or
controlled by persons of a non-Party and the juridical
person has no substantial business activities in the territory
of the other Party, or
(b) service suppliers of the other Party where the service is
being supplied by a juridical person that is owned or
controlled by persons of the denying Party and the juridical
person has no substantial business activities in the territory
of the other Party.
2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Agreement to a service
supplier of the other Party where the Party establishes that the service is
being supplied by a juridical person that is owned or controlled by
persons of a non-Party, and that denying Party does not maintain
diplomatic relations with the non-Party.
 18

 19
Article 25 Entry into Force
The Parties shall notify each other the completion of the domestic legal
procedures necessary for the entry into force of this Agreement through
diplomatic channels in writing. This Agreement shall enter into force 30
days after the date of sending the latter notification.
 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly
authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.
 DONE at Wu Han，the twenty-first day of two thousand and
nine, in duplicate in Chinese and English languages, both texts being
equally authentic.
For and on behalf For and on behalf
of the Government of of the Government of
the People’s Republic of China the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
_______________________ _________________________