FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA AND

THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR, GUATEMALA AND HONDURAS

PREAMBLE

The Government of the Republic of El Salvador, the Government of the Republic of Guatemala, the Government of the Republic of Honduras and the Government of the Republic of Colombia resolved to:

STRENGTHEN regional economic integration, aware that it represents one of the essential instruments for Latin American countries to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples;

STRENGTHEN the traditional bonds of friendship and the spirit of cooperation between their peoples;

RECOGNIZE the strategic and geographical position of each nation in its respective regional market;

ACHIEVE a better balance in your business relationships;

CREATE a broader and more secure market for goods and services produced in their respective territories;

RECOGNIZE the differences in the levels of development and in the size of their economies and the need to create opportunities for economic development, through the special and differential treatment agreed upon by the Parties in this Treaty;

AVOID distortions in their reciprocal trade;

ESTABLISH clear and mutually beneficial rules for the commercial exchange of their goods and services, as well as for the promotion and protection of investments in their territories;

RESPECT their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO) , as well as other bilateral and multilateral cooperation instruments;

STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their companies in world markets;

CREATE employment opportunities and improve the living standards of their peoples in their respective territories;

PROMOTE economic development in a manner consistent with the protection and conservation of the environment, as well as sustainable development

PRESERVE its ability to safeguard public welfare and order;

PROMOTE the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening trade relations between their nations;

RECOGNIZE that the Republic of Colombia is a member of the Andean Community and that the Republic of El Salvador, the Republic of Guatemala and the Republic of Honduras are part of the Central American Integration System (SICA);

HAVE AGREED as follows:

PART ONE
GENERAL ASPECTS

CHAPTER 1

INITIAL PROVISIONS

Article 1.1: Establishment of a free trade zone

1. The Parties to this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services , establish a free trade area.

2. This Agreement does not apply between the Republic of El Salvador, the Republic of Guatemala and the Republic of Honduras.

Article 1.2: Goals

1. This Treaty has as objectives:

(a) promote the expansion and diversification of trade in goods and services between the Parties;

(b) eliminate barriers to trade and facilitate the cross-border movement of goods and services within the Free Trade Zone;

(c) promote conditions of fair competition for trade between the Parties;

(d) promote, protect and substantially increase investments in each Party;

(e) create effective procedures for the execution and fulfillment of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of controversies; and

(f) establish guidelines for bilateral cooperation aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the general principles of public international law.

Article 1.3: Relationship with other international agreements

1. The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them under the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which they are party.

2. It shall be understood that any reference in this Agreement to any other International Agreement, includes its modifications, amendments and Agreements that replace it, to which the Parties are parties.

3. If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall consult with a view to amending the corresponding provision of this Agreement, as appropriate, in accordance with Article 21.2 (Amendments).

Article 1.4: observance

Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional norms and other provisions of its internal legislation, the adoption of all necessary measures to comply with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory and at all levels of government.

 

EPISODE 2

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Article 2.1: General application definitions

For purposes of this Agreement, except as otherwise provided:

GATS Agreement means the General Agreement on Trade in Services which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, including its interpretative notes, which forms part of the WTO Agreement;

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization , dated April 15, 1994;

Agreement on Safeguards means the Agreement on Safeguards , which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

customs duty means any import tax or duty and any charge of any kind levied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge in respect of such importation, except:

(a) charges equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III (2) of the GATT 1994;

(b) the duties or other charge related to the importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered; either

(c) antidumping duties or countervailing measures that are applied consistently with the provisions of Chapter 8 (Antidumping Duties and Countervailing Measures) of this Agreement;

customs authority means the authority that, according to the respective laws of each Party, is responsible for administering and applying customs laws and regulations;

chapter means the first two digits of the Harmonized System;

Commission means the Administrative Commission of the Agreement established in accordance with Article 17.1 (Administrative Commission of the Agreement);

government procurement means the process by which a government obtains the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination thereof, for government purposes and not with a view to commercial sale or resale or with a view to use in the production or supply of merchandise or services for commercial sale or resale;

International Monetary Fund Agreement means the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund , effective December 27, 1945;

days means calendar days;

enterprise means any legal entity incorporated or organized under the applicable laws of a Party, whether or not for profit and whether privately or governmentally owned, including companies, partnerships, foundations, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, or other associations;

existing means in force as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

measure means any law, regulation, procedure, requirement, provision or practice;

merchandise means any article, material, matter, product or part;

originating good means a good that qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

MIPYMES means micro, small and medium enterprises;

national means a natural person of a Party under Annex 2.1, or a permanent resident of a Party;

WTO means the World Trade Organization, created by the Agreement on the WTO;

Party means a State that has consented to be bound by this Agreement and with respect to which the Agreement is in force;

heading means the first four digits of the Harmonized System;

person means a natural person or a company;

person of a Party means a national or company of a Party;

production means methods of obtaining goods including cultivation, harvesting, raising, birthing, hunting, gathering, fishing, trapping, trapping, mining, extracting, manufacturing, assembling or processing;

producer means a person who is involved in the production of a good in the territory of a Party;

Tariff Elimination Program means “Tariff Elimination Program”, as set forth in Annex 3.4 (Tariff Elimination Program);

Harmonized System means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System , including its general rules of interpretation and its section, chapter, heading, and subheading legal notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective customs legislation;

subheading means the first six digits of the Harmonized System;

territory means in accordance with its national legislation and international law, the terrestrial, maritime and air space of each Party, as well as its exclusive economic zone and its continental shelf, over which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction; and

Preferential tariff treatment means the application of the tariff rate corresponding to an originating good in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program, established in Article 3.4 (Tariff Elimination) of this Agreement.

ANNEX 2.01

Country Specific Definitions PDF

 

PART TWO TRADE IN GOODS

CHAPTER 3

NATIONAL TREATMENT AND ACCESS OF GOODS TO THE MARKET

Article 3.1: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

essential character of the merchandise means when a merchandise does not lose its original manufacturing characteristic, and it does not undergo any change that makes it a different or commercially different merchandise;

printed advertising materials means brochures, forms, loose sheets, trade catalogues, trade association directories, tourism promotion materials and posters, classified in Chapter 49 of the Harmonized System, used to promote, publish or advertise a good or service, originating from any of the Parties and distributed without charge;

goods admitted for sports purposes means sports equipment that is temporarily admitted for use in competitions, events or training in the territory of one of the Parties;

goods intended for exhibition or demonstration means goods temporarily entering the territory of a Party for the purpose of exhibition or demonstration. It includes its components, auxiliary devices and accessories;

remanufactured goods means refurbished, recovered goods or any other similar name given to goods that, after having been used, have undergone a process to restore their original characteristics or specifications, or to restore the functionality they had when new;

used goods means used goods that have not undergone any post-use processing;

samples of insignificant commercial value means commercial samples valued, individually or in the package sent, in no more than one dollar of the United States of America (US$1.00) or in the equivalent amount in the currency of another Party; or that are marked, torn, perforated, or otherwise treated in a way that renders them unfit for sale or for any use other than as samples; and

advertising films and recordings means visual communication media or recorded audio materials, consisting essentially of images and/or sounds that show the nature or operation of goods or services originating from any of the Parties, offered for sale or for rent by a person established or resident in the territory of either Party, provided that such materials are suitable for display to potential customers, but not for dissemination to the general public, and are imported in packages each containing no more than a copy of each film or recording, and that they are not part of a larger consignment.

Article 3.2: Scope of Application

Unless otherwise provided, this Chapter applies to trade in new originating goods between the Parties. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not apply to the trade in used or remanufactured merchandise.

 

Section I- National Treatment

Article 3.3: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant National Treatment to the goods of another Party, in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to that end Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement. and are an integral part of it.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 referring to National Treatment mean, with respect to a Party, including its departments or municipalities, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that said Party, including its departments or municipalities, grants to any goods of origin domestic, directly competitive or substitutable.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the measures indicated in Annex 3.3.

 

Section II _ _- Customs Tariff Reduction Program

 

Article 3.4: Tariff Reduction

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its tariffs for originating goods, in accordance with its Tariff Elimination Program established in Annex 3.4.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase an existing customs duty or adopt a new customs duty on originating goods.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 are not intended to prevent a Party from breaking down a tariff item, as long as the customs duty applicable to new tariff openings is not greater than the tariff applied to the tariff item before it was broken down.

4. At the request of any Party, the requesting Party and one or more of the Parties shall consult through the Market Access Committee to examine the possibility of accelerating or improving the tariff treatment provided for in Annex 3.4. An agreement between the Parties on the tariff treatment of a good will prevail over any customs duty or preference provided for in the reduction programs for that good once approved by the Parties, in accordance with the applicable legal procedures.

5. For greater certainty, a Party may:

(a) following a unilateral reduction, increase a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule to Annex 3.4; either

(b) maintain or increase a customs duty when authorized by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO or the Dispute Settlement Mechanism of Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement).

6. The Parties agree to fix the customs tariffs for merchandise of the Tariff Elimination Program only in ad-valorem terms .

7. In merchandise trade between the Parties, the classification of merchandise will be governed by the nomenclature of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and its future updates, which will not modify the scope and access conditions negotiated.

8. In case of inconsistencies between the provisions of this Agreement and the Decree for its implementation, this Agreement shall prevail.

 

Section III _ _- Special Regimes

 

Article 3.5: Temporary admission of goods

1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary admission free of customs duties for the following goods, regardless of their origin:

(a) professional equipment, including press and television equipment, computer programs, and broadcasting and cinematographic equipment, necessary for the exercise of the business activity, trade, or profession of the business person who qualifies for temporary entry in accordance with the legislation of the importing Party;

(b) merchandise intended for display or demonstration;

(c) commercial samples, advertising films and recordings; and

(d) merchandise admitted for sporting purposes.

2. Each Party, upon request of the person concerned and for reasons that its customs authority considers valid, shall extend the term for temporary admission beyond the period initially set, in accordance with its national legislation.

3. Neither Party shall condition the temporary admission free of customs duties to a good indicated in paragraph 1, to conditions other than that the good:

(a) is used solely by or under the personal supervision of a national or resident of another Party in the exercise of that person's business, trade, professional or sporting activity;

(b) is not sold or leased while in its territory;

(c) is accompanied by a bond or guarantee for an amount not to exceed the charges that would be owed in your case for final entry or importation, refundable at the time of your departure;

(d) is identifiable at the time of departure;

(e) is re-exported upon the departure of the person referred to in subparagraph (a) or within a period corresponding to the purpose of temporary admission that the Party may establish or within one (1) year unless extended based on as established in their national legislation;

(f) is admitted in quantities no greater than what is reasonable for the intended use; and

(g) is otherwise admissible into the Party's territory under its law.

4. If any of the conditions imposed by a Party under paragraph 3 have not been met, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charges that would normally be due for the good plus any other charges or penalties established under its law. .

5. Each Party shall allow a good temporarily admitted under this Article to be re-exported by a customs office other than the customs office through which it was admitted.

6. Each Party shall provide that its customs authority or other competent authority exempts the importer or other person responsible for a good admitted in accordance with this Article, from any responsibility for the impossibility of re-exporting the good upon presenting satisfactory evidence to the customs authority of the importing Party that the merchandise has been destroyed in accordance with the national legislation of each Party, within the original term set for temporary admission or any lawful extension.

7. Subject to Chapters 12 (Investment) and 13 (Cross-Border Trade in Services):

(a) each Party shall permit a vehicle or container used in international transportation that has entered its territory from the other Party to leave its territory by any route that is reasonably related to the prompt and economic departure of such vehicle or container;

(b) no Party shall require a bond or impose any sanction or charge, solely because the port of entry of the vehicle or container is different from that of exit;

(c) neither Party shall condition the release of any obligation, including any bond, that it has applied to the entry of a vehicle or container into its territory, on its departure through a particular port; and

(d) no Party shall require that the vehicle or carrier that brings a container into its territory from the territory of another Party be the same vehicle or carrier that brings it into the territory of another Party.

8. For purposes of paragraph 7, vehicle means a truck, truck tractor, boxcar, tractor, trailer or trailer unit, locomotive or wagon, or other railroad equipment.

9. Each Party shall adopt procedures that facilitate expedited clearance of the goods admitted under this Article. To the extent possible, where such merchandise is accompanying a national or resident of another Party who is applying for temporary entry, those procedures shall allow the merchandise to be cleared simultaneously with the entry of that national or resident.

Article 3.6: Duty Free Import for Commercial Samples of Negligible Value and Printed Advertising Materials

1. Each Party shall authorize the importation free of customs duty of commercial samples of insignificant value and printed advertising materials imported from the territory of another Party, regardless of their origin, but may require that:

(a) such samples are imported only for the purpose of soliciting orders for goods or services from the territory of another Party or of another non-Party; either

(b) Such advertising materials are imported in packages containing no more than one copy of each form and neither the materials nor the packages are part of a larger consignment.

 

Section IV - Non-Tariff Measures

 

Article 3.7: Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the import of any good of another Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of another Party, except as provided in Article Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, and for this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis .

2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, in any circumstance in which any other type of restriction is prohibited, that a Party adopt or maintain in reciprocal trade:

(a) export and import price requirements, except as permitted for the enforcement of antidumping and countervailing duty provisions and commitments;

(b) granting of import licenses except as provided in the Schedule of a Party to Annex 3.3;

(c) voluntary export restrictions inconsistent with Article VI of the GATT 1994, as applied under Article 18 of the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and Article 8 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture ; either

(d) minimum, estimated, indicative, reference prices or any other appraisal price, in cases where these prices replace the transaction value of the goods.

3. No Party shall require, as a condition or commitment to import a good, that a person of another Party establish or maintain a contractual or other type of relationship with a distributor in its territory.

4. Nothing in the preceding paragraph prevents a Party from requiring the appointment of an agent, for the purpose of facilitating communications between the regulatory authorities of the Party and a person of the other Party.

5. For the purposes of paragraph 3, distributor means an individual, natural or legal person of a Party that is responsible for the commercial distribution, agency, concession or representation in the territory of that Party, of goods of another Party.

6. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 3.3.

Article 3.8: Customs Valuation

The Customs Valuation Agreement and any successive agreement shall regulate the customs valuation standards applied by the Parties to reciprocal trade.

Article 3.9: Import Licenses

1. Neither Party shall maintain or adopt any measure that is inconsistent with the WTO Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures (WTO Import Licensing Agreement).

2. After the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall promptly notify the other Parties of any existing import licensing procedures and subsequently, shall notify the other Parties of any new import licensing procedures and any modifications to their procedures. of existing import licenses within the sixty (60) days prior to their validity. A notification established under this Article:

(a) include the information established in Article 5 of the WTO Import Licensing Agreement; and

(b) shall not prejudge whether the import licensing procedure is compatible with this Agreement.

3. No Party shall apply an import licensing procedure to a good of another Party without having provided a notification in accordance with paragraph 2.

Article 3.10: Charges and Administrative Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII.1 of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, that all fees and charges of whatever nature (other than customs duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charges applied in accordance with Article III.2 of the GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and countervailing duties) imposed on or in connection with imports or exports, are limited to the approximate cost of the services rendered and do not represent indirect protection to national merchandise nor a tax on imports or exports for tax purposes.

2. No Party shall require consular transactions, including related fees and charges, in connection with the importation of any good of another Party.

3. Each Party shall make available and maintain, via the Internet, an up-to-date list of fees or charges imposed in connection with imports or exports.

Article 3.11: Export Taxes

Except as provided in Annex 3.3, no Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, levy or charge on the export of goods to the territory of another Party.

Article 3.12: Distinctive Products

At the request of a Party, the Committee on Trade in Goods will consider the possibility of amending the Agreement to designate a good as a distinctive product.

 

Section V - Agriculture

 

Article 3.13: Definitions

For purposes of this Section:

agricultural products include those goods included in Annex 1 of Article 2 of the Agreement on Agriculture of the WTO ; and

export subsidies for agricultural products means those included in the WTO Agreement on Agriculture , including any subsequent amendments.

Article 3.14: Scope of Application

This Section applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Parties in relation to reciprocal trade in agricultural products.

Article 3.15: Subsidies for the Export of Agricultural Products

1. The Parties share the objective of achieving the multilateral elimination of export subsidies on agricultural products. In this sense, they will cooperate in the effort to reach an agreement within the framework of the WTO Agreements.

2. The Parties agree not to maintain, reintroduce or introduce export subsidies on agricultural products in their reciprocal trade, from the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 3.16: Administration and Implementation of Tariff Quotas

1. Tariff quotas for agricultural products will be administered in accordance with Article XIII of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes and the WTO Import Licensing Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure that:

(a) unless otherwise provided, the procedures for administering TRQs are transparent, made publicly available in a timely, non-discriminatory and market-based manner, and involve a minimum burden on trade;

(b) any natural or legal person of a Party that meets the legal and administrative requirements of that Party shall be eligible to apply for and be considered for allocation of a quota quantity within the Party's TRQs;

(c) only the government authorities and their related entities administer their tariff quotas and, in this sense, that the government authorities do not delegate the administration of their tariff quotas to groups of producers or other non-governmental organizations; and

(d) allocate in-quota quantities, in commercially viable shipping quantities and, to the extent possible, in amounts requested by importers.

3. Each Party shall administer its TRQs in a manner that allows importers to make full use of them.

4. No Party may condition the application for or use of a quota quantity within a TRQ on the re-export of an agricultural product.

5. At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall report on the administration of its TRQs.

Article 3.17 Agricultural Trade Committee

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Agricultural Trade, made up of a regular representative and an alternate designated by each Party. The representatives designated by the Parties must be officials in charge of handling matters related to this Section.

2. The Committee will be integrated upon the entry into force of the Treaty, and the Parties must notify each other of the designation of their representatives.

3. The Committee will report the results of its work and meetings to the Commission.

4. The Committee shall meet ordinarily once a year, and extraordinarily at the request of either Party, to ensure the effective implementation and administration of this Section.

5. The ordinary meetings of the Committee will be chaired successively by each Party, corresponding to the Party hosting the meeting to make the call thirty (30) days in advance, at least; and will propose the agenda of the topics to be discussed and will carry out the rapporteur functions.

6. The Committee will meet at any time for extraordinary meetings, at the request of one of the Parties, convening at least thirty (30) days in advance.

7. The Agricultural Trade Committee will have among its functions:

(a) monitor the execution and compliance with the regulations contained in this Section;

(b) consider any other matter related to the implementation and enforcement of this Agreement that is related to trade in agricultural products between the Parties;

(c) recommend to the competent authority the establishment of subcommittees or technical groups, when appropriate; and

(d) others that are assigned by this Treaty or the competent authority, with respect to trade in agricultural products.

 

Section VI - Institutional Provisions

 

Article 3.18: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Trade in Goods, made up of a principal representative and an alternate designated by each Party.

2. The Committee will be integrated upon the entry into force of the Treaty, and the Parties must notify each other of the designation of their representatives.

3. The Committee will meet ordinarily once a year, and extraordinarily at the request of any Party, to ensure the effective implementation and administration of this Chapter.

4. The ordinary meetings of the Committee will be chaired successively by each Party, corresponding to the Party hosting the meeting to call at least thirty (30) days in advance and will propose the agenda of the topics to be discussed. It will also have the role of rapporteur.

5. The Committee will meet at any time for extraordinary meetings, at the request of one of the Parties, convening within a period of twenty (20) days in advance. The request must specify the purpose of the meeting. The meeting will take place in the country to which the consultation request was made.

6. The summoned Party must respond to its consent within ten (10) days of receiving the request for an extraordinary meeting. If no response is received, it may proceed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement.

7. The Committee on Trade in Goods will have within its functions:

(a) promote trade in goods between the Parties, including the improvement or acceleration of the tariff treatment, provided for in Annex 3.4, under this Agreement and other matters that are appropriate;

(b) address barriers to trade in goods between the Parties and, if appropriate, submit these matters to the Commission for its consideration;

(c) monitor the execution and compliance of this Chapter;

(d) evaluate, at the request of any of the Parties, modifications or additions to this Chapter and, if appropriate, submit these matters to the Commission for its consideration;

(e) review the updates and conversions of the nomenclature of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System to ensure that the obligations of each Party under this Agreement are not altered;

(f) consider any other matter related to the execution and compliance with this Chapter, or the trade in goods between the Parties;

(g) recommend to the competent authority the establishment of subcommittees or technical groups, when appropriate; and

(h) others that are assigned by this Agreement or the competent authority, with respect to merchandise trade.

8. A Party may request the participation of representatives of relevant government institutions, for the purpose of addressing specific issues related to the application of this Chapter.

ANNEX 3.3

National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions PDF

ANNEX 3.4

Tariff Elimination ProgramPDF

ANNEX 3.11

Export Taxes PDF

ANNEX 3.18

Committee on Trade in Goods PDF

 

CHAPTER 4

RULES OF ORIGIN

Article 4.1: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

reasonably allocate means allocate in the proper manner in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles;

CIF means the value of the imported merchandise that includes insurance and freight costs to the port or place of introduction in the importing country;

motor vehicle class means any of the following categories of motor vehicles:

(a) vehicles for the transport of passengers up to sixteen (16) people, including the driver; and goods transportation vehicles with a total weight with maximum load less than or equal to four thousand five hundred thirty-seven (4,537) tons or ten thousand (10,000) American pounds, as well as their cabin chassis;

(b) vehicles included in heading 87.02, except those included in subparagraph (a) above;

(c) motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.10 or in subheadings 8701.30 through 8701.90;

(d) includes other vehicles not included in categories (a) and (b);

shipping containers and packing materials means goods used to protect a good during its transportation and does not include the containers and materials in which the good is packaged for retail sale;

net cost means total cost less sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs, royalties, packaging and shipping, and non-allowable interest costs that are included in total cost;

net cost of the good means the net cost that can be reasonably allocated to the good using one of the following methods:

(a) calculating the total cost incurred in respect of all the goods produced by that producer, subtracting any costs of sales promotion, marketing, after-sales services, royalties, packing and shipping costs, and unpaid interest costs. allowable, including in the total cost of all such merchandise, and then reasonably allocating the resulting net cost of those merchandise to the merchandise;

(b) calculating the total cost incurred in respect of all the goods produced by that producer, reasonably allocating the total cost to the good and subsequently subtracting any costs of sales promotion, marketing, after-sales services, royalties, packing and shipping costs and non-allowable interest costs, included in the portion of the total cost allocated to the merchandise; either

(c) reasonably allocating each cost that forms part of the total cost incurred in respect of the goods, so that the sum of these costs does not include any costs of sales promotion, marketing, after-sales services, royalties, packing and shipping costs and non-allowable interest costs, provided that the allocation of such costs is consistent with the provisions for reasonable allocation of costs established in the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles;

non-allowable interest costs means interest costs incurred by a producer that exceed seven hundred (700) basis points over the yields of debt obligations of comparable maturities issued by the central level of government of the Party to which where the producer is located;

total cost means all direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the good, costs and expenses for a period and other costs and expenses for a good that are incurred in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

FOB means free on board, regardless of mode of transportation, at the point of direct shipment from the seller to the buyer;

model line means a group of motor vehicles having the same platform or model name;

material means a good that is used in the production of another good and includes ingredients, parts, or components;

self-made material means originating material that is produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;

indirect material means a good used in the production, verification or inspection of another good, but that is not physically incorporated into it; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of other good, including:

(a) fuel, power, solvents and catalysts;

(b) equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;

(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and accessories;

(d) tools, dies and molds;

(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

(f) lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production, equipment operation, or building maintenance; and

(g) any other good that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be a part of that production;

fungible goods or materials means goods or materials interchangeable for commercial purposes whose properties are essentially identical and that it is not possible to differentiate one from the other, by a simple visual examination;

non-originating good or non-originating material means a good or a material that does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter;

goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties means

(a) minerals extracted or obtained in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(b) plants and plant products harvested, picked or gathered in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(c) live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture, gathering or capture in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(e) goods obtained from live animals in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(f) fish, crustaceans and other marine species, obtained from the sea outside the territory of the Parties by fishing vessels registered or registered by a Party and flying the flag of that Party or by fishing vessels leased by companies established in the territory of a Party Part;

(g) Goods obtained or produced on board factory ships, from the goods identified in subparagraph (f), provided that the factory ships are registered or enrolled in a Party and fly the flag of that Party or are leased by companies established in the territory of a Party;

(h) goods obtained from the seabed or subsoil outside the territorial waters of a Party, by a Party or a person of a Party, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;

(i) waste and scrap from manufacturing or processing operations in the territory of one or more of the Parties and which are suitable for the recovery of raw materials; either

(j) merchandise produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties, exclusively from the merchandise mentioned in the previous paragraphs;

generally accepted accounting principles means those on which there is a recognized consensus or which enjoy substantial and authoritative support, in the territory of a Party and at a given time, with respect to the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities , disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements. Generally accepted accounting principles may include broad guidelines of general application, as well as detailed rules, practices, and procedures;

value means the value of a good or material for the purposes of calculating customs duties or applying this Chapter;

transaction value of a material means the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction made by the producer of the material, in accordance with the rules of Articles 1 to 8 and Article 15 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusted accordingly. with the norms of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Article 8 of the same Agreement, regardless of whether the merchandise is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the vendor referred to in the same Agreement will be the producer of the material; and

transaction value of a good means the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction made by the producer of the good, in accordance with the rules of Article 1 to 8 and Article 15 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusted accordingly. in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Article 8 of the same Agreement, regardless of whether the merchandise is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the same Agreement will be the producer of the merchandise.

Article 4.2: Instruments of Application and Interpretation

1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) the tariff classification of the goods will be based on the Harmonized System; and

(b) the rules of the Customs Valuation Agreement will be used to determine the value of a good or a material.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Customs Valuation Agreement will be applied to determine the origin of merchandise, as follows:

(a) the rules of the Customs Valuation Agreement will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications that the circumstances require, as they would be applied to international transactions; and

(b) The provisions of this Chapter shall prevail over those of the Customs Valuation Agreement, when there is incompatibility.

Article 4.3: Originating Merchandise

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a good shall be considered as originating in the territory of a Party, when:

(a) is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(b) is produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter; either

(c) is produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification, a regional value content or other requirements, as specified in Annex 4.3 and the good comply with the other applicable provisions in this Chapter.

Article 4.4: Minimum Operations or Processes

Unless the specific rules of origin in Annex 4.3 indicate otherwise, the minimum operations or processes that individually or in combination do not confer origin to a good are the following:

(a) operations necessary for the preservation of the goods during transport or storage, including aeration, ventilation, drying, refrigeration, freezing, removal of damaged parts, application of oil, anticorrosive paint or protective coatings, salting, carbon dioxide sulfur or some other aqueous solution;

(b) simple operations consisting of cleaning, washing, screening, sifting or shaking, selection, classification or grading, thinning; peeling, husking or chipping, shelling, pitting, crushing or squeezing, rinsing, removing dust or damaged or damaged parts, sorting, dividing bulk shipments, grouping packages, affixing marks, labels or distinguishing marks on the products and its packaging, packaging, unpacking or repackaging;

(c) the simple assembly or assembly of parts of products to constitute a complete merchandise;

(d) operations of simple dilution in water or other solvents, ionization or salting, that do not alter the nature of the goods; either

(e) slaughter of animals.

Article 4.5: Indirect Materials

Indirect materials will be considered as originating regardless of their place of production or processing.

Article 4.6: accumulation

1. Originating materials or goods originating in the territory of a Party, incorporated into a good in the territory of one or more of the Parties, shall be considered as originating in the territory of the latter.

2. A good is originating when it is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties, by one or more producers, as long as the goods comply with the requirements established in Article 4.3 and with the other requirements applicable to this Chapter.

3. For the purposes of the accumulation of an originating good excluded from the Tariff Elimination Program, the Party that excluded that good, will be considered as a non-Party for the purposes of compliance with the origin regime, until the moment in which the Parties agree to include it in the Tariff Reduction Program.

4. For the purposes of an extended cumulation of origin for goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System with countries that are not Parties to this Agreement, with which they have common trade agreements, the Parties shall enter into discussions within ninety ( 90) days after the date of entry into force of this Agreement or another date that the Parties determine, with the purpose that materials produced in said non-Party countries are considered as originating under this Agreement, subject to consultations with the sectors and consensus of the parts.

5. For other goods in which the Parties show a common interest in having extended cumulation with countries that are not Parties to this Agreement, with which they have common trade agreements, the Parties shall enter into consultations with said countries for the purpose of specify said cumulation of origin jointly.

Article 4.7: Regional Value Content

1. Each Party shall provide that the regional value content of the merchandise shall be calculated by the exporter or producer of the merchandise, in accordance with the following formula:

VCR = [(VM-VMN) / MV] * 100

where:

RVC is the regional value content, expressed as a percentage;

VM is the transaction value of the merchandise adjusted on an FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 2 determined in accordance with the provisions of Articles 1 to 8 and Article 15 of the Customs Valuation Agreement; and

VNM is the transaction value of non-originating materials adjusted on a CIF basis, except as provided in paragraph 4 determined in accordance with the provisions of Articles 1 through 8 and Article 15 of the Customs Valuation Agreement.

2. When a merchandise is not exported directly by its producer, the value will be adjusted up to the point in which the buyer receives the merchandise within the territory where the producer is located.

3. All the records of the costs considered for the calculation of the regional content value will be recorded and maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles, applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.

4. When the producer of a good acquires a non-originating material within the territory of a Party where it is located, the value of the non-originating material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in the transportation of the good. material from the supplier's warehouse to the producer's location.

5. For regional value content calculation purposes, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good will not include the value of non-originating materials used by:

(a) another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either

(b) the producer of a good in the manufacture of a self-made material.

6. When Annex 4.3 specifies a regional content value test to determine if a good from the automotive industry1 is originating, each Party shall provide that the importer, exporter, or producer may use the regional value content calculation for that good based on the following method:

Method for Automotive Goods ("Net Cost Method")

VCR = CN - VMN x 100 CN where:

RVC is the regional value content expressed as a percentage;

CN is the net cost of the merchandise; and

VMN is the value of non-originating materials purchased and used by the producer in the production of the merchandise.

7. Each Party shall provide that for purposes of the method of calculating the regional value content in accordance with paragraph 6, the exporter or producer may use a calculation averaged over the fiscal year of the producer, using any of the following categories, either taking as a basis all motor vehicles of the category or only motor vehicles of the category that are exported to the territory of one or more of the Parties:

(a) the same model line in motor vehicles of the same class of vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;

(b) the same class of motor vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party; either

(c) the same model line in motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party.

8. Each Party shall provide that for purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with paragraph 6 for automotive materials2 that are produced in the same plant, an exporter or producer may use the calculation:

(a) averaged:

(i) in the fiscal year of the producer of the motor vehicle to whom the merchandise is sold;

(ii) in any quarterly or monthly period; either

(iii) in its own fiscal year, provided that the good was produced during a fiscal year, quarter, or month used as the basis for the calculation;

(b) in which the average of subparagraph (a) is calculated separately for such goods sold to one or more motor vehicle producers; either

(c) in which the average in subparagraph (a) or (b) is calculated separately for those goods that are exported to the territory of one or more of the Parties.

Article 4.8: De Minimis

1. A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of this good that does not comply with the change in tariff classification requirement established in Annex 4.3 does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the transaction value of the good determined in accordance with Article 4.7.

2. In the case of merchandise that is classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the percentage indicated in paragraph 1 will refer to the weight of the fibers or yarns with respect to the weight of the merchandise produced.

3. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to a non-originating material:

(a) that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 1 through 24 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading than the good for which origin is being determined in accordance with this Article; either

(b) classified in Chapter 15 of the Harmonized System that is used in the production of a good classified in heading 15.11 or subheadings 1513.21 or 1513.29.

Article 4.9: Goods and Fungible Materials

1. When fungible, originating and non-originating goods are used in the production of an originating good or fungible material, the origin of this fungible good or material may be determined, either by physical segregation of each good or material, or by applying one of the following inventory management methods:

(a) First In, First Out (FIFO);

(b) Last In, First Out (LIFO); either

(c) Averages.

2. Each Party shall provide that the inventory management method selected pursuant to paragraph 1 for a particular good or fungible material shall continue to be used for that good or fungible material through the fiscal year of the person who selected the method. of inventory management.

Article 4.10: Games or Assortments of Merchandise

1. A set or assortment of merchandise that is classified in accordance with rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, as well as merchandise whose description according to the Harmonized System nomenclature is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in that set or assortment complies with the rules of origin established in this Chapter and in Annex 4.3.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the value transaction of the merchandise, determined in accordance with Article 4.7.

Article 4.11: Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. Accessories, spare parts or tools delivered with the merchandise as a normal part of the merchandise will be considered part of the merchandise and will not be taken into account to determine if all non-originating materials used in the production of a merchandise comply with the corresponding change. tariff classification established in Annex 4.3, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts or tools are not invoiced separately from the merchandise; and

(b) the quantity and value of these accessories, spare parts or tools are the usual ones for the merchandise. For those accessories, spare parts or tools that do not meet the conditions mentioned above, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to each one of them.

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts or tools will be considered as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the merchandise.

Article 4.12: Containers and Packaging Materials for Retail Sale

1. When the containers and packaging materials in which a merchandise is presented for retail sale are classified in the Harmonized System with the merchandise they contain, they will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the merchandise comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.3.

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of said containers and packaging materials will be taken into account as originating or non-originating material, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the merchandise. commodity.

Article 4.13: Shipping Containers and Packaging Materials

The containers and packaging materials in which the merchandise is packed for transport will not be taken into account for the purposes of determining whether a merchandise is originating.

Article 4.14:: Transit and Transshipment

Each Party shall provide that a good that is the subject of a transit or transhipment operation shall not be considered originating if the good:

(a) undergoes further processing or is subject to any other operation within the territory of a non-Party, except unloading, reloading or any other operation necessary to maintain the good in good condition or to transport it to the territory of a Party; either

(b) does not remain under the control of the customs authority.

Article 4.15: Origin Committee

1. The Parties establish the Committee of Origin, made up of two (2) representatives of each of them, a holder and a substitute, which will be responsible for this Chapter and Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures Related to the Origin of the Goods).

2. The Origin Committee will meet in ordinary session one (1) time a year and in extraordinary session as many times as necessary at the request of the Administrative Commission or any Party.

3. The Origin Committee will have, in addition to the functions established in Article 17.5 (Technical Committees), the following:

(a) prepare, no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the entry into force of this Agreement or on another date agreed by the Parties, the operating regulations of the Committee of Origin, which may be modified by agreement of the Parties. ;

(b) attend to, analyze and study matters regarding the interpretation, application and administration of the chapters within its competence to try to reach agreements on:

(i) matters related to resolutions of origin or advance rulings;

(ii) modifications to the specific rules of origin;

(iii) modifications to the format and instructions of the certificate of origin referred to in Article 5.2 (Certification of Origin);

(iv) new provisions or changes adopted by a Party regarding rules of origin or customs procedures related to the origin of the goods, for compliance with this Agreement; either

(v) any other matter considered pertinent by the Committee; and

(c) attend to any other matter agreed upon by the Parties.

Article 4.16 Consultations and Modifications

1. The Parties shall consult regularly to ensure that this Chapter and Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures Related to the Origin of Goods) are administered effectively, uniformly and in accordance with the spirit and objectives of this Agreement and shall cooperate in the their administration.

2. A Party that considers that one or more of the provisions of this Chapter or of Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures Related to the Origin of Merchandise) need to be modified to take into account developments in production processes, shortages of original materials or other relevant factors, may submit a proposal for modification, together with the reasons and studies that support them, for consideration by the Commission.

3. Upon submission by a Party of a proposal for modification pursuant to paragraph 2, the Commission may refer the matter to the Origin Committee, within a period of sixty (60) days or at such other date as the Commission may decide. The Origin Committee shall meet to consider the proposed modification within sixty (60) days from the referral or on such other date as the Commission may decide.

4. Within that period, as provided by the Commission, the Committee of Origin shall provide a report to the Commission, setting out its conclusions and recommendations, if any.

5. Upon receipt of the report, the Commission may take the pertinent actions in accordance with Article 17.1 (2) (c) or (3) (b) (Administrative Commission of the Agreement).

Article 4.17 Transitory Rules of Origin Applicable between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Honduras

The rules of origin for merchandise classified in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, applicable between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Honduras, are those established in Annex 4.17 and will be in force until the implementation of the provisions contained in Article 4.6(4).

ANNEX 4.3

Specific Rules of Origin PDF

ANNEX 4.17

Treatment of Goods Included in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System in Trade between the Republic of Honduras and the Republic of Colombia PDF

 

CHAPTER 5

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES RELATED TO THE ORIGIN OF THE GOODS

Article 5.1: Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

competent authority means:

(a) with respect to the Republic of El Salvador, the Ministry of Economy, which is responsible for the administration, and the General Directorate of Customs of the Ministry of Finance, which is responsible for carrying out the verification procedures of origin and issuance of advance resolutions;

(b) with respect to the Republic of Guatemala, the Ministry of Economy;

(c) with respect to the Republic of Honduras, the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce; and

(d) with respect to the Republic of Colombia, the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism or the Directorate of National Taxes and Customs; or their successors;

valid certificate of origin means a certificate of origin issued in the format referred to in Article 5.2(2), completed, dated and signed by the producer or exporter of a good in the territory of one of the Parties, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the instructions to complete the certificate;

exporter means the person who makes an export and is located in the territory of a Party;

importer means the person who makes an import and is located in the territory of a Party;

identical goods means goods that are the same in all respects, without taking into account minor differences in appearance that are not relevant to determine their origin, in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin); and

Resolution of origin means the written legal document, issued by the competent authority, as a result of a procedure that verifies whether a good qualifies as originating, in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin).

2. The definitions established in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) are incorporated into this Chapter.

Article 5.2: Certification of Origin

1. The importer may request preferential tariff treatment based on a written or electronic certificate of origin.1 , issued by the exporter or producer.

2. The Parties will establish a single format for the certificate of origin, which will enter into force on the same date as this Agreement and will serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party, qualifies as original and may be modified by agreement between the Parties.

3. The exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate of origin will do so in terms of an affidavit, agreeing to assume any administrative, civil or criminal responsibility, when false or incorrect information has been included in the certificate of origin.

4. Each Party shall provide that when the exporter is not the producer of the good, fill out and sign the certificate of origin based on:

(a) your knowledge as to whether the good qualifies as originating; either

(b) the certification of origin completed and signed by the producer of the good and voluntarily provided to the exporter.

5. Each Party shall provide that a certificate of origin may apply to:

(a) a single shipment of one or more goods into the territory of a Party; either

(b) several shipments of identical merchandise to be made within any period established in the certificate of origin, not to exceed one (1) year from the date of certification.

6. Each Party shall provide that the customs authority of the importing Party accept a certificate of origin valid for a period of one (1) year from the date on which the certificate was signed and sealed by the exporter or producer.

7. Each Party shall provide that preferential tariff treatment shall not be denied just because the good covered by a certificate of origin is invoiced by a company located in the territory of a non-Party country.

Article 5.3:exceptions

No Party shall require certification or information showing that a good is originating when:

(a) the customs value of the import does not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars of the United States of America (US$ 1,500.00) or the equivalent amount in the currency of the importing Party or a higher amount that may be established by the importing Party , unless it considers that the import is part of a series of imports made or planned with the purpose of evading compliance with the legislation of the Party that regulates the requests for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement; either

(b) is a good for which the importing Party does not require the importer to present certification or information showing origin.

Article 5.4: Obligations Related to Imports

1. Each Party shall require that the importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party:

(a) declare in writing on the import document required by its legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin, that a good qualifies as an originating good;

(b) have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time the declaration is made;

(c) provide, if requested by the customs authority, the certificate of origin or a copy thereof; and

(d) immediately present a corrected import document and pay the corresponding duty, when the importer has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which the import document is based contains incorrect information. The importer may not be penalized when he voluntarily presents the corrected import document, before the customs authority has initiated its powers of verification and control or before the customs authority notifies the revision, in accordance with the legislation of each Party. .

2. Each Party shall provide that if an importer in its territory does not comply with any of the requirements established in this Chapter, the preferential tariff treatment granted in this Agreement for a good imported from the territory of the other Party shall be denied.

3. Each Party shall provide that, when the importer has not requested preferential tariff treatment for the good imported into its territory that would have qualified as originating, the importer may, no later than one (1) year after the date of importation, request the return of customs duties paid in excess for not having requested preferential tariff treatment for that merchandise, provided that the request is accompanied by:

(a) a written statement indicating that the good qualifies as originating at the time of importation;

(b) the certificate of origin or its copy; and

(c) any other documentation related to the importation of the merchandise, as may be required by the customs authority.

Article 5.5: Obligations Related to Exports

1. Each Party shall provide that:

(a) the exporter or producer that has issued a certificate of origin delivers a copy of that certificate to its competent authority upon request;

(b) an exporter or producer that has issued a certificate of origin and has reason to believe that that certificate contains incorrect information, the exporter or producer must immediately notify in writing to all persons to whom it has issued that certificate of any change that may affect the accuracy or validity of that certificate; and

(c) if its exporter or producer delivered a false certificate or information and with the same, goods qualified as originating were exported to the territory of the other Party, it will be subject to sanctions similar to those that would be applied to an importer in its territory for violating its customs laws and regulations by making false statements and claims in connection with an importation.

2. No Party shall impose sanctions on an exporter or producer for providing an incorrect certificate, if the exporter or producer voluntarily communicates in writing that it was incorrect, to all persons to whom the certificate was provided.

Article 5.6: records

1. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer that issues a certificate of origin keep, for a minimum period of five (5) years from the date of signing the certificate, all accounting records and documentation related to the origin of the merchandise, including those that refer to:

(a) the purchase, costs, value and payment of the merchandise exported from its territory;

(b) the purchase, costs, value and payment of all materials, including indirect materials, used in the production of the good exported from its territory; and

(c) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory.

2. Each Party shall provide that an importer who claims preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into the territory of that Party, shall keep a copy of the certificate of origin and documentation related to the importation for a minimum period of five (5) years from the date of importation of the merchandise.

Article 5.7: Origin Verification Procedures

1. The importing Party, through its competent authority, may request information about the origin of a good from the competent authority of the exporting Party.

2. For the purposes of determining whether a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating, the importing Party may verify the origin of the good through its competent authority, through the following procedures:

(a) written requests for information addressed to the importer in its territory or to the exporter or producer of the good in the territory of the other Party, in which the good subject to verification must be specifically indicated;

(b) written questionnaires addressed to the importer in its territory or to the exporter or producer of the good in the territory of the other Party, in which the good subject to verification must be specifically indicated;

(c) verification visits to the facilities of the exporter or producer of the good in the territory of the other Party, for the purpose of examining the accounting records and related documentation referred to in Article 5.6 (1) and inspecting the facilities and materials used in the production of the merchandise; either

(d) any other procedure that the Parties agree.

3. For the purposes of this Article, the questionnaires, requests, official letters, origin resolutions, notifications or any other written communication made directly by the competent authority of the importing Party to the importer, exporter or producer and to the authority authority of the exporting Party for the verification of origin, will be considered valid, if they are carried out by means of:

(a) certified mail with an acknowledgment of receipt or other forms confirming that the importer, exporter or producer has received the documents or communications referred to in this paragraph; either

(b) any other way that the Parties agree.

4. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 (a) and (b), requests for information or written questionnaires must contain:

(a) the name or identification of the competent authority requesting the information;

(b) the name and address of the importer, exporter or producer from whom the information and documentation is requested;

(c) a description of the information and documents required; and

(d) the legal basis of the requests for information or questionnaires.

5. The importer, exporter or producer who receives a request for information or a questionnaire in accordance with paragraph 2 (a) and (b), will respond to the request for information or duly complete and return the questionnaire within thirty (30) days. from the date of receipt. During the indicated period, the importer, exporter or producer may make a written request for an extension to the competent authority of the importing Party, for no more than thirty (30) days. Said request for extension will not have the consequence of denying the preferential tariff treatment.

6. Each Party may, through its competent authority, request additional information, through a subsequent request or questionnaire, from the importer, exporter or producer, even if it has received the requested information or completed questionnaire referred to in the paragraph 2 (a) and (b). In this case, the importer, exporter or producer will have the same terms established in paragraph 5.

7. If the exporter or producer does not provide the requested information, does not duly complete a questionnaire, or does not return the questionnaire within the periods established in paragraphs 5 and 6, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise subject to verification. , issuing to the importer, exporter or producer, a resolution of origin that includes the facts and the legal basis for that decision, notifying it in accordance with paragraph 3.

8. Prior to carrying out a verification visit and in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 (c), the importing Party, through its competent authority, must notify in writing its intention to carry out the verification visit. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer as well as to the competent authority of the exporting Party, in accordance with paragraph 3. The competent authority of the importing Party shall request the written consent of the exporter or producer to conduct the verification visit.

9. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 2 (c), the notification of intention to carry out the origin verification visit referred to in paragraph 8, must contain:

(a) the name or identification of the competent authority of the importing Party making the notification;

(b) the name of the exporter or producer to be visited;

(c) the date and place of the proposed verification visit;

(d) the objective and scope of the proposed verification visit, including the specific reference of the merchandise subject to verification;

(e) the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; and

(f) the legal basis of the verification visit. Any change to the information referred to in this paragraph must be notified in accordance with paragraph 8.

10. If the exporter or producer of a merchandise does not grant their written consent to carry out the visit within a period of thirty (30) days, counted from the day following the notification referred to in paragraph 8, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise subject to verification, issuing to the importer, exporter or producer, a resolution of origin that includes the facts and the legal basis for that decision, notifying it in accordance with the paragraph 3.

11. The competent authority of the importing Party shall not deny preferential tariff treatment to a good if within fifteen (15) days following the date of receipt of the notification, for a single time, the producer or exporter requests the extension of the proposed verification visit with the corresponding justifications, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days from the date the notification was received, or for a longer period agreed upon by the competent authority of the importing Party and the exporter or producer. For this efects,

12. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 (c), the competent authority of the importing Party shall allow an exporter or producer who is subject to a verification visit, to designate up to two (2) observers to be present during the visit and They just act like it. The non-appointment of observers will not be a reason for the visit to be postponed.

13. For the verification of compliance with any requirement established in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) and its annex, the competent authority must adopt, where applicable, the generally accepted accounting principles applied in the territory of the Party from which the merchandise subject to verification was produced or exported.

14. When the exporter or producer of a good from the automotive industry that is imported into the territory of a Party, calculate the regional content value of this good in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.7 (6) to (8) (Value of Regional Content), the importing Party may not verify the regional content value with respect to that good, until the end of the period over which it was calculated.

15. Each Party shall require that an exporter or a producer make available to the competent authority of the importing Party conducting the verification visit, the records and documents referred to in Article 5.6(1). If the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or producer, he may request the producer of the goods or supplier of the materials, as appropriate, to make them available to the competent authority of the importing Party.

16. The competent authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to a good subject to verification when the exporter or producer of the good does not make the accounting records and related documentation available to the competent authority of the importing Party. reference is made to Article 5.6(1).

17. When the verification visit has been completed, the importing Party must draw up a record of the visit, which will include the facts verified by it. The exporter or producer subject to the visit may sign said act.

18. Within a period of one hundred and twenty (120) days from the conclusion of the verification, the competent authority of the importing Party shall issue a resolution of origin, in which it is determined whether or not the merchandise qualifies as originating, including the facts, results and legal basis of said resolution, and must notify the same to the importer, exporter or producer of the merchandise subject to verification and to the competent authority of the exporting Party, in accordance with paragraph 3.

19. The procedure to verify the origin may not exceed one (1) year. However, the competent authority of the importing Party, in duly founded cases and only once, may extend said term for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and must notify those involved.

20. Once the corresponding term or extension established in the previous paragraph has elapsed, without the competent authority of the importing Party having issued a resolution of origin, the merchandise object of the verification of origin will receive the same preferential tariff treatment as if it were an original good.

21. When, through verification, the importing Party determines that an exporter or producer has provided declarations or certifications of origin or false or unfounded information more than once in the sense that a good qualifies as originating, the importing Party may suspend the preferential tariff treatment to identical merchandise exported by that person until it verifies to the competent authority of the importing Party that the merchandise complies with all the requirements established in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) and its annex.

22. In case of resumption of the preferential tariff treatment, the competent authority of the importing Party shall issue a resolution, including the facts and the legal basis of said resolution, and must notify the same to the importer, exporter or producer of the merchandise subject to verification, of accordance with paragraph 3.

23. If the importing Party issues a ruling of origin, in accordance with paragraph 18, that a good is not originating, the Party shall not apply the ruling to an importation made before the date of importation, when:

(a) the competent authority of the exporting Party issued an advance ruling regarding the tariff classification or valuation of one or more materials used in the good, pursuant to Article 6.10 (Advance Rulings);

(b) the resolution of the importing Party is based on a tariff classification or valuation for such materials that is different from the one provided in the advance resolution referred to in subparagraph (a); and

(c) the competent authority issued the advance ruling before the ruling of the importing Party.

Article 5.8: Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its legislation, the confidentiality of the information collected under this Chapter and shall protect it from disclosure.

2. The confidential information collected in accordance with this Chapter may only be disclosed to the authorities in charge of the administration and application of resolutions of origin and customs and tax matters in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 5.9: Review and Appeal _ _

1. Each Party shall grant the same rights of review and appeal with respect to rulings of origin to its importers, or to exporters or producers of the other Party to whom such rulings have been notified pursuant to Article 5.7.

2. The rights referred to in the preceding paragraph include access to at least one administrative review, regardless of the official or office responsible for the original resolutions under review, and access to a judicial review of the same, as a last resort. administrative measures, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 5.10: Uniform Regulations

1. The Parties shall establish and implement, through their respective laws or regulations by the date this Agreement enters into force, or at any later date as agreed by the Parties, uniform regulations regarding the interpretation, application, and administration of Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin), this Chapter and other matters agreed upon by the Parties.

2. Any modification or addition to the uniform regulations shall be made by agreement between the Parties.

 

CHAPTER 6

TRADE FACILITATION

Article 6.1 : Publication

1. The Parties will publish in an orderly manner on the website of their customs authority, their customs legislation, regulations and administrative procedures of a general nature.

2. Each Party, to the extent possible, shall make available to the public in electronic form all the forms that a Party issues and that must be completed for the import or export of a good.

3. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, make known in advance any regulations of general application governing customs matters that it proposes to adopt and shall provide interested persons the opportunity to comment prior to their adoption.

4. The Parties shall designate or maintain one or more consultation points to attend to the concerns of persons interested in customs matters and shall make available on the Internet information regarding the procedures adopted to formulate and attend to the consultations.

Article 6.2 : Dispatch of Goods

1. The Parties shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient clearance of goods, in order to facilitate trade between them.

2. For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, the Parties must:

(a) allow the goods to be cleared at the point of arrival, without temporary transfer to warehouses or other premises;

(b) implement procedures that allow the release of merchandise in a period no longer than that required to ensure compliance with its customs legislation and, to the extent possible, will release the merchandise within forty-eight (48) hours after the start of the of the process of its dispatch; and

(c) allow importers to remove the goods from customs before the liquidation and payment of customs duties, taxes and charges that are applicable, without prejudice to the final decision by their customs authority regarding them. For these purposes, a Party may require that an importer provide a guarantee, in the form of a bond, deposit, or any other appropriate instrument that, to the satisfaction of the customs authority, covers the final payment of customs duties, taxes, and charges. related to the importation of the merchandise.

Article 6.3 : Risk Management

Each Party shall endeavor to adopt or maintain risk management systems aimed at facilitating and simplifying the process and procedures for the clearance of low-risk merchandise and direct its inspection and control activities towards the clearance of high-risk merchandise.

Article 6.4 : Automation

1. The customs authorities will endeavor to use information technology to expedite the procedures for the clearance of goods. In choosing the information technology to be used for that purpose, each Party:

(a) will make efforts to use international standards;

(b) make electronic systems accessible to customs users;

(c) will provide for the electronic submission and processing of information and data prior to the arrival of the shipment, in order to allow the clearance of merchandise upon arrival;

(d) will use electronic or automated systems for the analysis and direction of risks;

(e) work on the development of compatible electronic systems between the customs authorities of the Parties, in order to facilitate the exchange of international trade data between governments; and

(f) work to develop a set of common data elements and processes in accordance with the World Customs Organization (WCO) Customs Data Model and related WCO recommendations and guidelines.

2. The customs authorities, to the extent possible, will accept the forms, which must be completed by an importer or exporter, submitted electronically, as the legal equivalent of the printed version.

Article 6.5 : Cooperation

1. In order to facilitate the effective operation of this Agreement, each Party shall endeavor to give each Party prior notice of any significant changes to its import laws or regulations that may affect the performance of this Agreement.

2. The Parties will cooperate to achieve compliance with their respective laws and regulations with respect to:

(a) the implementation and operation of the provisions of this Agreement regarding imports or exports, including origin applications and procedures;

(b) the implementation and operation of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports; and

(d) other customs matters that the Parties may agree.

3. When a Party has reasonable suspicions of any illegal activity related to its import laws or regulations, the Party may request the other Party to provide it with specific confidential information, normally collected in the course of importing goods.

4. A request made by a Party under paragraph 3 must be in writing, specify the purpose for which the information is required, and identify the required information with sufficient specificity for the other Party to locate and provide it.

5. The Party from which the information is requested shall, in accordance with its legislation and any relevant international agreement to which it is a party, provide a written response containing such information.

6. For the purposes of paragraph 3, “reasonable suspicion of any unlawful activity” means a suspicion based on material factual information obtained from public or private sources, comprising one or more of the following:

(a) historical evidence of non-compliance with the laws or regulations governing imports by an importer or exporter;

(b) historical evidence of non-compliance with the laws or regulations governing imports by a manufacturer, producer or other person involved in the movement of goods from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

(c) historical evidence that any or all persons involved in the movement of goods from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party, for a specific product sector, have not complied with the Party's legislation or regulations that govern imports; either

(d) other information that the requesting Party and the Party from which the information is requested agree is sufficient in the context of a particular request.

7. Each Party shall endeavor to provide the other Party with any additional information that might assist that Party in determining whether imports or exports from or to the territory of that Party comply with the laws or regulations governing imports of the other Party. , especially those related to the prevention of illegal activities, such as smuggling and other similar ones.

8. In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, each Party shall endeavor to provide the other Party with advice and technical assistance for the purpose of improving risk assessment and management techniques, simplifying and expediting customs procedures for timely and efficient clearance of goods, improve the technical skills of personnel, and increase the use of technologies that may lead to better compliance with the laws or regulations governing imports from a Party.

9. The Parties will make efforts to cooperate in:

(a) strengthen the ability of each Party to apply the regulations governing its imports;

(b) establish and maintain other communication channels in order to facilitate the secure and rapid exchange of information; and

(c) improve coordination on import-related matters.

10. The Parties will cooperate in carrying out a fast and efficient dispatch of merchandise. For these purposes, they will strive to take into account as additional elements the certification carried out throughout their foreign trade chain in the country of export, international business alliances that promote safe trade in cooperation with governments and international organizations.

11. The Parties agree to sign a Mutual Assistance Agreement between their customs authorities, within the month following the signing of this Treaty.

Article 6.6: Confidentiality

1. When a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Chapter and designates it as confidential, the other Party will maintain the confidentiality of said information. The Party that has the information may demand from the Party that requests it a written guarantee, in the sense that the information will be kept confidential, that it will be used only for the purposes specified in the information request of the other Party and that it will not will be disclosed without the specific permission of the Party providing it.

2. A Party may refuse to provide the information requested by the other Party when the requesting Party does not provide the guarantee provided for in the preceding paragraph.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures to ensure that confidential information provided by a Party, including information the disclosure of which could harm the competitive position of the person providing it, is protected from unauthorized disclosure.

Article 6.7 Express Delivery Shipments

The Parties shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for express delivery shipments, maintaining appropriate control and selection systems. These procedures shall:

(a) provide for the electronic transmission and processing of information necessary for the clearance of an express delivery shipment, prior to its arrival;

(b) allow the presentation in electronic means of a single manifest that covers all the goods contained in a shipment transported by an express delivery service;

(c) provide for the clearance of certain merchandise with a minimum of documentation, in accordance with the legislation of each Party;

(d) under normal circumstances, provide for the clearance of express delivery shipments within six (6) hours of presentation of the necessary customs documents, provided the shipment has arrived; and

(e) be applied without regard to weight, volume, or quantity.

Article 6.8: Review and Appeal

Each Party shall guarantee access to:

(a) a level of administrative review independent of the employee or office issuing the administrative acts; and

(b) judicial review of administrative acts.

Article 6.9: Sanctions

The Parties shall adopt or maintain a system that allows for the imposition of civil or administrative sanctions and, when appropriate, criminal sanctions for violation of their customs legislation and regulations, including those governing tariff classification, customs valuation, country of origin, and requests for tariff treatment. preferential under this Agreement.

Article 6.10 Advance Rulings

1. In order to guarantee the uniform application of customs legislation, provide predictability in customs actions, eliminate discretion and offer legal certainty to the user of the customs service, the importing Party, through its customs authority or competent authority, to written request from your importer or from an exporter or producer6-1 of the other Party, before the importation of a good into its territory, shall issue an advance written resolution regarding:

(a) tariff classification;

(b) the application of customs valuation criteria for a particular case, in accordance with the application of the provisions contained in the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) the application of returns, suspensions or other exonerations of customs duties;

(d) if a good is originating in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin), including Annex 4.3 (Specific Rules of Origin);

(e) country of origin marking;

(f) the application of quotas; and

(g) Any other matters that the Parties agree.

2. Each Party shall establish procedures for requesting and issuing advance rulings, including:

(a) the obligation of the interested party to provide the information required by the customs authority or competent authority, to process an early ruling request, including, if required, a sample of the merchandise, for which an early ruling is being requested;

(b) the obligation of the customs authority or competent authority to issue an advance resolution within a maximum period of one hundred and twenty (120) days, once all the necessary information has been submitted by the applicant; and

(c) the obligation of the customs authority or competent authority to issue an advance resolution, considering the facts and circumstances that the applicant has presented.

3. Each Party shall provide any person who requests an advance ruling the same treatment as any other person to whom an advance ruling has been issued, provided that the facts and circumstances are identical in all material respects.

4. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings take effect from the date of their issuance or another date specified in the ruling, provided that the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based have not changed.

5. The customs authority or competent authority issuing the ruling may modify or revoke an advance ruling after the Party notifies the applicant. The Party that issues the resolution may modify or revoke an advance resolution, with the purpose of collecting the customs duties, taxes and charges that are applicable, not received, only if the advance resolution was based on incorrect or false information, and must notify the applicant immediately.

6. The customs authority or competent authority may modify or revoke an advance resolution, when:

(a) is based on errors such as the tariff classification of a good or materials that are the object of the resolution, the application of the customs valuation criteria of the goods or the application of the regional content value requirement pursuant to to Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

(b) the resolution is not in accordance with the uniform regulations referred to in Article 5.10 (Uniform Regulations) or with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

(c) there is a change in the facts and circumstances on which the decision is based;

(d) Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) or this Chapter is amended; either

(e) must comply with an administrative decision regardless of the issuing authority, a judicial decision or to adjust to a change in the national legislation of the Party that issued the advance ruling.

7. Subject to the confidentiality requirements under its law, each Party shall make its advance rulings publicly available.

8. If an applicant provides false information or omits relevant facts or circumstances related to the advance ruling, or does not act in accordance with the terms and conditions of the ruling, the importing Party may apply the measures that are appropriate, including administrative, civil or criminal, monetary or other sanctions. 9. Each Party shall provide that the holder of an advance ruling may use it only while the facts or circumstances that served as the basis for its issuance are maintained.

10. Any merchandise subject to a verification of origin or a request for review or appeal in the territory of one of the Parties shall not be subject to an advance ruling.

Article 6.11: Trade Facilitation Committee

1. The Parties establish the Trade Facilitation Committee, made up of two (2) representatives of each of them, a holder and a substitute; Said Committee shall be competent to hear matters related to the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The Trade Facilitation Committee will meet in ordinary session one (1) time a year and in extraordinary session as many times as necessary at the request of the Commission or any Party.

3. The Trade Facilitation Committee will have, in addition to the functions established in Article 17.5 (Technical Committees), the following:

(a) prepare, no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the entry into force of this Agreement, or on another date agreed by the Parties, the operating regulations of the Trade Facilitation Committee, which may be modified by agreement between the Parties;

(b) propose to the Commission the adoption of customs practices and guidelines that facilitate trade between the Parties, in accordance with the evolution of the WCO and WTO guidelines;

(c) propose to the Commission solutions to differences that arise related to:

(i) the interpretation, application and administration of this Chapter;

(ii) matters of tariff classification and customs valuation; and

(iii) any other issues related to practices or procedures adopted by the Parties that prevent the prompt clearance of merchandise;

(d) ensure the correct application of customs regulations by the customs authorities;

(e) propose to the Commission alternative solutions to obstacles or inconveniences related to trade facilitation that arise between the Parties; (f) propose to the Commission uniform guidelines, based on international standards, that lead to the improvement of customs procedures;

(g) examine proposals to modify customs regulations related to this Chapter, which may affect the flow of trade between the Parties;

(h) report to the Commission on the development of its activities; and

(i) any other matter considered pertinent by the Committee.

4. A Party that considers that one or more of the provisions of this Chapter should be modified, may submit a modification proposal, together with the reasons and studies that support them, for consideration by the Commission, which may refer the matter to this Committee, who will provide a report to the Commission, presenting its conclusions and recommendations, if any.

Article6.12 Implementation

The Parties will apply:

(a) Articles 6.2 (2) (b) and (c) and 6.7 one (1) year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement; and

(b) Articles 6.1 (1) and (4), 6.3, 6.4 and 6.10 two (2) years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

 

CHAPTER 7

SAFEGUARD MEASURES

Article 7.1 : Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

threat of serious injury means “threat of serious injury” as defined in the Agreement on Safeguards;

competent investigating authority means:

(a) with respect to the Republic of El Salvador, the Directorate of Administration of Commercial Agreements, of the Ministry of Economy;

(b) with respect to the Republic of Guatemala, the Directorate of Foreign Trade Administration, of the Ministry of Economy;

(c) with respect to the Republic of Honduras, the General Directorate of Economic Integration and Commercial Policy, of the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce; and

(d) with respect to the Republic of Colombia, the Sub-directorate of Commercial Practices, of the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism;

or its successors;

safeguard measure means all tariff-type measures that are applied in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the group of producers of like or directly competitive goods that operate in the territory of a Party, or those producers whose joint output of like or directly competitive goods constitutes a majority proportion of the production national total of said merchandise; and

transition period means a period of ten (10) years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. For those products in which the reduction period is longer, the transition period will be equivalent to the Tariff Reduction Program of the Party applying the measure, in which case "transition period" means the one established in the indicated program.

Article 7.2 : General Provisions

Except as provided in this Chapter, each Party shall be governed by its national legislation, by Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.

Article 7.3 : Imposition of a Safeguard Measure

1. A Party may apply a safeguard measure only during the transition period, if as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, an originating good is imported into the territory of the Party in quantities that have increased by such amount in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production and in such conditions as to constitute a substantial cause of serious injury, or a threat thereof, to the domestic industry that produces similar or directly competitive merchandise1 .

2. If the conditions indicated in the preceding paragraph are met, in order to apply a safeguard measure, a Party may, to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious damage, or threat thereof, and facilitate the adjustment:

(a) suspend the future reduction of any rate of duty established in this Agreement for the good; either

(b) increase the rate of duty on the good to a level not to exceed the Most Favored Nation (MFN) rate of duty applied at the time the measure is imposed2 .

Article 7.4 : Duration and Extension

1. No Party may maintain a safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent and for the period necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment;

(b) for a period exceeding three (3) years; except that this period is extended for an additional period of one (1) year, if the competent authority determines, in accordance with the procedures stipulated in Article 7.5, that the measure is still necessary to avoid or remedy serious harm and facilitate the adjustment and that there is evidence that the domestic industry is adjusting; either

(c) after the expiration of the transition period.

2. A safeguard measure may be reapplied for a second time provided that the non-application period is at least half of that during which the safeguard measure was applied for the first time.

3. Upon termination of the safeguard measure, the tariff rate will not be higher than the rate that, according to the Schedule of the Party of Annex 3.4 (Tariff Elimination Program), would have been in force one (1) year later. from the beginning of the measurement. As of January 1 of the year immediately following the termination of the measure, the Party that has adopted it must apply the tariff rate established in the Party's Schedule of Annex 3.4 (Tariff Elimination Program) as if the safeguard measure would never have been applied.

Article 7.5 : Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements

1. A Party may only apply a safeguard measure after an investigation by the Party's competent authority, in accordance with its domestic legislation and Articles 3, 4.2 (b) and (c) of the Agreement on Safeguards and for this To this end, Articles 3, 4.2 (b) and (c) of the Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis .

2. In the investigation described in paragraph 1, the Party shall comply with the requirements of its domestic law and of Article 4.2(a) of the Agreement on Safeguards and to this end, Article 4.2(a) is incorporated into and made a part of this Treaty, mutatis mutandis .

3. For the purposes of this Article, all information that by its nature is confidential will be treated in accordance with the internal legislation of each Party and in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of the Agreement on Safeguards.

Article 7.6 : Provisional Safeguard Measures

1. A Party may adopt a provisional safeguard measure, in critical circumstances in which any delay would cause damage that is difficult to repair to the domestic industry of similar or directly competitive goods, based on a preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence. that increased imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury.

2. The duration of the provisional measure will not exceed two hundred (200) days and must take the form of tariff increases, which will be promptly reimbursed if the investigation does not determine that the increase in imports has caused or threatened to cause damage. serious to a domestic industry.

Article 7.7 : Notification and Consultations

1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party in writing when:

(a) initiate a safeguard procedure in accordance with this Chapter; and

(b) takes a decision to apply or extend a provisional or final safeguard measure.

2. A Party shall provide the other Party with a copy of the public version of the report of its competent investigating authority, related to the preceding paragraph, in accordance with Article 7.5.

3. At the request of a Party whose good is subject to a safeguard procedure in accordance with this Chapter, the Party conducting the procedure shall initiate consultations with the requesting Party to review the notifications under paragraph 1 of this Article, or any public notification. or report issued by the competent investigating authority in relation to said procedure.

Article 7.8 Global Safeguard Measures

1. This Agreement does not confer any rights or establish additional obligations on the Parties with respect to actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards, except that the Party imposing a global safeguard measure may exclude imports of a good originating from the other Party, if such imports are not a substantial cause of serious injury or threat thereof.

2. Neither Party shall apply, with respect to the same good, and during the same period:

(a) a safeguard measure; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.

 

CHAPTER 8

ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING MEASURES

 

Article 8.1: Single Provision

Each Party retains its rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement with respect to the application of anti-dumping duties and countervailing measures.

 

PART THREE

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

CHAPTER 9

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

 

Article 9.1  Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures which is part of the WTO Agreement.

2. The Parties recognize the definitions contained in Annex A of the SPS Agreement and, in addition, the definitions recommended by the competent international organizations: World Organization for Animal Health - OIE, International Plant Protection Convention - IPPC, Codex Alimentarius and those that may arrive. failing that, they will be established by mutual agreement between the Parties.

Article 9.2 General Provisions

1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under the SPS Agreement. In addition to the foregoing, the Parties shall be governed by the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The Parties agree to make joint efforts for the effective implementation of the SPS Agreement, with the purpose of facilitating trade.

3. Competent authorities are considered to be those with the legal responsibility of guaranteeing compliance with the sanitary and phytosanitary requirements contemplated in this Chapter.

4. Through mutual cooperation, the Parties shall facilitate trade, endeavor to prevent the introduction or spread of pests and diseases, and improve plant health, animal health, and food safety.

5. Controversies that arise in relation to the application of this Chapter will be resolved through the provisions set forth in the General Dispute Settlement Mechanism of this Agreement. The Parties may use the WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding for those provisions that are contained in the SPS Agreement.

Article 9.3 Rights and Obligations of the Parties

Without prejudice to the provisions of the SPS Agreement, the Parties must ensure that plants, animals, products and by-products are subject to sanitary and phytosanitary monitoring, which ensures compliance with the requirements of the sanitary and phytosanitary measures established by the importing Party. .

Article 9.4   Harmonization

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3 of the SPS Agreement, the Parties may develop criteria and procedures for the harmonization of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, including, among others, methods of sampling, diagnosis, inspection, and certification of animals, plants, and their products. and byproducts.

Article 9.5   Equivalence

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 4 of the SPS Agreement, the Parties may enter into equivalence agreements in sanitary and phytosanitary matters, the objectives of which will be to facilitate trade in goods subject to sanitary and phytosanitary measures and promote mutual trust. For the effect:

(a) the equivalencies may be determined on the measures applied to a specific product or category of products. By mutual agreement, Agreements for the Recognition of Equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures or systems may be established at the request of a Party; and

(b) when an equivalence agreement is being negotiated and until an understanding is reached on said recognition, the Parties may not apply more restrictive sanitary or phytosanitary measures than those in force in the trade of the merchandise(s). object of the equivalence agreement, except those derived from sanitary or phytosanitary emergencies.

Article 9.6 Risk Assessment

Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 5 of the SPS Agreement:

1. When assessing the risk and establishing its appropriate level of protection, the Parties shall take into account, among other factors:

(a) the epidemiology of pests and diseases of quarantine interest;

(b) analysis of critical control points in sanitary (food safety) and phytosanitary aspects;

(c) the physical, chemical and biological risks in food;

(d) the structure and organization of the sanitary and phytosanitary services;

(e) the protection procedures, epidemiological surveillance, diagnosis and treatments that ensure the safety of food;

(f) the loss of production or sales in the event of the entry, establishment, propagation or dissemination of a pest or disease;

(g) the applicable quarantine measures and treatments that satisfy the importing Party in terms of risk mitigation; and

(h) the costs of control or eradication of pests or diseases in the territory of the importing Party and the cost-effectiveness of other possible methods to reduce the risk.

2. When there is a substantiated technical reason that warrants carrying out a new risk assessment in situations in which there is a fluid and regular trade in agricultural goods between the Parties, it should not be a reason to interrupt the trade in the goods in question, unless the result of the risk assessment has not been passed or in cases of sanitary or phytosanitary emergency.

3. When the scientific information is insufficient to carry out the risk analysis, the Party may adopt provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measures, basing them on the available information, including that coming from the competent international organizations mentioned in this Chapter. In such circumstances the Parties will try to obtain the additional information necessary for a more objective risk analysis and review of the sanitary or phytosanitary measures within a reasonable period of time, for this purpose:

(a) the importing Party shall allow the exporting Party to submit its comments and shall take them into account for the conclusion of the risk assessment;

(b) the importing Party may request clarifications on the information submitted by the exporting Party after having received it;

(c) the adoption or modification of the provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure must be immediately notified to the other Party through the information centers established in accordance with the SPS Agreement; and

(d) if the result of the risk assessment implies the non-acceptance of the import, the scientific basis of the decision will be notified in writing.

4. When a Party has reason to believe that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure established or maintained by the other Party restricts or may restrict its exports and that measure is not based on relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, or there are no such standards, international guidelines or recommendations, it may request an explanation of the reasons for those sanitary and phytosanitary measures and the Party that maintains those measures will have to provide it within a reasonable period of time.

5. The Parties may take into account risk assessments or scientific information, including proposals for mitigation measures that the exporting party wishes to contribute, in order to support the importing party's risk analysis process and alternatives for the exporting party. risk management.

Article 9.7 Recognition of Free Zones and Low Prevalence Zones

Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 6 of the SPS Agreement:

1. The Party interested in obtaining recognition of a zone free of any pest or disease must make the request and provide the corresponding scientific and technical information to the other Party.

2. The Party receiving the application for recognition may carry out inspections, tests and other verification procedures. In case of non-acceptance, it will state in writing the technical grounds for its decision.

Article 9.8 Control, Inspection, Approval and Certification Procedures

Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 8 of the SPS Agreement:

1. When the competent authority of the exporting Party requests for the first time the competent authority of the importing Party to inspect a production unit or a production process in its territory, the competent authority of the importing Party after review and evaluation Complete with the necessary documents and data, it will give the date to carry out the inspection, without prejudice to the provisions of Annex 9.8. Once the inspection has been carried out, the competent authority of the importing Party must issue a resolution based on the result obtained in the inspection and must notify the exporting Party, without prejudice to the provisions of Annex 9.8.

2. Compliance with the recommendations issued as a result of the inspection process must be verified, certified and notified by the competent authority of the exporting Party.

3. In the case of production units or production processes that have a current certification in the importing Party, they must request its renewal at least ninety (90) calendar days before its expiration date. Production units or production process units that comply with the term stipulated in this paragraph and that have not yet received the approval of the certification renewal from the importing Party will be allowed to continue exporting until the competent authority of the importing Party , complete the inspection procedures and issue the corresponding renewal certification.

4. Those productive units or productive processes that do not request their renewal within the period of ninety (90) days, will be governed by the procedure established in paragraph 1 of this Article.

5. The certifications of the production units or production processes issued by the competent authority of the importing Party will be valid in accordance with national legislation.

6. The Parties will grant the necessary facilities for the evaluation of sanitary and phytosanitary services, through the current procedures for verification of controls, inspections, approval procedures, application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and programs based on the guidelines and recommendations of the competent international organizations.

Article 9.9 Technical Cooperation

The Parties agree to provide cooperation and reciprocal technical assistance, as well as to promote its provision through the competent international organizations, in order to strengthen activities aimed at:

(a) the application of this Chapter;

(b) the application of the SPS Agreement;

(c) more active participation in the competent international organizations and their reference bodies; and

(d) support for the development and application of international and regional standards.

Article 9.10 Transparency

Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7 of the SPS Agreement:

1. Each Party, when proposing the adoption or modification of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of general application, shall notify the following:

(a) the adoptions and modifications of said measures; likewise, it will provide information on them, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the SPS Agreement and will make the pertinent adaptations;

(b) changes or modifications to sanitary or phytosanitary measures that have a significant effect on trade between the Parties, at least sixty (60) days before the entry into force of the new provision, to allow the other Party make observations. Emergency situations will be exempt from the term indicated above, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the SPS Agreement;

(c) changes that occur in the field of animal health, such as the appearance of exotic diseases and those notifiable on the OIE List of diseases, within twenty-four (24) hours after the confirmation of the disease ;

(d) changes that occur in the phytosanitary field, such as the appearance of quarantine pests and diseases or the spread of pests and diseases under official control, within seventy-two (72) hours after their verification;

(e) diseases in which the consumption of food products is scientifically proven to be the cause; and

(f) report on the status of the admissibility processes and pending measures.

2. The Parties shall use the notification and information centers established in accordance with the SPS Agreement as a channel of communication. In the case of emergency measures, the Parties, through the competent national institutions, undertake to communicate in writing immediately, briefly indicating the objective and reason for the measure, as well as the nature of the problem.

Article 9.11 Technical Consultations

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party, when in doubt about the application or interpretation of its content, from initiating consultations with the other Party.

2. When a Party requests consultations and so notifies the Committee, the latter must facilitate the consultations, being able to request the opinion of a group of experts, for advice or technical recommendation.

3. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with this Article, without satisfactory results, these consultations will constitute the consultations provided for in Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement).

Article 9.12 Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties agree to establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, the composition of which is indicated in Annex 9.12. The Committee shall be established within a maximum period of thirty (30) days from the entry into force of this Agreement through an exchange of letters that identifies the representatives of each Party before the Committee and the respective main representatives.

2. The Committee in its first meeting will establish the rules and procedures for its operation.

3. The Committee will hear the matters related to this Chapter and will serve, among other things, to promote consultations and cooperation on sanitary and phytosanitary measures and as a forum for the solution of practical problems identified by the Parties.

4. The Committee will have the following functions:

(a) promote the implementation of this Chapter;

(b) promote the improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary conditions in the territory of the Parties;

(c) prepare and recommend procedures for the recognition of equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, for risk assessment, including that of provisional measures, and for the recognition of free zones and low prevalence zones. These works to develop the procedures may begin no later than nine (9) months after the Committee is constituted;

(d) promote assistance and technical cooperation between the Parties, for the development, application and enforcement of sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(e) seek, to the greatest extent possible, technical assistance and cooperation from competent international organizations, in order to obtain scientific and technical advice;

(f) carry out, attend to and promote consultations on specific matters related to sanitary or phytosanitary measures;

(g) promote the necessary facilities for the training and specialization of technical and scientific personnel;

(h) create technical working groups in the areas of animal health, plant health, and food safety, among others, and establish their objectives, guidelines, functions, and the deadlines in which they must deliver their reports or resolve requests; and

(i) approve the results of the working groups.

5. The technical groups will report the results and conclusions of the work to the Committee.

6. The Committee will seek to promote communication and encourage present or future relationships between the institutions of the Parties with responsibility for sanitary and phytosanitary matters.

7. All decisions of the Committee shall be made by consensus, unless the Committee decides otherwise.

8. The Committee may meet and adopt recommendations to deal with matters of bilateral interest to the Parties, provided that all Parties are notified sufficiently in advance so that they can participate in the meeting.

The recommendations adopted by the Committee by virtue of what is established in this paragraph will not take effect with respect to a Party that has not attended the meeting.

9. The Committee will report annually to the Commission on the application of this Chapter and will meet ordinarily once a year or extraordinarily, when the Parties so agree.

10. The Committee may also consult and carry out its work, when so agreed, through the means of communication agreed by the Parties, such as email, videoconferences or others, through their main representatives.

ANNEX 9.8

Control, Inspection, Approval and Certification Procedures PDF

ANNEX 9.12

Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures PDF

 

CHAPTER 10

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

Article 10.1 Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

to make compatible means to bring the different standardization measures, approved by different standardization bodies, but with the same scope, to a level such that they are identical, equivalent or have the effect of allowing the goods to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose;

standardization measures means technical regulations or mandatory technical standards, the conformity assessment procedures applicable to them, approval or authorization procedures, and metrology;

standard means a document approved by a recognized institution that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or related processes and production methods and the observance of which is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process or production method;

international standard means that standard, guide, recommendation or standard specification that is adopted by an international standardization body, in accordance with the guidelines and recommendations established in the TBT Agreement, as well as the provisions of this Chapter;

legitimate objectives means the imperatives of national security, the prevention of practices that may mislead consumers, the protection of human health or safety, animal, plant or environmental life or health;

international standardization and metrology body means a standardization body open to participation by relevant bodies of at least all Members of the TBT Agreement, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Commission of the Codex Alimentarius , the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML) and the International Commission on Radiological Units and Measurements (CIUMR) or any other body designated by the Parties;

approval or authorization procedure means any mandatory administrative process to obtain a registration, permit, license or any other authorization, different from the customs procedure and border inspections and controls, in order for a good to be produced, marketed or used for defined purposes or under established conditions;

conformity assessment procedure means any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine whether the relevant requirements established by technical regulations or mandatory technical standards or standards are met, including, among others, sampling, testing and inspection, evaluation, verification and assurance of conformity, registration, accreditation and approval, either separately or in different combinations;

administrative refusal means the actions taken by a public administration body of the importing Party in the exercise of its powers, to prevent the entry into its territory of a good, due to non-compliance with technical regulations or mandatory technical standard, procedure of evaluation of the conformity or metrology;

technical regulation or mandatory technical standard means a document that establishes the characteristics of the goods or their related processes and production methods, including the applicable administrative provisions and the observance of which is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process or production method; and

comparable situation means one that guarantees the same level of security or protection to achieve a legitimate objective.

The terms used in this Chapter shall have the meaning assigned to them in Annex 1 of the OTC Agreement, in addition to those contained in this Chapter.

Article10.2 General Provisions

1. The objectives of this Chapter are to increase and facilitate merchandise trade and obtain effective access to the market, through an adequate implementation of the TBT Agreement.

2. The provisions of this Chapter are intended to ensure that the standardization measures and standards of the Parties do not constitute unnecessary obstacles to trade.

3. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its domestic law, compliance with the obligations of this Chapter in its territory and, in this regard, shall adopt the measures within its power with respect to non-governmental standardization organizations in its territory.

4. Controversies that arise in relation to the application of this Chapter will be resolved through the provisions set forth in the dispute settlement procedure of this Agreement. The Parties may use the Understanding Related to the Rules and Procedures Governing the WTO Dispute Settlement for those provisions that are consigned in the TBT Agreement.

Article10.3 Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of all standardization measures and standards that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade in goods between the Parties, including any amendment thereto and any addition to its rules or to the list of products to which they refer.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, this Chapter does not apply to:

(a) the technical specifications established by public entities for the production or consumption requirements of said entities; and

(b) sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

Article10.4 Basic Rights and Obligations

1. The Parties agree to reaffirm compliance with the rights and obligations contained in the TBT Agreement. In addition to the foregoing, the Parties shall be governed by the rights and obligations of this Chapter.

2. Each Party may develop, adopt, apply and maintain standardization measures that allow guaranteeing the achievement of its legitimate objectives.

3. The Parties understand that the preparation, adoption and application of technical regulations or mandatory technical standards, standards and conformity assessment procedures must be based on the provisions of the TBT Agreement and the provisions of this Chapter.

Article10.5 Trade Facilitation

1. The Parties shall seek to identify trade-facilitating initiatives in relation to their standardization measures and standards and increase understanding of each other's national systems.

2. Each Party shall allow persons of the other Party to participate in the development of its technical regulations or mandatory technical standards, standards, conformity assessment procedures, and metrology, on terms no less favorable than those granted to its own persons and those of any other country.

3. Each Party shall recommend that non-governmental standardization entities located in its territory observe the previous numeral.

4. When a Party administratively rejects a good originating in the territory of the other Party due to a perceived non-compliance with a technical regulation or mandatory technical standard, it must notify the importer without delay and in writing of the reasons for its rejection, through such as fax, document sent by courier, by email or other suitable means.

5. The Parties agree to strengthen and guide, to the extent possible, their activities in terms of standardization measures and standards, based on the recommendations of international standardization, accreditation, and metrology forums.

Article10.6 Use of International Standards

Without prejudice to the rights and obligations conferred by the TBT Agreement and the provisions of this Chapter, for the preparation or application of its standardization measures and standards, each Party shall use the current or imminently adopted international standards, or their relevant elements, except when these international standards do not constitute an effective or adequate means to achieve their legitimate objectives, for example, fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological, or infrastructure nature, or for scientifically proven reasons, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

Article10.7 Compatibility and Equivalence

Without prejudice to the rights conferred on them and the obligations imposed on them by the TBT Agreement and the provisions of this Chapter, and taking into account international standardization and metrology activities, to the greatest extent possible, the Parties will make their respective measures compatible. of standardization, without reducing the level of safety or protection of human, animal or plant life or health, the environment or consumers.

Article10.8 Technical Regulations or Mandatory Technical Standards

1. A Party shall accept a technical regulation or mandatory technical standard adopted by the other Party as equivalent to its own, when in cooperation with that other Party, the importing Party determines that the technical regulations of the exporting Party adequately comply with the legitimate objectives of the importing Party.

2. At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall communicate to it in writing the reasons why it does not accept a technical regulation or mandatory technical standard as equivalent, in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. When a Party accepts as its own the technical regulations or mandatory technical standards or conformity assessment procedures of a third country and does not accept as equivalent the technical regulations or mandatory technical standards or conformity assessment procedures of the other Party shall, upon request by that other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

Article10.9 Conformity Assessment

1. In order to advance in trade facilitation, a Party shall favorably consider, at the request of the other Party, entering into negotiations aimed at concluding mutual recognition agreements for the results of their respective conformity assessment procedures.

The Parties recognize that there is a wide range of mechanisms to facilitate the acceptance in the territory of one Party of the results of the conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, such as:

(a) the importing Party may accept a supplier's declaration of conformity;

(b) Conformity assessment entities operating in the territory of a Party may enter into voluntary agreements with conformity assessment entities operating in the territory of the other Party, to accept or validate the results of their assessment procedures. of conformity;

(c) a Party may adopt accreditation procedures to qualify conformity assessment entities located in the territory of the other Party;

(d) a Party may designate conformity assessment entities located in the territory of the other Party;

(e) a Party may agree with the other Party to accept the results of the conformity assessment procedures that the entities located in the territory of the other Party carry out with respect to specific technical regulations or mandatory technical standards; and

(f) a Party may recognize the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party.

2. Each Party may accept the results of the conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, provided that they offer a satisfactory guarantee, equivalent to that provided by the procedures carried out by the accepting Party. or that are carried out in your territory and whose result you accept.

3. In the event that a Party does not accept the results of a conformity assessment procedure carried out in the territory of the other Party, it shall, at the request of that other Party, explain the reasons for its decision so that corrective actions are taken. that are necessary.

4. Prior to the acceptance of the results of a conformity assessment procedure in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 and in order to strengthen the sustained reliability of the results of the conformity assessment of each of them, Parties may consult on matters such as the technical capacity of the concerned conformity assessment bodies, including verified compliance with relevant international standards, through means such as accreditation.

5. In recognition that this should be to the mutual benefit of the Parties involved, each Party shall accredit, approve or otherwise recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party, under conditions no less favorable than those granted to those organizations in their territory.

6. For conformity assessment procedures, the Parties may use the capacity and technical infrastructure of accredited bodies established in the territory of the Parties.

Article10.10 Approval or Authorization Procedures

1. Each Party shall develop, adopt and apply approval or authorization procedures, so as to grant access to like goods from the territory of the other Party under conditions no less favorable than those granted to its like goods or to those of any other country not Part, in a comparable situation.

2. In connection with its approval or authorization procedures, each Party shall be required to:

(a) such proceedings are commenced and concluded as expeditiously as possible and in a non-discriminatory order;

(b) the processing of each of these procedures is published or, upon request, the applicant is informed of said information;

(c) the competent body or authority examines without delay, upon receipt of an application, whether the documentation is complete and communicates to the applicant all deficiencies accurately and completely, transmits to the applicant as soon as possible the results of the authorization in an accurate manner and complete, so that corrective measures can be taken if necessary and the applicant is informed of the stage of the procedure, explaining any delays;

(d) only the information necessary to authorize and calculate the fees is required;

(e) the confidential nature of the information referring to a good of the other Party, resulting from such procedures or that has been provided as a result of them, is respected in the same way as in the case of a good of that Party;

(f) the fees imposed for the approval or authorization procedure of a good of the other Party are equitable in comparison with those that would be levied for the approval or authorization procedure of a good of that Party, taking into account the expenses of communications, transport and other expenses derived from the differences in the location of the applicant's facilities and those of the approval or authorization procedure body; and

(g) a procedure is established to review complaints regarding the application of an approval or authorization procedure and to take corrective action where the complaint is justified.

Article10.11 Metrology

Each Party shall guarantee, to the extent possible, the documented traceability of its standards and the calibration of its measuring instruments, in accordance with the recommendations of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) and the OIML, complying with the provisions in this chapter.

Article10.12 Notifications and Information Sharing

1. In cases where there is no relevant international standard or where the technical content of a technical regulation or mandatory technical standard or conformity assessment procedure applicable to a draft technical regulation or mandatory technical standard is not in accordance with the technical content of the relevant international standards and provided that said technical regulation or mandatory technical standard may have a significant effect on the trade of the Parties, the Parties undertake to:

(a) exchange information on standards, technical regulations or mandatory technical standards and conformity assessment procedures, in particular those that may affect reciprocal trade;

(b) at the request of the other Party, provide information about the base standard and the legitimate objective of the technical regulation or mandatory technical standard, or conformity assessment procedure that the Party has adopted or proposes to adopt;

(c) transmit the proposed technical regulation or mandatory technical standard, or conformity assessment procedures applicable to them electronically to the other Parties through the contact points that each Party has established under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, to the at the same time as notifying the proposal to other WTO Members in accordance with the TBT Agreement;

(d) provide, in print or electronically, within a reasonable period, any information or explanation that is required at the request of a Party in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Party shall endeavor to respond to each request within sixty (60) days;

(e) apply in accordance with Article 10 of the WTO TBT Agreement, the recommendations indicated in the document Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the Committee since January 1, 1995, G/TBT/1/Rev.8, 23 May 2002 , Section IV (Information Exchange Procedure) expressed by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade;

(f) allow at least sixty (60) days after notification, for individuals and other Parties to comment in writing on the proposed applicable technical regulation or mandatory technical standard or conformity assessment procedure to these, so as to allow the interested parties during this period to present and formulate observations and queries so that the notifying Party can take them into account. A Party will give favorable consideration to reasonable requests for an extension of the period established for comments; and

(g) each Party shall annually notify the other Party in writing of its standardization plans and programs and shall deliver them within a reasonable time to the information center of the other Party.

2. If urgent security, health, environmental protection or national security problems arise or threaten to arise, that Party may omit prior notification of the project, but once adopted it must immediately notify and send it to the other Party. .

3. The notifications established in paragraphs 1 and 2 will be made in accordance with the formats established in the TBT Agreement.

Article10.13 Information Centers

1. Each Party shall ensure that there is an information center in its territory capable of responding to all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing relevant up-to-date documentation regarding standardization measures or norms applicable to them, adopted or proposed in their territory, by governmental or non-governmental organizations.

2. Each Party designates the information center indicated in Annex 10.13.

Article10.14 Cooperation and Technical Assistance

1. The Parties shall promote cooperation on standards, technical regulations or mandatory technical standards, conformity assessment and metrology with a view to facilitating market access, increasing understanding of the respective national systems and strengthening the bonds of trust between the Parties.

2. At the request of one Party, the other Party shall provide, to the extent of its possibilities and taking into account the level of development of the requesting Party, advice, information and assistance to strengthen the national systems of standardization, conformity assessment and metrology. .

3. The Parties will develop cooperation and technical assistance programs aimed at achieving full and effective compliance with the obligations established in the TBT Agreement.

4. At the request of the other Party, a Party shall favorably consider any proposal aimed at:

(a) facilitate trade for a specific sector and promote greater cooperation under this Chapter;

(b) develop mechanisms to promote equivalence between technical regulations or mandatory technical standards and conformity assessment procedures applicable to them; mutual recognition agreements and the designation in the territory of the other Party of its conformity assessment bodies;

(c) create cooperation and technical assistance programs aimed at achieving standardization measures and harmonized standards;

(d) facilitate the coordination of the standardization entities of the Parties for their participation in international standardization processes; and

(e) support the development and application of international standards.

Article10.15 Technical Consultations

1. When a Party considers that a standardization measure of the other Party is interpreted or applied in an inconsistent manner with the provisions of this Chapter, it must deliver its written request to the other Party, including identification of the current standardization measure or project and the reasons that support the existence of the incompatibility.

2. When a Party requests consultations and so notifies the Committee, the latter must facilitate the consultations, being able to refer them to an ad-hoc working group in order to obtain advice or non-obligatory technical recommendations from them.

3. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with this Article, without satisfactory results, these consultations will constitute those provided for in the Dispute Resolution Chapter, if the Parties so agree.

4. The Parties will make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution, within a period of sixty (60) days.

Article10.16 Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, which will be made up of representatives of each Party, in accordance with Annex 10.16.

2. The Committee will hear matters related to this Chapter and will serve, among other things, as a forum to promote consultations and cooperation on matters related to it, as well as to discuss and resolve problems identified by the Parties.

3. The Committee will have the following functions:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) identify and ensure that unnecessary technical barriers to trade are removed;

(c) facilitate the process through which the Parties will make their respective measures related to technical regulations or mandatory technical standards, standards and conformity assessment procedures applicable to them compatible;

(d) ensure that the conformity assessment procedures applicable to technical regulations or mandatory technical standards do not constitute hidden obstacles to trade and that their application is carried out in the most expeditious, transparent and non-discriminatory manner possible. ;

(e) encourage that the activities related to legal metrology of the Parties are carried out in accordance with the OIML guides, recommendations and documents and that the Parties guarantee, to the extent possible, the traceability of their metrological standards in accordance with what is recommended by the BIPM and the OIML;

(f) analyze and propose solutions for those measures related to technical regulations or mandatory technical standards, conformity assessment procedures and metrology applicable to them, which a Party considers a technical barrier to trade;

(g) as appropriate, facilitate sectoral cooperation between governmental and non-governmental standardization, accreditation and conformity assessment entities in the territories of two (2) or more Parties;

(h) at the request of a Party, facilitate consultations on any matter arising under this Chapter;

(i) establish, if necessary, for particular issues or sectors, working groups to deal with specific matters related to this Chapter, such as standardization measures or standards; and

(j) report to the Commission on the implementation of this Chapter.

3. The Committee will meet at least one (1) time a year, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

4. The Committee may also consult and carry out its work through the means of communication agreed by the Parties, such as email, videoconferences or others.

5. The Parties may hold bilateral meetings when it is not possible to convene the Committee, provided that all Parties are duly informed of the objectives of said meeting.

6. All Committee recommendations will be made by consensus, unless the Committee decides otherwise.

7. The Committee will establish its rules and procedures, within six (6) months after the entry into force of the Agreement.

ANNEX 10.13

Information Centers PDF

ANNEX 10.16

Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade PDF

 

PART FOUR

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT

CHAPTER 11

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT

Article11.1 Coverage

1. Subject to the terms and conditions established in Annex 11.1, Section A, this Chapter applies to measures related to the procurement of goods and services, including construction services, or any combination thereof, through any means. contractual, including purchase and rental or lease, with or without a purchase option, carried out by the public entities of each of the Parties, when they publish an open invitation to participate or submit an offer, in accordance with the modalities or regimes contracting procedures provided for in the legislation of each Party, listed in Annex 11.1, Section B.

2. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) non-contractual arrangements or any form of assistance that a Party or a State enterprise provides, including grants, loans, capital transfers, tax incentives, subsidies, guarantees, cooperative agreements, government supply of goods and services to persons or central or local governments and purchases for the direct purpose of providing foreign assistance;

(b) procurement financed by loans or donations in favor of a Party, including an entity of a Party, by a person, international entities, associations, another Party, or non-Party, to the extent that such loans or donations establish inconsistent conditions with what is established in this Chapter;

(c) contracting agency services or fiscal deposits, settlement and administration services for regulated financial institutions, and sales and distribution services for public debt;

(d) the hiring of public employees and measures related to employment; and

(e) purchases made under exceptionally favorable conditions that only occur for a very short period, such as extraordinary disposals made by companies that are not normally suppliers or the disposal of assets of companies in liquidation or under receivership.

3. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not apply to public procurement of banking, financial or specialized services referred to the following activities:

(a) public debt; either

(b) management of liabilities and public debt.

4. For greater certainty:

(a) when a public entity is going to award a contract that is not covered, no goods or services that are part of said contract will be included in the coverage of this Chapter; and

(b) the contracting of merchandise or services carried out by a public entity not covered shall be understood as excluded from this Chapter.

Article11.2 National Treatment, Non-Discrimination and Transparency

1. With respect to the coverage of this Chapter:

(a) each Party shall grant to goods, services, including construction services, and suppliers1 of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted to its own goods, services and suppliers;

(b) no Party,

(i) grant a locally established supplier less favorable treatment than that accorded to another locally established supplier, by reason of the degree of association or foreign ownership; neither

(ii) discriminate against a locally established supplier, on the grounds that the goods or services offered by said supplier are goods or services of the other Party;

(c) each Party will apply its procurement procedures in such a way that they allow the maximum possible competition and respect the principles of transparency, publicity and non-discrimination; and

(d) no Party or public entity of a Party shall establish requirements that have the object or effect of circumventing the obligations of this Chapter or creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.

2. With respect to covered procurement, a public entity shall refrain from considering, requesting, or imposing special compensatory conditions at any stage of the procurement. For the purposes of this Chapter, special compensatory conditions mean the conditions or commitments imposed or considered by a public entity, which promote local development or improve the balance of payments accounts of a Party through local content requirements, licenses for the use of technology, investment, countertrade or similar requirements.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to measures relating to customs duties and other charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation, to the method of collection of said duties or charges, to other regulations import, including restrictions and formalities, or measures that affect trade in services, in all its supply modalities, other than the measures that specifically regulate public procurement covered by this Chapter.

4. Each Party shall submit to the other Party its laws, regulations and other regulations of general application relating to public procurement and, if any changes occur, shall submit them to the other Party as soon as possible.

5. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from developing new public procurement policies, or adopting and modifying its laws, regulations and practices related to procurement, provided they are not inconsistent with what is established in this Chapter.

6. For the purposes of the application of this Chapter, in the cases in which there are provisions in national legislation that establish qualification criteria that contemplate national value added requirements, the same requirements demanded of the goods or services of that Party will be demanded of them. to the goods or services of the other Party. For the purposes of merchandise, the Parties will allow the incorporation of originating materials or originating merchandise.2 of one or more of the Parties to a good of one of the Parties.

Article11.3 General Exceptions

1. Provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means of arbitrary and unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals, security and order;

(b) necessary to protect human, animal and plant life or health;

(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; and

(d) related to goods or services of persons with disabilities, philanthropic institutions or prison labor.

2. The Parties understand that paragraph 1 (b) includes environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal and plant life and health.

Article11.4 Chapter Administration and Future Negotiations

The Parties shall meet within the first year from the date of entry into force of the Agreement, with a view to reviewing the application of the Chapter and thereafter every two (2) years in order to review its application, expand its coverage and determine possible mechanisms to improve the access of suppliers of one Party to the Government Procurement of the other Party.

ANNEX 11.1

Public Procurement PDF

 

PART FIVE

INVESTMENT, SERVICES AND RELATED ISSUES

CHAPTER 12

INVESTMENT

Section A - Investment

Article12.1 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

New York Convention means the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards , done at New York on June 10, 1958;

Inter-American Convention means the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration , done in Panama on January 30, 1975;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States , concluded at Washington on March 18, 1965;

respondent means the Party that is a party to a dispute relating to an investment;

claimant means an investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute with the other Party;

protected information means confidential business information or information that is proprietary or otherwise protected from disclosure under the Party's law;

investment means

1. Any type of asset of an economic nature owned by an investor, or controlled by it, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of paragraph 3, including in particular, but not exclusively, the following:

(a) movable and immovable property, as well as all property rights thereon;

(b) shares, social quotas and any other type of economic participation in companies;

(c) claims for money or any other claim that has economic value;

(d) intellectual property rights;

(e) concessions granted by law, by an administrative act or under a contract, such as concessions to explore, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources; and

(f) any external credit operation, under the terms established by the legislation of each Party that is linked to an investment.

It will not be considered an investment:

(a) public debt operations;

(b) pecuniary claims arising exclusively from:

(i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or legal entity in the territory of a Party to a national or to a company in the territory of the other Party; either

(ii) the granting of credit in connection with a commercial transaction;

2. A change in the way in which the assets have been invested or reinvested does not affect their investment nature under this Chapter, as long as said change is included in the definitions of this Article.

3. In accordance with paragraph 1 of the definition of investment, an investment must have at least the following elements:

(a) the contribution of capital or other resources;

(b) expectation of benefits and returns; and

(c) the existence of risk for the investor;

covered investment means with respect to a Party, an investment, as defined in this Article, in its territory, of an investor of the other Party that exists on the date of entry into force of this Agreement or is established, acquired or later expanded;

investor of a Party

1. Appoints for each of the Parties:

(a) a natural person of a Party who is considered a national of the Party in accordance with Annex 2.1 (Country-Specific Definitions);

(b) business, which means, any entity or person, whether for profit or not, and whether privately or government owned, including companies, corporations, partnerships, foundations, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, associations trade, or other associations, which are constituted or otherwise duly organized under the law of that Party, and which have their domicile, as well as substantial economic activities in the territory of the same Party;

(c) company not established under the law of that Party but effectively controlled, according to the law of the Party in which the investment is made, by one or more natural persons, as defined in subparagraph (a) or by one or more companies as defined in subparagraph (b).

2. The term investor of a Party refers to the natural person and company, as defined in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) above, that intend to carry out, through specific actions, are carrying out or have made an investment in the territory of the other Party; considering, however, that a natural person who has dual nationality shall be considered exclusively a national of the State of his dominant and effective nationality;

freely usable currency means the “freely usable currency” as determined in accordance with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

disputing party means either the plaintiff or the defendant;

disputing parties means the plaintiff and the defendant;

Non-disputing Party means the Party that is not a party to an investment dispute;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Additional Facility Rules for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes ;

income means the sums produced by an investment during a determined period of time, and includes in particular, but not exclusively, profits, dividends and interests;

Secretary General means the Secretary General of ICSID; and

Tribunal means an arbitral tribunal established under Articles 12.21 and 12.28.

Article12.2 Scope of Application1

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party, at any level of government, relating to:

(a) the investors of the other Party in everything related to their investment;

(b) the covered investments; and

(c) all investments in the territory of the Party in relation to Articles 12.9 and 12.16.

2. This Chapter does not apply to controversies that arose prior to its entry into force, nor to controversies about events that occurred before its entry into force, even if its effects remain even after it.

3. In the case of external credits, this Chapter shall apply exclusively to those contracted after the entry into force of the Treaty.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall oblige any of the Parties to protect investments made with capital or assets of illicit origin, nor shall it be interpreted in the sense of preventing a Party from adopting or maintaining measures aimed at preserving public order, the compliance with its obligations for the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security or the protection of its own essential security interests.

5. This Chapter does not apply to measures that a Party adopts or maintains, related to financial services.

Article12.3 Relationship with Other Chapters

1. In case of incompatibility between a provision of this Chapter and a provision of another, the provision of the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions set forth in it shall prevail over any other definition set forth in this Agreement.

3. The requirement of a Party that a service provider of the other Party post a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for the supply of a cross-border service does not, by itself, make this Chapter applicable to measures adopted or maintained by the Party with respect to the cross-border supply of the service. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Party with respect to a financial bond or guarantee, to the extent that such financial bond or guarantee constitutes a covered investment.

Article12.4 Investment Protection

1. Each Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment in accordance with customary international law and full protection and security within its territory to covered investments.

2. For greater certainty,

(a) the concept of “fair and equitable treatment” does not require treatment in addition to that required by the minimum level of treatment of aliens under customary international law, nor does it create additional substantive rights;

(b) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil, or administrative proceedings, in accordance with the principle of due process incorporated in the main legal systems of the world; and

(c) the concept of “full protection and security” does not imply a treatment higher than the level of police protection granted to nationals of the Party where the investment has been made.

3. The determination that another provision of this Chapter or of another international agreement has been violated shall not imply that fair and equitable treatment or full protection and security have been violated.

Article12.5 National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or otherwise. disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investments in its territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, and sale or other form of disposition of the investments.

Article12.6 Most Favored Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investors of any other Party or of a non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion , administration, management, operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investments in its territory of investors of any other Party or of a non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition , expansion, administration, management, operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments in its territory.

3. The Most Favored Nation Treatment that must be granted in similar circumstances does not extend to dispute resolution mechanisms that are provided for in international investment treaties or agreements.2

Article12.7 Free Transfer

1. Each Party, subject to compliance with the requirements established in its internal legal system, will allow all transfers related to a covered investment to be made freely and without undue delay to and from its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) capital contributions;

(b) investment income, as defined in Article 12.1;

(c) proceeds from the sale or liquidation, in whole or in part, of a covered investment;

(d) interest, royalty payments, administration fees, technical assistance and other charges;

(e) payments made pursuant to a contract, including a loan contract;

(f) payments made in accordance with Article 12.8 and 12.14;

(g) payments arising from a dispute; and

(h) Salaries and other remuneration received by personnel hired abroad in connection with a covered investment.

2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for reasons that affect the macroeconomic balance, the Parties may adopt measures related to capital inflows of external credits and/or that imply an extra cost for the advance payment of the same, provided that such measures are of fair, non-discriminatory and good faith application.

3. Each Party shall permit transfers related to a covered investment to be made in a freely usable currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange at the time of the transfer.

4. Each Party shall permit transfers of in-kind earnings related to a covered investment to be made as authorized or specified in a written agreement between the Party and a covered investment or an investor of the other Party.

5. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1, 3 and 4, a Party may condition or prevent a transfer, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, bankruptcy proceedings, corporate restructuring, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) criminal offences;

(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist with law enforcement or financial or exchange regulatory authorities;

(e) guarantee of compliance with orders or rulings in firm judicial, arbitration or administrative proceedings; either

(f) compliance with labor or tax obligations.

Article12.8 Expropriation and Compensation

1. The covered investments of investors of one Party in the territory of the other Party shall not be subject to nationalization, direct or indirect expropriation, or any other measure with similar effects (hereinafter "expropriation") except for the reasons expressly provided for in the Constitutions of the Parties, in accordance with due legal process, in a non-discriminatory manner, in good faith and accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.

The reasons indicated in the previous paragraph are:

(a) with respect to the Republic of El Salvador: public utility or social interest;

(b) with respect to the Republic of Guatemala: collective utility, social benefit or public interest;

(c) with respect to the Republic of Honduras: public need or interest; and

(d) with respect to the Republic of Colombia: public utility or social interest.

2. Each Party, in accordance with the corresponding constitutional provisions, may establish monopolies or reserve strategic activities that deprive an investor of a Party from developing an economic activity, as long as it is for the constitutional reasons expressed in the previous paragraph. In these events, the investor will receive prompt, adequate and effective compensation, under the conditions set forth in this Article.

3. The Parties understand that:

(a) indirect expropriation results from a measure or series of measures by a Party that has an effect equivalent to a direct expropriation, without the formal transfer of ownership rights;

(b) the determination as to whether a measure or a series of measures by a Party, in a specific situation, constitutes indirect expropriation, requires a case-by-case analysis based on the facts and considering:

(i) the economic impact of the measure or series of measures. In any case, the simple fact that the measure or series of measures generates an adverse economic impact on the value of an investment does not imply that there is indirect expropriation; and

(ii) the scope of the measure or series of measures and its interference on the distinguishable and reasonable expectations of the investment;

(c) non-discriminatory measures of a Party, which are designed and applied based on the constitutional reasons expressed in paragraph 1 of this Article, or which have objectives such as public health, safety and security, do not constitute indirect expropriation. environmental Protection; except in extraordinary circumstances, such as when a measure or series of measures are so severe in light of their objective that they cannot reasonably be perceived as a result of adoption in good faith.

4. The compensation will be equivalent to the fair market value that the expropriated investment had immediately before the expropriation measure was adopted or before its imminence became public knowledge, whichever comes first (hereinafter "valuation date") .

5. The fair market value will be calculated in a freely usable currency at the prevailing market exchange rate for that currency on the valuation date. The compensation will include interest at a commercial rate set according to market criteria for said currency from the date of expropriation until the date of payment. The compensation will be paid without undue delay, will be effectively realizable and freely transferable.

6. The legality of the measure and the amount of compensation may be claimed before the judicial authorities of the Party that adopted it; the foregoing without prejudice to the administrative resources proceeding according to the legislation of each Party.3

7. The Parties confirm that, in development of the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights, cannot be questioned under the provisions of this Article.

Article12.9 Performance Requirements

1. No Party may, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other form of disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party, in its territory, impose or enforce any requirement or enforce any obligation or commitment to:4

(a) export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(c) buy, use or give preference to goods produced in its territory, or buy goods from persons in its territory;

(d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment;

(e) restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that such investment produces or supplies, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings they generate in foreign currency;

(f) transfer to a person in its territory a particular technology, a productive process or other knowledge of its property;5th or

(g) supply exclusively from the territory of the Party the goods produced by the investment or the services it supplies to a specific regional market or to the world market.

2. No Party may condition the receipt of an advantage, or the continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale, or other form of disposition of an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or of a country that is not a Party, to the fulfillment of any requirement for:

(a) achieve a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(b) buy, use or grant preferences to goods produced in its territory or to buy goods from persons in its territory;

(c) relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; either

(d) restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that such investment produces or supplies, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings that it generates in foreign currency.

3. (a) Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed to prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt of an advantage or

that an advantage continue to be received, in connection with an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or of a country that is not a Party, upon fulfillment of a requirement that it locate production, supply services, train or employ workers , build or expand private facilities or carry out research and development, in its territory.

(b) Paragraph 1 (f) does not apply:

(i) when a Party authorizes the use of an intellectual property right pursuant to Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement or to measures that require the disclosure of proprietary information that fall within the scope of application of, and are consistent with, Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement; either

(ii) when the requirement is imposed or the commitment or obligation is ordered by a judicial or administrative court or a competition authority, to remedy a practice that has been determined after a judicial or administrative process as anticompetitive in accordance with competition laws from one side.6

(c) Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner and provided that such measures do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in paragraphs 1 (b), (c) and (f) and 2(a) and (b) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including those of an environmental nature, that are:

(i) necessary to ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

(ii) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

(iii) related to the preservation of non-renewable natural resources, living or not.

(d) Paragraphs 1 (a), (b) and (c) and 2 (a) and (b) do not apply to the requirements for qualification of goods or services with respect to export promotion programs and foreign aid programs.

(e) Paragraphs 1 (b), (c), (f) and (g) and 2 (a) and (b) do not apply in relation to Government Procurement.

(f) Paragraphs 2 (a) and (b) do not apply to requirements imposed by an importing Party with respect to the contents of the goods, necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.

4. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to any requirements other than those stated in those same paragraphs.

5. This Article does not exclude the application of any commitment, obligation or requirement between private parties, when a Party did not impose or require the commitment, obligation or requirement.

Article12.10 Senior Executives and Boards of Directors

1. No Party may require an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment to appoint natural persons of a particular nationality to senior management positions.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of the boards of directors, committees thereof, or equivalent management bodies of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment be of a particular nationality or resident in the territory of the Party provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control over its investment.

Article12.11 Denial of Benefits

Upon notice and consultation, a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of such investor, if an investor of a non-Party owns or controls the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory Of the other part; either

(b) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of such investor, if an investor of the denying Party owns or controls the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of The other part.

Article12.12 Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 12.5, 12.6, 12.9 and 12.10 shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure maintained by a Party in:

(i) the central level of government as stipulated by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I, or

(ii) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that said modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 12.5, 12.6 , 12.9 and 12.10;

(d) Articles 12.5, 12.6, 12.9 and 12.10 shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

2. Article 12.6 shall not apply to treatment accorded by a Party under any Treaty or International Agreement, or in respect of sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its schedule in Annex III.

3. Neither Party may require, pursuant to any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and included in its Schedule in Annex II, an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure takes effect.

4. Articles 12.5, 12.6 and 12.10 shall not apply to:

(a) public procurement; either

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-backed loans, guarantees, and insurance.

Article12.13 Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 12.5 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities connected with a covered investment, such as a requirement that investors be residents of the Party or that Covered investments are constituted in accordance with the legislation or regulation of the Party, provided that such formalities do not significantly undermine the protection granted by a Party to investors of the other Party and to investments covered in accordance with this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 12.5 and 12.6, a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its covered investment to provide information regarding that investment, exclusively for informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect business information that is confidential from any disclosure that could adversely affect the competitive situation of the investor or of the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing a Party from obtaining or disclosing information regarding the fair and good faith application of its laws.

Article12.14 Compensation for Damage or Loss

Investors of a Party and covered investments that suffer losses due to war, armed conflict, or civil disturbances in the territory of the other Party, shall receive from the latter, in terms of reparation, indemnity, compensation or other arrangement, a treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to its investors or to the investments of its own investors, or to the investors or to the investments of the investors of any third State.

Article12.15 Subrogation

1. When a Party or a body authorized by it has granted insurance or some other financial guarantee against non-commercial risks, with respect to any investment of one of its investors in the territory of the other Party, the latter shall recognize the rights of the first Party, or body authorized by it, to subrogate the rights of the investor, when it has made a payment by virtue of said insurance or guarantee.

2. When a Party or a body authorized by it has paid its investor and by virtue of this has assumed its rights and benefits, said investor may not claim such rights and benefits from the other Party, unless expressly authorized by the first Party.

Article12.16 Investment and the Environment

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this Chapter that it deems appropriate to ensure that investments in its territory are made in compliance with ecological or environmental law. in that part.

Section B - Investor-State Dispute Settlement

Article12.17. Consultations and Negotiation

Any dispute that arises between an investor of one Party and the other Party shall be resolved by the parties to the dispute, to the extent possible, by amicable agreement. Any difference must be communicated in writing by the investor to the Party receiving the investment, including a justification of the facts and legal issues that support the communication.

Article12.18 Submission of a Claim

1. In the case of administrative acts, in order to submit a claim to the internal forum or to the arbitration provided for in this Article, it will be essential to previously exhaust the governmental or administrative means, by the investor or his investment, when the legislation of the Party so requires. . Said exhaustion may in no case exceed a term of six (6) months from the date of its initiation by the investor and shall not prevent the investor from requesting the consultations referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article.

2. In order to submit a claim to arbitration under this Chapter based on the fact that the respondent has breached his obligation not to deny justice and therefore has not granted fair and equitable treatment in accordance with customary international law, the investor must have exhausted the remedies jurisdictional interns, except that:

(a) there is no remedy in the Party's domestic law for the protection of the right that is alleged to have been violated; or in case there is an appeal, the principle of due process incorporated in the main legal systems of the world is not guaranteed;

(b) has not been allowed access to domestic remedies, or has been prevented from exhausting them; either

(c) there is unjustified delay in the decision on the aforementioned resources.

3. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the parties to a dispute, by mutual agreement, from resorting to mediation or conciliation, ad-hoc or institutional, before or during the arbitration procedure.

4. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot be resolved through consultation and negotiation:

(a) the claimant, at its own expense, may submit to arbitration a claim alleging:

(i) that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A; and

(ii) that the claimant has suffered loss or damage by reason of, or as a result of, such breach;

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the claimant, may, in accordance with this Section, submit to arbitration a claim alleging:

(i) that the defendant has breached an obligation under Section A, and

(ii) that the company has suffered loss or damage by virtue of or as a result of said breach.

5. If the dispute cannot be resolved in this way within a period of nine (9) months from the date of the written communication mentioned in Article 12.17, the dispute may be submitted, at the investor's choice, to:

(a) an ad-hoc arbitration tribunal which, unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, shall be established in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; either

(b) the ICSID Convention and the Rules of Procedure Applicable to ICSID Arbitration Proceedings , provided that the respondent as well as the Party to the claimant are parties to the ICSID Convention; either

(c) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules provided that either the respondent or the Party of the claimant, but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention; either

(d) an arbitration tribunal under another arbitration institution or under other arbitration rules, agreed by the Parties.

6. Provided that the period provided for in paragraph 5 of this Article has elapsed and at least ninety (90) days before a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section, the claimant shall give the respondent written notice of its intention to submit the claim to arbitration. The notification will specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and in the case that the claim is submitted on behalf of a company, the name, address and place of incorporation of the company;

(b) for each claim, the provision of this Chapter allegedly violated;

(c) the basis for each claim, namely:

(i) questions of fact and law;

(ii) the losses or damages generated to the investment; and

(iii) the causal link between the violation of the Chapter and the losses or damages generated to the investment; and

(d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

7. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration, in accordance with the procedures provided in this Agreement; and

(b) the request for arbitration is accompanied by:

(i) the claimant's written waiver of the claims submitted to arbitration under this Article; and

(ii) of the written waivers by the claimant and the company of the claims submitted to arbitration under this Article;

of any right to initiate before any judicial or administrative court in accordance with the law of any Party, or other dispute resolution procedures, any action with respect to any measure that is alleged to have constituted a violation referred to in this Article.

8. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 7 (b), the plaintiff for claims initiated under this Article, may initiate or continue a precautionary measure, which does not involve the payment of monetary damages, before a judicial or administrative court of the defendant, provided that such measure is filed with the sole purpose of preserving the rights and interests of the plaintiff or the company during the arbitration process.7

Article12.19 Consent of Each Party to Arbitration

Each Party gives its advance and irrevocable consent so that any dispute related to an investment may be submitted to any of the arbitration procedures indicated in Article 12.18 (5) (b), (c) and (d).

Article12.20 Headquarters of the Arbitration Procedure

The disputing parties may agree on the legal seat where any arbitration is to be held in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, in accordance with Article 12.18 (5). In the absence of agreement between the disputing parties, the Tribunal will determine said place in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place is in the territory of a State that is party to the New York Convention.

Article12.21 Selection of Referees

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the Tribunal will be made up of three (3) arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing parties and the third, who will be the presiding arbitrator, will be appointed by agreement of the disputing parties.

2. In the event that a disputing party does not appoint an arbitrator or an agreement is not reached on the appointment of the president of the Tribunal, the Secretary General shall appoint the arbitrators in the arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this Section.

3. If a tribunal has not been constituted within seventy-five (75) days from the date the claim was submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section, the Secretary General, at the request of a disputing party , will appoint within a period that may not exceed ninety (90) days, according to this section, the arbitrator or arbitrators who have not yet been appointed.8 In any case, the majority of the arbitrators may not be nationals of the disputing Party or nationals of the Party of the disputing investor.

4. The Secretary General shall designate the President of the Tribunal within ninety (90) days from the request referred to in paragraph 3. In the event that there is no agreement between the parties once the Secretary General has proposed three ( 3) candidates for President of the Tribunal from the list pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article, and an arbitrator available to preside over the Tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary-General shall appoint, from the ICSID List of Arbitrators, the President of the Tribunal , as long as it is of a nationality other than that of the disputing Party or that of the Party of the disputing investor.

5. As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall establish and maintain a list of sixteen (16) arbitrators as possible presidents of the Tribunal, who meet the requirements established in the ICSID Convention and in the rules contemplated in Article 12.18 and who have experience in International Law and investment matters. Each Party shall nominate four (4) chairperson candidates. In the event of the death or resignation of a member of the list, the nominating Party will designate another person to replace him in his functions for the remainder of the period for which he was appointed.

6. For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator on grounds other than nationality:

(a) the respondent accepts the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal established in accordance with this Article, or additionally with the ICSID Convention or with the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

(b) the claimant referred to in Article 12.18(4)(a) may continue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only provided that at the preliminary hearing under Rule 21 ICSID Arbitration Rules or under Article 29 of the ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, the claimant expresses its written consent to the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal; and

(c) the claimant referred to in Article 12.18(4)(b) may continue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only provided that at the preliminary hearing under Rule 21 ICSID Arbitration Rules or under Article 29 of the ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, the claimant and the company express their written consent to the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal.

Article12.22 Conditions and Limitations to the Consent of the Parties

1. The investor may not file a claim if more than three (3) years have elapsed from the date on which he became aware or should have been aware of the alleged violation of this Chapter, as well as the losses or damages suffered. .

2. Once the investor has initiated proceedings before a competent court of the Party in whose territory the investment was admitted or has notified the other Party of its intention to initiate any of the arbitration proceedings indicated in Article 12.18 (5) , the choice of one or the other procedure will be final.

Article12.23. Conduct of Arbitration

1. The Parties will refrain from dealing through diplomatic channels, issues related to disputes between a Party and an investor of the other Party, subject to judicial processes or international arbitration in accordance with the provisions of this Section, except in the case in that one of the disputing parties has not complied with the judicial sentence or the award of the Arbitration Court, in the terms established in the respective sentence or arbitral award.

2. A non-disputing Party may submit oral or written submissions to the Tribunal regarding the interpretation of this Agreement.

3. The Tribunal shall be empowered to accept and consider amicus curiae communications that come from a person or entity that is not a disputing party. Each communication must be presented in Spanish or with a translation into it and identify its owner and any person or organization that has provided or will provide any financial or other type of assistance in the preparation of the communication.

4. To accept and consider an amicus curiae communication , the Tribunal must ensure:

(a) that the matters in controversy are of public interest, and whose resolution could affect, directly or indirectly, persons other than the disputing parties; and

(b) that the person or entity presenting the amicus curiae communication proves to the Tribunal a legitimate interest in presenting the communication and demonstrates that they have the specialized knowledge and independence necessary for their communication to assist the Tribunal.

5. The Tribunal must decide, before ruling on the merits of the matter, the preliminary objections such as the objections on jurisdiction or admissibility. In addition, a court will hear and decide as a preliminary matter any objection by the defendant that, as a matter of law, the claim submitted is not a claim in respect of which an award favorable to the claimant can be rendered in accordance with the Article 12.29.

(a) Such objection shall be filed with the Tribunal as soon as possible after the Tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date the Tribunal sets for the respondent to file its answer to the complaint (or in the case of an amendment to the request for arbitration, the date the Tribunal sets for the respondent to file its response to the amendment).

(b) At the time an objection is received under this paragraph, the Court will suspend any proceedings on the merits of the dispute, establish a schedule for the consideration of the objection that will be compatible with any schedule that has been established for the consideration of any other preliminary issue and will issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds thereof.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the Tribunal will assume as true the allegations of fact advanced by the claimant for the purpose of supporting any claim appearing in the request for arbitration (or any amendment thereto), and , in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The Tribunal may also consider any other relevant fact that is not in dispute.

(d) Respondent does not waive any jurisdictional objection or substantive argument simply because it has or has not raised an objection under this paragraph or makes use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 6 .

6. In the event that the respondent so requests, within forty-five (45) days after the constitution of the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall decide, in an expeditious manner, on an objection in accordance with paragraph 5 and any another objection to the effect that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The Tribunal will suspend any action on the merits of the litigation and will issue a decision or award on said objection, stating the grounds thereof, no later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the date of the request. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the Tribunal may take an additional thirty (30) days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing has been requested, the Court may, showing extraordinary cause,

7. When the Tribunal decides a respondent's objection under paragraph 4 or 5, it shall, if justified, award to the successful disputing party reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in filing the objection or oppose it. In determining whether such award is justified, the Tribunal will consider whether the claimant's claim or respondent's objection was frivolous, and will give the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment. In the event of a frivolous claim, the Court must order the plaintiff to pay the costs.

8. (a) In any arbitration conducted pursuant to this Section,

at the request of any of the disputing parties, the Tribunal, before issuing a decision or award on liability, shall communicate its proposed decision or award to the disputing parties and to the non-disputing Parties. Within sixty (60) days after such proposed decision or award is communicated, the disputing parties may submit written comments to the Tribunal in relation to any aspect of their proposed decision or award. The Court will consider said comments and issue its decision or award no later than forty-five (45) days after the expiration of the sixty (60) day term for submitting comments.

(b) Subparagraph (a) shall not apply to any arbitration conducted pursuant to this Section in which an appeal is available under paragraph 9.

9. If a separate multilateral treaty entering into force between the Parties establishing an appellate body for the purpose of reviewing awards rendered by tribunals constituted under international trade or investment agreements to hear investment disputes, the Parties shall endeavor to reach an agreement that causes said appellate body to review the awards rendered in accordance with Article 12.29 of this Section in arbitrations that have been initiated after said treaty enters into force for the Parties.

Article12.24 Transparency of Arbitration Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent shall promptly deliver to the non-disputing Parties the following documents and make them publicly available:

(a) the notice of intent;

(b) the request for arbitration;

(c) the pleadings, statements of claim and explanatory notes submitted to the Tribunal by a disputing party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Articles 12.23 and 12.28;

(d) the minutes or transcripts of the Tribunal hearings, when available; and

(e) the orders, awards and decisions of the Tribunal.

2. Except for a well-founded objection by any of the disputing parties that is duly considered by the Tribunal and subject to its decision, the latter will hold hearings open to the public and will determine, in consultation with the disputing parties, the pertinent logistical arrangements. However, any disputing party that intends to use information classified as protected information in a hearing must so inform the Court. The Court will make appropriate arrangements to protect the information from disclosure.

3. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent to make available protected information or to provide or allow access to information that it may withhold pursuant to Article 19.2 (National Security) or Article 19.4 (Disclosure of Information ).

4. Any protected information that is submitted to the Court must be protected from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) subject to subparagraph (d), neither the disputing parties nor the Tribunal shall disclose to any non-disputing Party or to the public any protected information when the disputing party providing the information clearly so designates it in accordance with subparagraph ( b);

(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes protected information shall clearly designate it at the time it is submitted to the Tribunal;

(c) a disputing party shall, at the same time that it submits a document that contains information claimed to be protected information, submit a redacted version of the document that does not contain the protected information. Only the redacted version will be provided to the non-disputing Parties and will be made public in accordance with paragraph 1; and

(d) the Court will decide on any objection in relation to the designation of information alleged as protected information. If the Tribunal determines that such information was not properly designated, the disputing party that submitted the information may:

(i) remove all or part of the presentation containing such information, or

(ii) agree to resubmit complete and redacted documents with corrected designations in accordance with the Court's determination and with subparagraph (c).

In any event, the other disputing party shall, where necessary, resubmit complete and redacted documents which omit the information withdrawn pursuant to subparagraph (i) by the disputing party that first submitted the information or redesignate the information from manner consistent with the designation made pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of the disputing party that first submitted the information.

5. Nothing in this Section requires the defendant to deny the public access to information that, according to its law, must be disclosed.

Article12.25 Applicable Law

1. The dispute settlement mechanisms provided for in this Section shall be based on the provisions of this Chapter, international law and customary international law, general principles of law, and the national law of the Party in whose territory the investment has been made. , including rules regarding conflicts of laws.

2. A Commission decision declaring the interpretation of a provision of this Chapter, pursuant to Article 17.1 (Treaty Administrative Commission) shall be binding on a tribunal established pursuant to this Section and any decision or award issued by the court shall be consistent with that decision.

Article12.26 Interpretation of Annexes

1. When the defendant presents as a defense that the measure alleged to be in violation is within the scope of application of Annex I, Annex II or Annex III, at the request of the defendant, the Court will request an interpretation from the Commission on the matter. . Within sixty (60) days after delivery of the request, the Commission will present in writing to the Tribunal any decision declaring its interpretation, in accordance with Article 17.1 (Administrative Commission of the Agreement).

2. The decision issued by the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 1, shall be binding on the Tribunal and any decision or award issued by the Tribunal shall be consistent with that decision. If the Commission does not issue said decision within the term of sixty (60) days, the Tribunal will decide on the matter.

Article12.27 Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the Tribunal, at the request of a disputing party or, unless the disputing parties do not accept it, on its own initiative, may appoint one or more experts to report in writing on any matter of fact relating to environmental, health, safety or other scientific matters that has been raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.

Article12.28 Accumulation of Proceedings

1. In cases where two or more separate claims have been submitted to arbitration under Article 12.18(5) and the claims raise a common issue of fact or law and arise out of the same facts or circumstances, either party The disputing party may seek to obtain a joining order, subject to the agreement of all disputing parties in respect of whom the joining order is sought or in accordance with the terms of paragraphs 2 through 8.

2. The disputing party that seeks to obtain a consolidation order in accordance with this Article shall deliver a request, in writing, to the Secretary General and all the disputing parties in respect of which the consolidation order is sought and shall specify in the request what following:

(a) the name and address of all disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

3. Unless the Secretary General determines, within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request under paragraph 2, that the request is manifestly unfounded, a tribunal shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought agree otherwise, the Tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall be composed of three (3) arbitrators:

(a) an arbitrator appointed by agreement of the claimants;

(b) an arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the presiding arbitrator appointed by the Secretary General, who shall not be a national of either Party.

5. If, within sixty (60) days of the receipt by the Secretary General of the request made pursuant to paragraph 2, the respondent or claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator pursuant to paragraph 4, the Secretary General, at the request of any of the disputing parties in respect of which the accumulation order is sought, will appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators that have not yet been appointed. If the respondent fails to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of the disputing Party and, if the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of a Party of the claimants. The appointment shall be made in accordance with Article 12.21(3).

6. In the event that the Tribunal established pursuant to this Article has found that two or more claims have been submitted to arbitration pursuant to Article 12.18(5), raising a common issue of fact or law, and arising out of the same facts or circumstances, the Tribunal may, in the interest of achieving a fair and efficient resolution of the claims and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction and jointly hear and determine all or part of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction and hear and determine one or more claims, the determination of which it considers would contribute to the resolution of the others; either

(c) instruct a Tribunal previously established pursuant to Article 12.21 to assume jurisdiction and hear and determine jointly, over all or part of the claims, provided that:

(i) that Tribunal, at the request of any claimant not previously a disputing party before that Tribunal, be reinstated with its original members, except that the arbitrator for the claimants shall be appointed pursuant to paragraphs 4(a) and 5; and

(ii) that court decides whether to repeat any previous hearing.

7. In the case where a Tribunal has been established under this Article, a claimant who has submitted a claim to arbitration under Article 12.18(5), and whose name is not mentioned in a request made under paragraph 2, may make a written request to the Court for such claimant to be included in any order made under paragraph 6 and specify in the request:

(a) the name and address of the claimant;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based. The claimant shall deliver a copy of his request to the Secretary General.

8. A Tribunal established under this Article shall conduct proceedings in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

9. A Tribunal established pursuant to Article 12.21 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, over which a Tribunal established or directed pursuant to this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

10. At the request of a disputing party, a tribunal established under this Article may, pending its decision under paragraph 6, order that the proceedings of a Tribunal established under Article 12.21 be adjourned, unless the latter Tribunal has already suspended its proceedings.

Article12.29 Awards

1. The arbitral awards will only be final and binding for the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.

2. The awards shall be enforced in accordance with the internal law of the Party in whose territory the investment was made.

3. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.

4. When a court issues a final award unfavorable to the defendant, the Court may only declare restitution or pecuniary damages and interest that proceed; likewise, it may declare costs and legal fees in accordance with this Article and with the applicable arbitration rules. The Court will not be competent to rule on the legality of the measure as a matter of internal law and will not be authorized to order the payment of punitive damages.

5. Subject to paragraph 6 and the review procedure applicable to an interim award, the disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.

6. The disputing party may not request enforcement of the final award until:

(a) in the case of a final award rendered in accordance with the ICSID Convention:

(i) one hundred and twenty (120) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested its review or annulment; either

(ii) the review or annulment procedures have been completed; and

(b) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or the corresponding arbitration rules selected:

(i) ninety (90) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has initiated a proceeding to review, revoke or annul it; either

(ii) a Court has dismissed or admitted a request for review, revocation or annulment of the award and this decision cannot be appealed.

7. When the respondent fails to comply with or comply with a final award, upon delivery of a request by the Party of the claimant, a panel shall be established in accordance with Article 18.11 (Request for the Establishment of the Arbitral Tribunal). The requesting Party may request in said procedures:

(a) a determination that the breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement; and

(b) pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 18.17 (Draft Award), a decision that the respondent abide by or comply with the final award.

8. A disputing party may seek enforcement of an arbitral award under the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention, or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the proceedings under paragraph 7 have been commenced.

9. For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or transaction.

Article12.30 General Provisions

Moment in which the claim is considered submitted to the arbitration procedure

1. A claim is considered submitted to arbitration under the terms of this Section when the request for arbitration9 (“request for arbitration”) of the claimant:

(a) has been received by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention;

(b) has been received by the Secretary-General pursuant to Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; either

(c) has been received by the disputing party in accordance with the notice of arbitration provided for in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Delivery of the request for arbitration and other documents

2. The request for arbitration and other documents shall be delivered to a Party at the place designated by it in Annex 12.A or at the place notified by the corresponding Party to the Commission and published by the latter as an annex to the Treaty.

 

ANNEX 12.A

Service of Documents to a Party under Section B PDF

 

CHAPTER 13

CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES

Article13.1 Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services means the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party, to a consumer of services of the other Party; either

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the provision of a service in the territory of a Party through an investment, as defined in Article 12.1 (Definitions);

company means a “company” as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions) and a branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party and its branches located in the territory of a Party and carrying on business therein;

service provider of a Party means a person of the Party who intends to supply or supplies a service;1

specialized air services means any air service other than transport, such as firefighting, scenic flights, spraying, aerial surveying, aerial mapping, aerial photography, skydiving service, glider towing, helicopter logging services, and construction and other air services related to agriculture, industry and inspection; and

professional services means services that require higher education related to a specific area of ​​knowledge, equivalent training or experience for their provision2and whose exercise is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services rendered by persons who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft.

Article13.2 Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect cross-border trade in services supplied by service providers of the other Party. Such measures include those that affect:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and supply of a service;

(b) the acquisition or use of, or payment for, a service;

(c) access to, and use of, distribution systems, transportation or telecommunication networks and services related to the provision of a service;

(d) the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; and

(e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for the provision of a service.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, "measures adopted or maintained by a Party" means the measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) central or local authorities and governments; and

(b) non-governmental institutions in the exercise of the powers delegated to them by central or local authorities or governments.

3. Articles 13.5, 13.8 and 13.9 shall apply to measures by a Party that affect the supply of a service in its territory by a covered investment3

4. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) cross-border financial services;

(b) public procurement carried out by a Party or State enterprise;

(c) air services, including scheduled and non-scheduled national and international air transport services, as well as related support services for air services, except:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;

(ii) specialized air services; and

(iii) the services of computerized reservation systems (SCR)4 ; and

(d) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance.

Annex 13.2 (4) (d) establishes an understanding of the Parties with respect to subparagraph (d).

5. This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor does it confer any rights on that national with respect to such access or employment. .

6. This Chapter does not apply to services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority in the territory of a Party. A “service provided in the exercise of governmental authority” means any service not provided on a commercial basis or in competition with one or more service providers.

Article13.3 National Treatment

Each Party shall grant the other Party's services and service providers treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own services or service providers.

Article13.4 Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall accord to the services and service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to the services and service providers of any other Party or of a non-Party.

Article13.5 Market Access

No Party may adopt or maintain measures that:

(a) impose limitations on:

(i) the number of service providers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service providers, or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(ii) the total value of assets or service transactions in the form of numerical quotas or by requiring an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of service operations or the total quantity of service output, expressed in terms of designated numerical units, in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;5th or

(iv) the total number of natural persons that can be employed in a certain service sector or that a service provider can employ and that are necessary for the supply of a specific service and are directly related to it, in the form of contingents numerical or the requirement of an economic needs test; either

(b) restrict or prescribe the specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service provider may supply a service.

Article13.6 Local Presence

Neither Party may require the service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain representative offices or other types of businesses, or to reside in its territory as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.

Article13.7 Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.5 and 13.6 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party in:

(i) the central level of government as stipulated by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; either

(ii) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a), provided that said modification does not reduce the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.5 or 13.6.

2. Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.5 or 13.6 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors or activities, as stipulated in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. Article 13.4 does not apply to the treatment granted by a Party in accordance with the International Treaties or Conventions, stipulated in its schedule in Annex III.

4. The Parties shall establish procedures for a Party to notify the other Party and include in its pertinent lists, the modifications to measures referred to in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.

5. Through future negotiations that may be called by the Commission, the Parties will deepen the liberalization achieved in the different service sectors, with a view to achieving the elimination of the remaining restrictions listed in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. .

Article13.8 National Regulation6

1. When a Party requires authorization for the supply of a service, the competent authorities of the Party, within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application considered complete in accordance with its laws and regulations, shall inform the applicant of the decision. regarding your request. At the request of the applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information concerning the status of the application. This obligation will not apply to the authorization requirements that are covered by the scope of application of Article 13.7.

2. In order to ensure that measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary obstacles to trade in services, each Party shall endeavor to ensure, as appropriate for each sector specifically, that any such measure it adopts or maintains:

(a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability to supply the service;

(b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, do not in themselves constitute a restriction on the supply of the service.

3. If the results of the negotiations related to GATS Article VI:4 (or the results of any similar negotiations conducted in another multilateral forum in which the Parties participate) enter into force for each Party, this Article shall be modified, as appropriate, after consultations between the Parties, for those results to enter into force under this Agreement. The Parties will coordinate, as appropriate, in such negotiations.

Article 13.9 Transparency in the Development and Application of Regulations7

In addition to Chapter 16 (Transparency):

(a) each Party shall establish or maintain adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations relating to the subject matter of this Chapter;

(b) upon consultation with an interested person, if a Party fails to give advance notice or provide an opportunity for comment, it shall, to the extent possible, provide the reasons for this in writing;

(c) at the time of adopting final regulations regarding the subject matter of this Chapter, each Party shall respond in writing, to the extent possible, including upon request, to substantive comments received from interested persons regarding the proposed regulations; and

(d) to the extent possible, each Party will allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of final regulations and the date they enter into force.

Article13.10 Acknowledgment

1. For the purposes of compliance, in whole or in part, with its standards or criteria for the authorization, licensing or certification of service providers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4 of this Article, a Party may recognize the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certificates granted in a particular country. Such recognition, which may be achieved through harmonization or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or arrangement with the country in question or may be agreed autonomously.

2. When a Party recognizes, autonomously or through an agreement or agreement, the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or licenses or certificates granted in the territory of a country that is not a Party, no provision in Article 13.4 shall be construed as requiring the Party to grant such recognition to education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certificates granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. A Party that is a party to an existing or future agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall provide adequate opportunities to the other Party, if that Party is interested in negotiating its accession to such agreement or agreement or to negotiate agreements or agreements comparable with it. When a Party grants recognition autonomously, it shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunities to demonstrate that the education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained or requirements fulfilled in the territory of that other Party should be recognized.

4. A Party shall not grant recognition in such a way as to constitute a means of discrimination between countries in the application of its standards or criteria for the authorization, licensing or certification of service providers or a disguised restriction on trade in services.

5. Annex 13.10 applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party in connection with the granting of licenses or certificates to professional service providers, as provided for in the provisions of that Annex.

Article13.11 Transfers and Payments

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply of services to be made freely and without delay to and from its territory.

2. Each Party shall allow such transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply of services to be made in a freely usable currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange at the time of the transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may condition or prevent the making of a transfer or payment, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal offences; either

(e) guarantee of compliance with orders or rulings in judicial or administrative proceedings.

Article13.12 Denial of Benefits

Upon notice and consultation, a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) service providers of the other Party when the service is being supplied by a company owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party and the company does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) service providers of the other Party when the service is supplied by a company owned or controlled by persons of the refusing Party and the company does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party.

Article13.13 Implementation

The Parties shall consult annually, or as otherwise agreed, to review the implementation of this Chapter and consider other matters of mutual interest that affect trade in services.

 

ANNEX 13.2

(4) (d) PDF

ANNEX 13.8

Understanding between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Guatemala on National Regulation on Land Freight Transportation Services PDF

ANNEX 13.10

Professional Services
Development of Standards for the Provision of Professional ServicesPDF

 

CHAPTER 14

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE

Article14.1 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

authentication means the process or act of establishing the identity of a party to an electronic communication or transaction or ensuring the integrity of an electronic communication;

electronic media means the use of computerized processing;

carrier medium means any physical object designed primarily for the use of storing a digital product by any method now known or later developed and from which a digital product can be directly or indirectly perceived, reproduced or communicated and includes, but is not limited to, an optical medium, diskettes or a magnetic tape;

digital products means computer programs, text, video, images, sound recordings and other products that are digitally encoded;1 and

electronic transmission or electronically transmitted means the transfer of digital products using any electromagnetic or photonic means.

Article14.2 General Provisions

1. The Parties recognize the economic growth and opportunity that electronic commerce generates, the importance of avoiding obstacles to its use and development, and the applicability of the WTO rules to measures that affect electronic commerce.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from imposing internal taxes or other internal charges on domestic sales of digital products, provided that such taxes or charges are established in a manner consistent with this Agreement.

Article14.3 Electronic Supply of Services

For greater certainty, the Parties affirm that measures affecting the supply of a service through the use of an electronic means are within the scope of the obligations contained in the relevant provisions of Chapters 12 (Investment) and 13 (Cross-Border Trade in Services ) and subject to any exception or non-conforming measure established in this Agreement, which are applicable to said obligations.

Article14.4 Digital Products

1. No Party may impose customs duties, fees or other charges in connection with the import or export of digital products by means of electronic transmission.

2. For purposes of determining the applicable customs duties, each Party shall determine the customs value of the imported carrier medium that incorporates a digital product based solely on the cost or value of the carrier medium, regardless of the cost or value of the digital product stored on the carrier medium. .

3. Neither Party shall accord less favorable treatment to some electronically transmitted digital products than it accords to other similar electronically transmitted digital products:

(a) on the basis that:

(i) digital products that receive less favorable treatment are created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned or first made available on commercial terms outside its territory; either

(ii) the author, performer, producer, manager or distributor of said digital products is a person from another Party or from a non-Party country; either

(b) otherwise provide protection for other similar digital products that are created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned or first made available on commercial terms in their territory.2

4. Neither Party shall accord less favorable treatment to digital products transmitted electronically:

(a) that are created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned, or are first made available on commercial terms in the territory of the other Party than that granted to similar electronically transmitted digital products that are created, produced, , published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned or first made available under commercial conditions in the territory of a non-Party country; either

(b) whose author, performer, producer, manager or distributor is a person of the other Party than that which grants to similar digital products transmitted electronically whose author, performer, producer, manager or distributor is a person of a non-Party.

5. Paragraphs 3 and 4 do not apply to any non-conforming measure in accordance with the provisions of Articles 12.12 (Non-Conforming Measures) and 13.7 (Non-Conforming Measures).

Article14.5 Transparency

Each Party shall publish or otherwise make available to the public its laws, regulations, and other measures of general application that relate to electronic commerce.

Article14.6 Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognize the importance of maintaining and adopting transparent and effective measures to protect consumers from fraudulent and deceptive commercial practices when they carry out transactions through electronic commerce.

2. The Parties recognize the importance of cooperation between national consumer protection entities in activities related to cross-border electronic commerce to strengthen consumer protection.

Article14.7 Authentication and Digital Certificates

No Party may adopt or maintain legislation on electronic authentication, which prevents the parties from having the opportunity to establish before the judicial or administrative instances that the electronic transaction complies with any legal requirement established by the legislation of each of the Parties with respect to the authentication.

Article14.8 Cooperation

Taking into consideration the global nature of electronic commerce, the Parties recognize the importance of:

(a) work together to overcome the obstacles faced by small and medium-sized enterprises in the use of electronic commerce;

(b) share information and experiences on laws, regulations and programs in the field of electronic commerce, including those related to data privacy, consumer trust, cyber security, electronic signature, intellectual property rights and electronic forms of government;

(c) work to maintain cross-border flows of information as an essential element of a dynamic environment for electronic commerce;

(d) stimulate the development by the private sector of methods of self-regulation, including codes of conduct, model contracts, guidelines and compliance mechanisms that encourage electronic commerce; and

(e) actively participate in international forums, both at the hemispheric and multilateral levels, with the purpose of promoting the development of electronic commerce.

 

CHAPTER 15

TEMPORARY ENTRY OF BUSINESS PERSONS

Article15.1 Definitions

1. For purposes of this Chapter:

business activities means those legitimate activities of a commercial nature created and operated for the purpose of making a profit in the market. It does not include the possibility of obtaining employment, nor salary or remuneration from a labor source in the territory of a Party;

labor certification means the procedure carried out by the competent administrative authority aimed at determining whether a national of a Party, who intends to temporarily enter the territory of another Party, displaces national labor in the same labor branch or significantly impairs the labor conditions of the same ;

temporary entry means the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;

national means a “national” as defined in Annex 2.1 (Country-Specific Definitions) to Chapter 2 (General Definitions);

person means a natural person;

business person means the national who participates in the trade of goods or supply of services, or in investment activities; and

recurring practice means a practice carried out by the immigration authorities of a Party on a repetitive basis during a representative period prior to and immediately after its execution.

2. For the purposes of Annex 15.4:

executive functions means those assigned within an organization, under which the person has primarily the following responsibilities:

(a) direct the management of the organization or a relevant component or function thereof;

(b) establish the policies and objectives of the organization, component or function; either

(c) receive supervision or general direction only from the highest level executives, the board of directors or the council of administration of the organization or the shareholders of the same;

managerial functions means those assigned within an organization, under which the person has fundamentally the following responsibilities:

(a) direct the organization or an essential function within it;

(b) supervise and control the work of other professional employees, supervisors or managers;

(c) have the authority to hire and fire, or recommend those actions, as well as others with respect to the management of personnel who are directly supervised by that person and perform functions at a higher level within the organizational hierarchy or with respect to the function to office; either

(d) perform actions at his discretion with respect to the daily operation of the function over which that person has authority; and

functions involving specialized knowledge means those that involve special knowledge of merchandise, services, research, equipment, techniques, management of the organization or its interests and their application in international markets, or an advanced level of knowledge or experience in processes and procedures of the organization.

Article15.2 General Principles

1. This Chapter reflects the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, as well as the mutual desire of the Parties in the sense of facilitating the temporary entry of persons related to the trade of goods, services and investments on a basis of reciprocity and transparency. The Parties also recognize that the achievement of the above objectives must take place within the framework of their need to protect the domestic labor market and permanent employment in their respective territories.

2. Nothing in this Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained that affect nationals seeking access to the labor market of the Parties, nor to measures related to nationality, residence or permanent employment. .

Article15.3 General Obligations

1. Each Party shall apply the measures related to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with Article 15.2 and, in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or damage in trade in goods and services, or in investment activities included in this Treaty.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the Parties from applying immigration measures necessary to protect the integrity of their borders and guarantee the orderly movement of people across them, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that unduly delays or impairs trade in goods or services or the conduct of investment activities in accordance with this Agreement.

Article15.4 Temporary Entry Authorization

1. In accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, including those contained in Annex 15.4, each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of business persons who comply with the other applicable measures related to public health and safety, as well as those related to the National security.

2. A Party may, in accordance with its law, deny temporary entry to a business person when his temporary entry adversely affects:

(a) the resolution of any labor dispute in progress in the place where he is employed or will be employed; either

(b) the employment of any person involved in that dispute.

3. When a Party denies temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party, at the request of the affected person, shall provide the reasons for the refusal in writing.

4. Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees for processing applications for temporary entry to the approximate cost of the services rendered.

5. The authorization of temporary entry under this Chapter does not replace the requirements for the exercise of a profession or activity in accordance with the specific regulations in force in the territory of the Party that authorizes temporary entry.

6. Nothing in this Chapter shall be understood to prevent a Party from requiring, as a prior condition to authorize the temporary entry of a business person, that said person obtain a visa or equivalent document prior to entry. The Parties shall consider the possibility of avoiding or eliminating the visa or equivalent document requirements.1

Article15.5 Provision of Information

1. In addition to the provisions of Article 16.3 (Publication), each Party shall:

(a) provide another Party with information material that allows it to know the measures it adopts in relation to this Chapter; and

(b) no later than one (1) year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its own territory and in that of the other Party, a consolidated document with material explaining the requirements for temporary entry under this Chapter, so that business persons of the other Party can learn about them.

2. Each Party shall compile, maintain, and make available to the other Party, information regarding the granting of temporary entry authorizations to business persons of the other Party who have been issued immigration documentation in accordance with this Chapter. This collection will include information for each authorized category.

Article15.6 Implementation

The Parties shall consult at least once a year, with the participation of the competent authorities, to review the implementation of this Chapter and consider other matters of mutual interest that affect the temporary entry of business persons.

Article15.7 Dispute Resolution

1. Disputes that arise between the Parties on the occasion of the interpretation and application of this Chapter, will be subject to the dispute resolution mechanism provided for in Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution). A Party may not initiate dispute settlement procedures with respect to a denial of temporary entry authorization under this Chapter, unless:

(a) the matter concerns a recurring practice2 ; and

(b) the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies established in the legislation of the other Party with respect to that particular matter.

2. The remedies mentioned in subparagraph (b) will be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution within a period of six (6) months, counted from the beginning of the administrative procedure and the resolution has not been delayed for causes attributable to the affected business person.

Article15.8 Relationship with Other Chapters

1. Except as provided in this Chapter, nothing in this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or commitments with respect to the provisions of other chapters of this Agreement.

 

ANNEX 15.4

Provisions Applicable to Temporary Entry PDF

APPENDIX 1

Business VisitorsPDF

APPENDIX 2

Country Specific Provisions for the Temporary Entry of Business Persons PDF

APPENDIX 3

Current Immigration Measures for Temporary Entry PDF

 

PART SIX

ADMINISTRATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER 16

TRANSPARENCY

Article16.1 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, "generally applicable administrative resolution" shall be understood as an administrative resolution or interpretation that applies to all persons and factual situations that fall within its scope and that establishes a standard of conduct, but does not include:

(a) resolutions or rulings in administrative proceedings that apply to a particular person, good or service of another Party in a specific case; either

(b) a decision that resolves with respect to a particular act or practice.

Article16.2 Information Center

1. Each Party shall designate a unit as an information center so that, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, it will be in charge of sending and receiving all communication, information and notification between the Parties on any matter included in this Agreement.

2. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 1, when a Party requests it, the information center of another Party will inform the agency or entity responsible for knowing a specific matter, to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.

Article16.3 Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement are published promptly.

2. To the extent possible, each Party:

(a) publish any draft measure of general application that it proposes to adopt relating to matters covered by this Agreement; and

(b) provide the other Parties and any interested party with a reasonable opportunity to comment on such drafts.

Article16.4 Provision of Information

1. Each Party shall ensure that the published measures and projects are made available for the knowledge of the other Party and any interested party, when requested. Likewise, it will promptly respond to questions related to such measures.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party, to the extent possible, of any current or proposed measure that it considers might affect the future operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect the interests of that other Party in the terms of this Agreement.

3. The communication or provision of information on current or projected measures referred to in this Article, will be carried out without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

Article16.5 Hearing, Legality and Due Process Guarantees

Each Party shall ensure that in the judicial and administrative procedures related to the application of any measure mentioned in Article 16.3, the guarantees of hearing, legality and due process enshrined in their respective legislations are observed, in the sense of the Articles 16.6 and 16.7.

Article16.6 Administrative procedures for the application of measures

In accordance with its domestic legal provisions, each Party shall ensure that in its administrative procedures in which its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application are applied with respect to particular persons, goods or services of another Party in specific cases:

(a) the persons of that other Party who are directly affected by a proceeding receive notice of the initiation of the proceeding, including a description of its nature, the statement of the authority that is legally responsible for initiating it, and a general description of all controversial issues;

(b) such persons have the opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their positions, prior to any final administrative action; and

(c) its procedures conform to its legislation.

Article16.7 Review and Challenge

1. Each Party shall maintain courts and judicial and administrative procedures in accordance with its respective legislation for the purposes of the prompt and timely review and, when appropriate, the correction of the final administrative acts related to the matters included in this Agreement. These courts will be impartial and will not be linked to the agency or authority in charge of the administrative application of the law and will not have a substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that before such courts and in such proceedings, the parties to the proceedings have the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions and arguments; and

(b) a resolution that considers the evidence and arguments presented by them.

3. Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with the means of challenge or subsequent review that could be resorted to in accordance with its legislation, said resolution is implemented by its dependencies or competent authorities .

Article16.8 Communications, Information and Notifications

Unless otherwise provided, a communication, information or notification shall be understood to have been delivered to a Party, upon receipt at the information center provided for in Article 16.2.

Article16.9 Cooperation Against Corruption

The Parties shall cooperate in the prevention and fight against corrupt practices that may arise in connection with the development of this Treaty and reaffirm their existing rights and obligations under the Inter-American Convention against Corruption .

Article16.10 Promotion of Free Competition

The Parties will promote the actions they deem necessary to have an adequate framework to identify and eventually penalize practices that restrict free competition.

 

CHAPTER 17

ADMINISTRATION OF THE TREATY

Section A- Treaty Administrative Commission, Treaty Coordinators and Administration of Dispute Settlement Procedures

disputes

Article17.1 Administrative Commission of the Treaty

1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission of the Agreement, made up of the representatives of each Party at the ministerial level referred to in Annex 17.1, or by the officials they designate.

2. The Commission will have the following functions:

(a) ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Agreement;

(b) evaluate the results achieved in the application of this Agreement;

(c) monitor the development of the Agreement and recommend to the Parties the modifications it deems appropriate;

(d) seek to resolve disputes that arise regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution);

(e) supervise the work of all committees established or created under this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article 17.5(3);

(f) know any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, or any other that is entrusted to it by the Parties;

(g) establish the applicable rules and procedures for the proper functioning and coordination of the Agreement; and

(h) the other functions provided for in this Agreement.

3. The Commission may:

(a) create the ad hoc or permanent committees and groups of experts required for the execution of this Agreement and assign them functions;

(b) modify, in furtherance of the objectives of this Agreement:

(i) the list of goods of a Party contained in Annex 3.4 (Tariff Elimination Program), in order to incorporate one or more excluded goods, in the tariff treatment;

(ii) the deadlines established in Annex 3.4 (Tariff Elimination Program), in order to accelerate the tariff elimination; and

(iii) the rules of origin established in Annex 4.3 (Specific Rules of Origin);

(c) call the Parties to future negotiations to examine the deepening of the liberalization achieved in the different services or investment sectors;

(d) request the advice of persons or groups without governmental ties;

(e) issue interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement;

(f) approve and modify any regulation necessary for the execution of this Agreement;

(g) if agreed by the Parties, take any other action for the exercise of their functions; and

(h) review the impacts, including any benefits, of the Agreement on the small and medium-sized enterprises of the Parties. To this end, the Commission may designate working groups to assess said impacts and make relevant recommendations to the Commission, including work plans focused on the needs of MSMEs; For such purposes, the Commission may receive information, inputs, and contributions from the representatives of small and medium-sized enterprises and their trade associations.

4. The modifications referred to in paragraph 3 (b) and (f) must be implemented by the Parties in accordance with their respective national laws, when applicable. In this case, the respective modifications will take effect between the Republic of Colombia and each of the other Parties, from the date on which compliance with the internal legal requirements is communicated through notes.

5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Commission may meet and adopt decisions when representatives of the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of El Salvador, the Republic of Guatemala or the Republic of Honduras attend, to deal with matters of bilateral interest of those Parties, provided that sufficient notice is given to the other Party or Parties, so that they can participate in the meeting. In these cases, the decisions will be adopted by the Parties interested in the respective matter. The other Party or Parties will intervene in the adoption of decisions after demonstrating their interest in the matter.

6. The decisions adopted by the Commission by virtue of what is established in paragraph 5, will only take effect between the Parties that have adopted them.

7. The Commission will establish its rules and procedures.

8. The Commission will make its decisions by consensus.

9. The Commission shall meet at least once a year, in ordinary session and at the request of any Party, in extraordinary session. The sessions will be held alternating the venue between the Parties.

Article17.2 Treaty Coordinators

1. Each Party shall designate a Coordinator of the Agreement, in accordance with Annex 17.2.

2. The Coordinators of the Treaty will have the following functions:

(a) develop the agendas as well as other preparations for the meetings of the Commission;

(b) prepare and review the technical files necessary for decision-making under the Treaty;

(c) follow up on the decisions made by the Commission;

(d) provide assistance to the Commission;

(e) on instructions from the Commission, support and supervise the work of the technical committees and expert groups established under this Agreement; and

(f) know about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, that is entrusted to it by the Commission.

Article17.3 Administration of Dispute Resolution Procedures

1. Each Party shall:

(a) designate an office to provide administrative support to the Arbitral Tribunals contemplated in Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement; and

(b) notify the Commission of the address, telephone number and any other relevant information of the place where its designated office is located.

2. Each Party shall be responsible for:

(a) the operation and costs of its designated office; and

(b) the remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators, assistants and experts, as stipulated in Annex 17.3.

Section B - Technical Committees and Expert Groups

Article17.4 General Provisions

1. The provisions set forth in this Section shall apply, in a supplementary manner, to all committees and groups of experts created within the framework of this Agreement.

2. Each committee and group of experts will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties and all its recommendations will be adopted by consensus.

Article17.5 Technical Committees

1. The Commission may create committees other than those established in Annex 17.5.

2. Each committee will have the following functions:

(a) promote the implementation of the Chapters of this Agreement that fall within its competence;

(b) hear the matters submitted to it by a Party that considers that a current measure of the other Party affects the effective application of any commitment included in the Chapters of this Agreement that are within its competence and make the recommendations it deems appropriate;

(c) request technical reports from the competent authorities, necessary for the formulation of their recommendations;

(d) evaluate and recommend to the Commission proposals for modification, amendment or addition to the provisions of the Chapters of this Agreement that are within its competence; and

(e) comply with the other tasks entrusted to it by the Commission, by virtue of the provisions of this Agreement and other instruments derived from it.

3. The Commission and the Agreement Coordinators shall oversee the work of all committees established or created under this Agreement.

4. Each committee may establish its own rules and procedures and those of the groups of experts related to them and will meet at the request of any of the Parties or the Commission.

Article17.6 Expert Groups

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 17.1 (3) (a), a committee may also create groups of experts, in order to carry out the technical studies it deems necessary to fulfill its functions. The group of experts must strictly comply with what has been entrusted to it, in the terms and deadlines established. Unless otherwise provided, the group of experts must report to the Commission or the committee that created it.

Article17.7 Meetings of the Administrative Bodies

The bodies created in Sections A and B of this Chapter may meet in person or remotely, being able to use in the latter case, any technological means available to the Parties.

ANNEX 17.1

Members of the Administrative Commission of the Treaty PDF

ANNEX 17.2

Treaty Coordinators PDF

ANNEX 17.3

Remuneration and Payment of Expenses PDF

ANNEX 17.5

CommitteesPDF

 

CHAPTER 18

DISPUTE RESOLUTION

Section A - Dispute Resolution

Article18.1 Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

consulting Party means any Party that consults under Article 18.6;

Disputing Party means the complaining Party or the Party complained against;

Party complained against means the party against whom a claim is made; and

Complaining Party means the party making a claim.

Article18.2 Cooperation

1. The Parties will at all times endeavor to reach an agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement and through cooperation and consultation, will endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that could affect its operation.

2. All solutions to matters raised in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter must be compatible with this Agreement and must not nullify or impair the benefits resulting from it for the Parties, nor must they hinder the achievement of the objectives of the Treaty.

3. The mutually satisfactory solutions agreed between the disputing Parties on the issues raised in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be notified to the Commission within a period of fifteen (15) days from the agreement.

Article18.3 Scope of Application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the procedure of this Chapter shall apply:

(a) to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement;

(b) when a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of another Party is or could be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement;

(c) when a Party considers that an existing measure of another Party causes or could cause nullification or impairment, within the meaning of Annex 18.3; either

(d) when a Party considers that another Party has in any way breached one or more of its obligations under this Agreement.

Article18.4 Choice of Forums

1. The controversies that arise in relation to the provisions of this Agreement, the WTO Agreement or the agreements negotiated in accordance with the latter, must be resolved in the forum chosen by the complaining Party.

2. Once a Party has requested the formation of an arbitral tribunal in accordance with Article 18.14, or has requested the formation of a panel in accordance with Article 6 of the Understanding Regarding the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes of the WTO , the forum selected according to paragraph 1 of this Article shall be exclusive of the others.

Article18.5 Perishable Goods

In disputes relating to perishable goods1 , the terms established in this Chapter will be reduced by half, unless the Parties to a dispute agree on different terms.

Article18.6 Consultations

1. A Party may request in writing to another Party, consultations under the terms of Article 18.2, when any of the situations contemplated in Article 18.3 of this Agreement arise.

2. The requesting Party shall deliver the request to the other Party and explain the reasons for the request, including the identification of the current or proposed measure or other matter in question and the legal basis of the claim. A copy of the request must be simultaneously sent to the other Parties to this Agreement.

3. The consulting Parties shall use their best efforts to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter, through the consultations provided for in this Article or other consultative provisions of this Treaty. For this purpose, the Parties must:

(a) provide the information that allows a full examination of the way in which the current or proposed measure, or any other matter, could affect the operation or application of this Agreement; and

(b) treat the confidential information that is exchanged during the consultations, in the same way that the Party that provided it treats it.

4. Consultations may be requested and carried out in person or through any technological means available to the Parties. The face-to-face meetings will be held in the capital city of the Party to which the consultations have been requested, unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise.

5. After one (1) year of inactivity from the date on which the last meeting was held in the consultation phase and if the situation that gave rise to the controversy persists, the consulting Party will have to request new consultations.

Article18.7 Denial of Consultations

If the consulted Party does not respond to the request for consultations within ten (10) days of notification of the request, proposing a date for holding a meeting, the consulting Party may appeal to the Commission without having to wait for that the period of thirty (30) days referred to in Article 18.8 elapses, or may proceed in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.11.

Article18.8 Intervention of the Commission

1. Any consulting Party may request in writing that the Commission meet, provided that a matter is not resolved in any of the following cases:

(a) in the case established in Article 18.7;

(b) within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the request for consultations or within another term agreed by the consulting Parties; either

(c) within thirty (30) days following the receipt of the request for consultations for cases of perishable merchandise.

2. The Party that requests the intervention of the Commission, will explain the reasons for the request and will include the identification of the current or projected measure or other matter in question and an indication of the legal grounds of the claim.

3. The application must be submitted to the Commission. A copy of the same shall be sent to the other Party.

Article18.9 Procedure before the Commission

1. Unless the Party requesting the intervention of the Commission decides a longer term, it will meet within ten (10) days following receipt of the request and will seek to resolve the controversy without delay.

2. In order to support the Parties in the dispute to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, the Commission may:

(a) convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary;

(b) resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other alternative means of dispute resolution; either

(c) make recommendations.

The costs caused by the processes established in subparagraphs (a) and (b), will be borne by the parties in dispute, in equal parts.

3. All the agreements reached in the procedure before the Commission must be fulfilled within the terms indicated therein, which may not be greater than three (3) months or, as the case may be, within the prudential term established by the latter for that purpose. . For the purpose of reviewing such compliance, the Party against whom the procedure was requested before the Commission shall submit to the Commission a monthly written report on the progress of compliance.

4. The Commission may meet in person or remotely, being able to use in the latter case any technological means that is available to the Parties, which allows it to comply with this stage of the procedure.

Article18.10 Accumulation of Procedures

Unless otherwise decided, the Commission will combine two (2) or more proceedings that it hears under this Chapter, relating to the same measure or matter. Likewise, it may accumulate two (2) or more procedures referring to other matters of which it is aware, when it deems appropriate to examine them jointly.

Article18.11 Request for the Establishment of the Arbitral Tribunal

1. A Party may request in writing the establishment of an arbitral tribunal, provided that a matter is not resolved in any of the following cases:

(a) in the case established in Article 18.7;

(b) within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for the meeting of the Commission or any other term agreed by the disputing Parties, or when the meeting has not been held in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.9 (1);

(c) in the case of accumulation of procedures when the matter has not been resolved within thirty (30) days following the date of the meeting of the Commission to deal with the most recent matter submitted to it, in accordance with Article 18.10;

(d) when the Parties have not resolved the dispute in the consultation phase within the thirty (30) days provided in Article 18.5 or sixty (60) days provided in Article 18.6 or within another term agreed by the Parties. Parties to consultations; either

(e) when the Party that requested the intervention of the Commission considers, once the term indicated by the Commission has expired, that no measures were adopted to comply with the agreement obtained in accordance with Article 18.9.

2. The complaining Party shall deliver the request to the other Party and a copy to the other Parties and to the Commission, in which it shall indicate the reasons for the request, including the identification of the measure or other matter in question and an indication of the legal grounds of the claim.

3. The establishment of an arbitral tribunal may not be requested to review a proposed measure.

Article18.12 List of Referees

1. Each Party shall designate, no later than six (6) months after the entry into force of this Agreement, to integrate the list of arbitrators, four (4) nationals and two (2) non-nationals of the Parties, who have the necessary qualities and disposition to exercise the role of arbitrator. Such appointments will be sent to the office referred to in Article 17.3 (Administration of Dispute Settlement Procedures).

2. The members of the list of arbitrators will meet the qualities stipulated in Article 18.13 (1).

3. The members of the list of arbitrators will remain in it for a period of three (3) years and may be reelected for equal periods. However, any of the Parties may review its list of arbitrators before said term elapses. In the latter case, the new members of the list of arbitrators will exercise their functions for the time remaining for the completion of the original period, without prejudice to being re-elected.

4. Every three (3) years, a new process of conformation of the list of arbitrators must be carried out. For this, the Parties must send to the office referred to in Article 17.3 (Administration of Dispute Settlement Procedures) their appointed arbitrators before the expiration of the referred period, or, where appropriate, an express statement of their desire to re-elect to those who are already designated. In case of silence, it will be understood that the arbitrators of the respective Party have been re-elected.

5. The Parties may use the list of arbitrators even if it is not complete.

6. If, at the expiration of the three (3) year period for which the members of the list of arbitrators were appointed, one of them is appointed as an arbitrator in an ongoing process, he or she will continue to serve in that specific process until that it concludes.

Article18.13 Qualifications of the Referees

1. All referees will have the following qualities:

(a) have specialized knowledge or experience in Law, international trade, matters related to the matters contained in this Treaty or in dispute resolution arising from international trade agreements;

(b) be elected strictly on the basis of their objectivity, impartiality, probity, reliability and good judgment; and

(c) without prejudice to the provisions of Article 18.12, not be related to the Parties, not receive instructions from them and be independent.

2. The members of the arbitral tribunal must comply with the Code of Conduct established by the Commission.

3. The persons who have intervened in a controversy, under the terms of Article 18.9, may not be arbitrators for the same controversy.

Article18.14 Integration of the Arbitral Tribunal

1. For the integration of the arbitral tribunal, the following procedure will be applied:

(a) The disputing Parties must meet within fifteen (15) days following receipt of the request for the establishment of the Arbitral Tribunal to agree on their integration, unless they agree to a longer term. The meeting shall take place in the territory of the Party complained against unless the disputing Parties decide otherwise;

(b) the disputing Parties shall endeavor to select arbitrators who have relevant knowledge or experience in the matter in dispute;

(c) the arbitral tribunal will be made up of three (3) members;

(d) within the framework of the meeting for the integration of the arbitral tribunal, the disputing Parties shall endeavor to agree on the appointment of the president of the arbitral tribunal from the list of arbitrators, referred to in Article 18.12, who may not be a national of any of the parts;

(e) within the framework of the meeting for the integration of the arbitral tribunal, each disputing Party will select an arbitrator from the list referred to in Article 18.12 who may have the nationality of the Party that appointed him;

(f) if the disputing Parties fail to reach an agreement on the appointment of the president of the arbitral tribunal within the term indicated in subparagraph (a), the latter shall be appointed within the business day following the expiration of said term, by lottery carried out by the disputing Parties, among the members of the list who are not nationals of the Parties. The president must be a national of a State with which the Parties to the dispute have diplomatic relations;

(g) If a disputing Party does not designate an arbitrator within the period indicated in subparagraph (a), the arbitrator shall be designated within the following business day, by lottery carried out by the disputing Parties, among the members of the list referred to in paragraph Article 18.12; and

(h) The disputing Parties shall appoint, within the framework of the meeting, among the members of the list referred to in Article 18.12, alternate arbitrators in the event of non-acceptance, death, resignation or dismissal of one of the designated arbitrators, in accordance with the rules for integrating the arbitral tribunal contained in this Article.

2. The referees will preferably be selected from the list. Any disputing Party may challenge, without giving reasons and within the framework of the integration meeting, any person who is not on the list and who is proposed as a member of the arbitral tribunal by a disputing Party. In this case, said person may not be a member of the arbitral tribunal.

3. The disputing Parties shall notify the office referred to in Article 17.3 (Administration of Dispute Settlement Procedures) of the appointment of the arbitrators of the arbitral tribunal within a period of fifteen (15) days from their appointment. . The arbitral tribunal will be constituted once the arbitrators have expressed their acceptance to said office.

Article18.15 Model Rules of Procedure

1. Within the six (6) months following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Commission shall approve the Model Rules of Procedure in order to regulate the procedural aspects necessary for the proper development of all the stages contained in this Chapter. Likewise, these rules will regulate the development of the arbitration process in accordance with the following principles:

(a) the procedures will guarantee the right, at least, to a hearing before the arbitral tribunal, as well as the opportunity to present arguments and replies in writing and will allow the use of any technological means that guarantees their authenticity;

(b) the hearings before the arbitral tribunal, the deliberations, as well as all the writings and communications presented therein, will be confidential; and

(c) the arbitral tribunal will issue a work schedule considering that within the first sixty (60) days from its constitution, it will be available to the disputing Parties to receive their written communications and to hold hearings, and that the The last thirty (30) days of the term available to issue their draft award, will be used exclusively for the analysis of the available information, without the Parties disputing in the difference being able to present additional information, unless the arbitral tribunal, ex officio or request of the disputing Party, considers it necessary.

2. Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, the process before the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure.

3. Unless the disputing Parties agree otherwise within twenty (20) days of receipt of the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal shall be:

“To examine, in light of the applicable provisions of this Treaty, the matter submitted for its consideration in the terms of the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal and issue the Award.”

4. If the complaining Party alleges in the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal, that a matter has been the cause of nullification or impairment of benefits in the sense of Article 18.3 (c), the mandate will indicate so.

5. When the complaining Party requests in the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal, that the tribunal formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse commercial effects that the breach of the obligations of this Agreement by the other Party has generated for that Party, or that a measure is found to be inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, or that such measure has caused nullification or impairment within the meaning of Article 18.3(c), the mandate shall so indicate.

Article18.16 Information and Technical Advice

At the request of a disputing Party or ex officio, the arbitral tribunal may request the information and technical advice from the persons or institutions it deems pertinent.

Article18.17 Draft Award

1. Unless the disputing Parties agree otherwise, the arbitral tribunal shall render a draft award based on the applicable provisions of this Agreement, the pleadings, arguments and evidence presented by the disputing Parties and on any information it has received pursuant to the previous Article.

2. Unless the disputing Parties decide another term, the arbitral tribunal will present to said Parties, within ninety (90) days following its constitution, a draft award that will contain:

(a) findings of fact, including any resulting from a request under Article 18.15(5);

(b) the determination as to whether the measure in question is inconsistent with the obligations under this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 18.3 or in any other determination requested in the mandate; and

(c) the opinions of the arbitrators on the issues in respect of which there was not unanimity.

3. The disputing Parties may make written observations to the arbitral tribunal on the draft award within fifteen (15) days following its presentation.

4. In the case of paragraph 3, and after examining the written observations, the arbitral tribunal may, ex officio or at the request of any disputing Party:

(a) request the observations of any disputing Party;

(b) carry out any due diligence it deems appropriate; either

(c) reconsider the draft award.

Article18.18 Award

1. The arbitral tribunal will notify the disputing Parties of its Award, which will include the written opinions on the issues with respect to which there has not been unanimity, within thirty (30) days following the presentation of the draft resolution. award, unless the disputing Parties agree to a different term.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall not disclose the confidential information in its Award, but may state conclusions obtained based on that information.

3. The disputing Parties shall make the Award available to the public by any means, within fifteen (15) days following its notification. The lack of publicity of the Award by one of the disputing Parties will not prejudice its binding nature.

4. No arbitral tribunal may reveal in its Award, the identity of the arbitrators who have voted with the majority or the minority.

Article18.19 Compliance with the Award

1. The Award shall be binding on the disputing Parties in the terms and within the terms ordered by it, which shall not exceed six (6) months from its notification, unless they agree to another term.

2. When the Award of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is incompatible with the provisions of this Agreement, the Party complained against shall refrain from executing the measure or shall repeal it.

3. When the Award of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is cause for nullification or impairment in the sense of Article 18.3 (c) it will determine the level of nullification or impairment and may suggest, if the disputing Parties so request, the adjustments it considers mutually satisfactory to each other.

Article18.20 Suspension of Benefits

1. Unless the disputing Parties have notified the Commission within five (5) days following the expiration of the term set in the Award or another agreed upon by the disputing Parties, that it has been complied with, the complaining Party may apply immediately the suspension of benefits, which will be notified to the Party claimed, also indicating the level of such suspension. The level of the suspension of benefits must have an effect equivalent to the benefits not received.

2. In considering the benefits to be suspended pursuant to paragraph 1:

(a) the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the arbitral tribunal has found inconsistent with the obligations under this Agreement, or that has been the cause of nullification or impairment; and

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, it may suspend benefits in other sectors.

3. If the Party complained against considers that the level of benefits that has been suspended is excessive, it may request the office referred to in Article 17.3 (Administration of Dispute Settlement Proceedings) to convene the arbitral tribunal for the suspension. of benefits, so that he can examine the matter.

4. The arbitral tribunal for the suspension of benefits will be constituted with the same arbitrators who heard the matter. If this is not possible, the office referred to in Article 18.3 (Administration of Dispute Settlement Procedures) will inform the disputing Parties so that they can proceed in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.14, but the terms will be will be cut in half.

5. In any case, this arbitral tribunal will be reconstituted no later than fifteen (15) days following the submission of the request, and will issue its decision within thirty (30) days following its constitution.

6. The decision of the arbitral tribunal will establish whether the Party complained against has complied with the terms of the Award, or if the level of benefits that the complaining Party has suspended is excessive, in which case it will set the level of benefits that it considers to be of equivalent effect.

7. The suspension of benefits will last until the Party complained against complies with the Award, or until the arbitral tribunal determines that it has complied, or in the case of Article 18.3 (c), until the disputing Parties reach a mutual agreement. satisfactory resolution of the dispute, as the case may be.

Article18.21 Compliance Review

1. Without prejudice to the procedures established in the previous Article, if the Party complained against considers that it has eliminated the incompatibility or the annulment or impairment, or has complied with its obligations under the Award, it may submit the matter to the attention of the arbitral tribunal mentioned in Article 18.20 (4) by written notification to the complaining Party. The arbitral tribunal will issue its report on the matter within a period of thirty (30) days from said notification.

2. If the arbitral tribunal decides that the Party complained against has eliminated the incompatibility or nullification or impairment, or has complied with its obligations, the complaining Party shall promptly reinstate the benefits that it has suspended in accordance with the preceding Articles.

Section B - Internal Procedures and Dispute Resolution

Commercial Private

Article18.22 Interpretation of the Treaty before Internal Judicial and Administrative Instances

1. The Commission will endeavor to issue, as soon as possible, an adequate non-binding interpretation or response, when:

(a) a Party considers that a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement that has arisen or will arise in a judicial or administrative proceeding of another Party merits interpretation by the Commission; either

(b) a Party informs it of the receipt of a request for an opinion on a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement in a judicial or administrative proceeding of that Party.

2. The Party in whose territory the judicial or administrative procedure is carried out, will present in it the interpretation or response of the Commission, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.

3. When the Commission fails to issue an interpretation or response, any Party may submit its own opinion in the judicial or administrative proceeding, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.

Article18.23 Rights of Individuals

No Party may grant a right of action in its legislation against another Party on the grounds that a measure of the latter Party is inconsistent with this Agreement.

Article18.24 Alternative Means for Dispute Resolution between Individuals

1. To the greatest extent possible, each Party shall promote and facilitate arbitration and other alternative means for the resolution of international commercial disputes between individuals in the free trade area.

2. To this end, each Party shall have adequate procedures to ensure compliance with the International Arbitration Agreements that it has ratified, and the recognition and execution of the arbitral awards that are pronounced in those controversies.

3. The Commission may establish an Advisory Committee on Private Business Disputes, made up of persons who have specialized knowledge or experience in the settlement of international business disputes of a private nature. Once constituted, the Committee will submit reports and general recommendations to the Commission on the existence, use, and effectiveness of arbitration and other procedures for settling disputes between individuals.

ANNEX 18.3

Nullification or Impairment PDF

 

CHAPTER 19

EXCEPTIONS

Article19.1 General Exceptions

1. Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis , for the purposes of:

(a) Chapters 3 (National Treatment and Market Access of Goods), 4 (Rules of Origin), 5 (Customs Procedures Related to the Origin of Goods), 6 (Trade Facilitation), 7 (Safeguard Measures) and 8 (Antidumping and Countervailing Measures), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services or investment; and

(b) Chapters 9 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and 10 (Technical Barriers to Trade), except to the extent that any of their provisions apply to services or investment.

2. Subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article XIV of the GATS are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis , for the purposes of:

(a) Chapters 3 (National Treatment and Market Access of Goods), 4 (Rules of Origin), 5 (Customs Procedures Related to the Origin of Goods), 6 (Trade Facilitation), 7 (Safeguard Measures) and 8 (Anti-dumping and Countervailing Measures), to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services;

(b) Chapters 9 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and 10 (Technical Barriers to Trade), to the extent that any of their provisions apply to services; and

(c) Chapters 12 (Investment), 13 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), and 15 (Temporary Entry of Business Persons).

Article19.2 Homeland Security

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;

(b) prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:

(i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and the trade in operations on merchandise, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other establishment of defending;

(ii) applied in times of war or in other cases of serious international tension; either

(iii) applied to national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;

(c) prevent a Party from taking measures in compliance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security; and

(d) prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures it deems necessary to preserve public order.

Article19.3 Balance of Payments

1. If a Party experiences serious or serious difficulties in its balance of payments or it is seriously threatened, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures with respect to trade in goods and services and payments and movements of capital, including those related to investment .

2. The Parties shall endeavor to avoid the application of the restrictive measures referred to in paragraph 1.

3. The restrictive measures adopted or maintained by virtue of this Article must be non-discriminatory and of limited duration and must not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the situation of the balance of payments or threat thereof and must be in accordance with to the conditions established in the Agreement on the WTO and consistent with the articles of the Convention of the International Monetary Fund, as appropriate.

4. When a Party adopts or maintains a measure under this Article it shall, as soon as possible, notify the other Party.

Article19.4 Disclosure of Information

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to oblige a Party to provide or give access to confidential information to another Party, the disclosure of which would impede compliance with its Constitution, laws, or would be contrary to the public interest, or that could harm the legitimate commercial interest of public or private companies.

Article19.5 Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either Party arising from a tax agreement.1 . In the event of any inconsistency between any of these agreements and this Agreement, the former shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax agreement between two (2) or more Parties, the competent authorities that exist under that agreement would have the exclusive responsibility to determine if there is any incompatibility between this Agreement and that agreement.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 3.3 (National Treatment) and those other provisions in this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same extent as Article III of the GATT 1994; and

(b) Article 3.11 (Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. For the purposes of this Article, tax measures do not include:

(a) a “customs duty”, as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions); neither

(b) the measures listed in exceptions (b) and (c) of that definition.

5. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 13.3 (National Treatment) shall apply to tax measures on income, capital gains or taxable capital of companies, referring to the acquisition or consumption of specific services, except that none of the provisions of this literal prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt of an advantage or the continued receipt of an advantage related to the acquisition or consumption of specific services, on the requirement to supply the service in its territory; and

(b) Articles 12.5 (National Treatment) and 12.6 (Most Favored Nation Treatment); 13.3 (National Treatment) and 13.4 (Most Favored Nation Treatment); will apply to all tax measures, other than those related to income, capital gains or taxable capital of companies, as well as taxes on wealth, inheritance and donations, except that nothing in the provisions of the articles referred to in literals (a) and (b) will apply to:

(i) any most-favored-nation obligation in respect of benefits granted by a Party pursuant to a tax treaty;

(ii) a non-conforming provision of any current tax measure;

(iii) the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming provision of any current tax measure;

(iv) an amendment to a non-conforming provision of any current tax measure, as long as that amendment does not reduce, at the time it is made, its degree of conformity with any of those articles;

(v) any new tax measures, aimed at ensuring the equitable and effective application and collection of taxes (as permitted by GATS Article XIV(d))2 ; either

(vi) a provision conditioning the receipt, or continued receipt of an advantage in connection with contributions to, or income from, pension trusts or pension plans on the requirement that the Party maintain continuing jurisdiction over the pension trust or plan pension.

6. Subject to paragraph 2 and without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under paragraph 3, Article 12.9 (Performance Requirements) shall apply to tax measures.

7. Article 12.8 (Expropriation and Compensation) and Article 12.18 (Submission of Claim) shall apply to a tax measure that is alleged to be expropriatory or a violation of Chapter 12 (Investment). However, no investor may invoke Article 12.8 (Expropriation and Compensation) as the basis of a claim when it has been determined, in accordance with this paragraph, that the measure does not constitute an expropriation. An investor who intends to invoke Article 12.8 (Expropriation and Compensation) with respect to a tax measure, must first submit the matter to the competent authorities of the claimant and defendant parties indicated in Annex 19.5 at the time of delivering the notice of intention to submit a claim to arbitration under Article 12. 18 (Submission of the Claim), so that said authorities can determine if the measure constitutes an expropriation. If the competent authorities do not agree to examine the matter or if, having agreed to examine it, they do not agree that the measure does not constitute an expropriation, within a period of six (6) months after the matter has been submitted to them, the investor may submit your claim to arbitration, in accordance with Article 12.18 (Submission of Claim).

ANNEX 19.5

Competent Authorities PDF

 

CHAPTER 20

COOPERATION

Article20.1 Objectives

The cooperation developed between the Parties will have the following objectives:

(a) contribute to the strengthening and establishment of commercial, financial, technological and investment flows;

(b) enhance the capacity of the public and private sectors to take advantage of the opportunities offered by this Agreement; and

(c) promote a favorable environment for the development of MSMEs and the generation of exportable supply.

Article20.2 Cooperation Actions

1. The Parties may initiate and implement cooperative projects and activities with the participation of experts and national and international institutions, as appropriate, to promote the achievement of objectives and compliance with their obligations under the terms of this Agreement.

2. The Parties will develop an indicative work plan that reflects the national priorities and will take the forecasts of the case for its fulfillment. This work plan will be adjusted over time according to the needs of the Parties.

3. Cooperation projects and activities will be carried out taking into consideration:

(a) differences in economic, environmental, geographic, social, cultural, and legal systems between the Parties;

(b) the national priorities agreed by the Parties;

(c) the advisability of not duplicating already existing cooperation actions seeking their complementarity and articulation; and

(d) existing cooperation mechanisms.

4. The agreed cooperation projects and activities in this area will be integrated into the regular cooperation mechanisms between the Parties and that have been defined in the basic cooperation agreements.

5. For the definition of projects and activities, the instances involved and technical managers of cooperation will reach an agreement, and they will monitor and evaluate them through formal cooperation mechanisms.

6. The definitions of cooperation that appear in other Chapters of this Agreement will be understood to be equally linked to this Agreement.

7. The projects and activities undertaken will be carried out within the framework of non-reimbursable technical cooperation in both ways, to the extent of the capacities of each Party, and will be governed in general terms by the principles of technical cooperation between developing countries ( CTPD), without prejudice to considering the possibility of involving other sources of resources.

Article20.3 Cooperation in Investor-State Disputes

In order to promote cooperation in training and adequate representation of the Parties in investor-State disputes, the Parties will promote specific training, representation services and technical cooperation to act in conciliation or arbitration procedures through the consultative mechanism of investment or a similar regional or multilateral center that provides such services.

Article20.4 Dispute Resolution Exclusion

This Chapter shall not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution).

ANNEX 20.2

Indicative Cooperation Work Plan between the Republic of El Salvador, the Republic of Guatemala, the Republic of Honduras and the Republic of Colombia PDF

 

CHAPTER 21

FINAL PROVISIONS

 

Article21.1 Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

Annexes, appendices and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.

Article21.2 Amendments

The Parties may agree on amendments to this Agreement, which must be approved according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party. Said amendments shall enter into force, for the Republic of Colombia and each of the other Parties, once notifications are exchanged indicating that the corresponding internal legal procedures have been concluded.

Article21.3 Entry into Force

1. This Agreement will have an indefinite duration and will enter into force between the Republic of Colombia and each of the other Parties, on the thirtieth (30) day from the date on which they exchange the written notifications that certify that they have complied with all the requirements. internal laws for that purpose.

2. As of the entry into force of this Treaty, the Partial Scope Agreements (PAA) No. 5, 8 and 9 signed in 1984 between the Republic of Colombia and the Republics of Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras, remain without effect. respectively; with the exception of the tariff preferences established in PSA numbers 8 and 9 signed in 1984 between the Republic of Colombia and the Republics of El Salvador and Honduras, respectively, whose tariff lines are listed in the Appendix to Annex 3.4 (Tariff Elimination Program). .

Article21.4 Adhesion

Any country may adhere to this Agreement subject to the terms and conditions agreed between that country and the Parties. The Agreement will enter into force for that country on the thirtieth (30) day from the date that said country notifies the fulfillment of all its internal legal requirements.

Article21.5 Complaint

1. This Agreement may be denounced by any of the Parties by written notification addressed to the other Parties. In case of denunciation by the Republic of Colombia against all the other Parties, the Treaty will be without force.

2. The denunciation will take effect one hundred eighty (180) days after the notification is received by the other Parties, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different date.

3. With respect to covered investments admitted prior to the expiration of the term referred to in paragraph 2, its provisions will remain in force with respect to such investments for an additional period of ten (10) years counted from said expiration.

Article21.6 Provisional Application

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 21.3, this Treaty may be provisionally applied by the Republic of Colombia, in accordance with its constitutional requirements, from the date of its signing and until the moment of its final entry into force. The provisional application will also cease when the Republic of Colombia notifies the other Parties of its intention not to become a Party to the Treaty or its intention to suspend the provisional application.

Article21.7 Evolutionary Clause

1. The Parties agree on their interest in deepening their commercial relations through the development of this Agreement, taking into account the experience derived from its implementation and its effects on trade. To this end, the Parties decide to initiate a market access negotiation process within three (3) years following the entry into force of the Agreement, which includes tariff and non-tariff measures, as well as the applicable rules of origin and Any other element that is necessary to achieve the proposed objectives.

2. For those products that are transferred from the Exclusion category to a reduction category, if necessary, at the request of one of the Parties, a special safeguard mechanism will be negotiated.

Article21.8 Transitional Provisions

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 21.3 (2), importers may request the application of Partial Scope Agreements No. 5, 8 and 9 signed in 1984 between the Republic of Colombia and the Republics of Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras, respectively, for a period of thirty (30) days from the entry into force of this Agreement. For these purposes, the certificates of origin issued in accordance with the respective Partial Scope Agreement must have been completed prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, be in force and be enforced until the indicated period.

