FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES AND THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA, EL SALVADOR, GUATEMALA, HONDURAS, AND NICARAGUA

 

 

PREAMBLE

 

The Government of the United Mexican States (hereinafter "Mexico") and the Governments of the Republics of Costa Rica (hereinafter "Costa Rica"), El Salvador (hereinafter "El Salvador"), Guatemala (hereinafter "Guatemala" ), Honduras (hereinafter "Honduras") and Nicaragua (hereinafter "Nicaragua"),

RESOLVED TO:

STRENGTHEN the special bonds of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between their peoples;

ACHIEVE a better balance in their commercial relations, through clear and mutually beneficial rules for their commercial exchange;

CONTRIBUTE to harmonious development, the expansion of world trade and the expansion of international cooperation;

PROMOTE a broader and more secure market for goods and services produced in their respective territories while recognizing the differences in their levels of development and in the size of their economies;

CONTRIBUTE to the competitiveness of the service sector by creating business opportunities in the free trade area;

ENSURE a predictable commercial framework for the planning of productive activities and investment;

DEVELOP their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization, as well as from other bilateral and multilateral integration and cooperation instruments;

PROMOTE trade facilitation by promoting efficient and transparent customs procedures that reduce costs and ensure predictability for its importers and exporters;

STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their companies in global markets;

STIMULATE creativity and innovation, promoting trade in goods and services that are subject to protection of intellectual property rights;

RECOGNIZE the importance of transparency in international trade;

PROMOTE new opportunities for the economic and social development of their States;

PRESERVE its ability to safeguard the public welfare;

RECOGNIZE this Treaty as a tool that can contribute to improving living standards, creating new job opportunities and promoting sustainable development;

REAFFIRM regional economic integration, which constitutes one of the essential instruments for Central America and Mexico to advance in their economic and social development; and

CONVERGE the free trade agreements in force between Central America and Mexico, in order to establish a single regulatory framework that facilitates trade between the Parties and adapts the provisions that regulate their commercial exchange;

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

 

 

Chapter I

Initial Provisions

 

Article 1.1: Establishment of the Free Trade Zone

The Parties establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of Articles XXIV of the GATT 1994 and V of the GATS.

Article 1.2: Goals

1. The objectives of this Agreement, developed more specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:

(a) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade in goods and services between the Parties;

(b) promote conditions of fair competition within the free trade zone;

(c) remove barriers to trade and facilitate the movement of goods and services between the Parties;

(d) facilitate the movement of capital and business persons between the territories of the Parties;

(e) increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

(f) protect and enforce, adequately and effectively, intellectual property rights in the territory of each Party;

(g) establish guidelines for bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation, aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement; and

(h) create effective procedures for the application and fulfillment of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of controversies.

2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of International Law.

Article 1.3: Relationship with other International Treaties

1. The Parties confirm the existing rights and obligations between them in accordance with the WTO Agreement and other treaties to which they are party.

2. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 1.4: Area of ​​application

Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this Agreement apply between Mexico and Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, considered individually. This Agreement does not apply between Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua.

Article 1.5: Observance of the Treaty

Each Party shall ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory, in accordance with its constitutional norms, at the federal or central, state or departmental and municipal levels, as appropriate, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.

Article 1.6: Succession of Treaties

Any reference to any other international treaty shall be understood to be made in the same terms to a successor treaty to which the Parties are party.

 

Chapter II

General Definitions

 

Article 2.1: General Application Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise provided, it shall be understood as:

Antidumping Agreement: the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

Customs Valuation Agreement: the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, including its interpretative notes, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

SPS Agreement: the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

TBT Agreement: the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Agreement on Agriculture: the Agreement on Agriculture, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

WTO Agreement: the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, dated April 15, 1994;

TRIPS Agreement: the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Agreement on Safeguards: the Agreement on Safeguards, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures: the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

GATS: the General Agreement on Trade in Services, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

customs duty: any import tax or duty and charge of any kind levied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, with respect to like, directly competitive, or substitute goods of the Party, or with respect to goods from which it has been manufactured or produced, totally or partially, the imported merchandise;

(b) anti-dumping duty or countervailing measure that is applied in accordance with the domestic law of a Party;

(c) duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of services rendered; and

(d) any premium offered or collected on imported merchandise, derived from any bidding system, with respect to the administration of quotas or quotas;

MFN customs tariff: the Most Favored Nation customs tariff;

Central America: the Republics of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua;

Administrative Commission: the Administrative Commission established in accordance with Article 19.1 (Administrative Commission);

days: calendar or calendar days;

business: an entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and privately or government owned, including companies, foundations, partnerships, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures or other associations;

state enterprise: an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through equity participation;

enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the domestic law of a Party;

existing: in force at the entry into force of this Agreement;

tariff fraction: the breakdown of a Harmonized System tariff classification code to more than 6 digits;

GATT 1994: the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

government at the central level:

(a) in the case of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, the national level government; and

(b) in the case of Mexico, the federal government;

government at the local level:

(a) in the case of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, the municipalities; and

(b) in the case of Mexico, the municipalities;

regional government:

(a) in the case of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, "government at the regional level" does not apply;

(b) in the case of Mexico, a state of the United Mexican States.

measure: any law, regulation, procedure, provision, requirement or administrative practice, among others;

merchandise: products or merchandise as understood in the GATT 1994, whether originating or not;

merchandise of a Party: national products as understood in the GATT 1994, those goods that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating goods. A good of a Party may incorporate materials from another Party and from non-Party States;

originating merchandise or originating material: a good or material that qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

national: a physical or natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with its applicable law;

Party: any State for which this Agreement has entered into force;

Exporting Party: the Party from whose territory a good or service is exported;

Importing Party: the Party into whose territory a good or service is imported;

heading: the first 4 digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification code;

person: a physical or natural person, or a company;

person of a Party: a national or company of a Party;

Tariff Treatment Program: the one established in Article 3.4 (Tariff Treatment);

Harmonized System: the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System in force, including its General Rules of Interpretation and its legal section, chapter and subheading notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective legislations. nationals;

subheading: the first 6 digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification code; and

territory: for each Party, as defined in Annex 2.1.

 

 

Chapter III

National Treatment and Market Access for Goods

 

Article 3.1 : Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

customs authority: the competent authority which, in accordance with the national legislation of each Party, is responsible for the administration of customs laws and regulations;

consumed:

(a) actually consumed; either

(b) processed or manufactured in a way that results in a substantial change in the value, form, or use of a good or in the production of another good;

quota or quota: import volume of a good in a specific period, which is subject to a preferential tariff;

Customs Procedure Fee: fee or charge charged by the customs authority, related to the services provided in customs operations;

material: "material", as defined in Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

agricultural goods: goods included in the Harmonized System, listed in Annex I of the Agreement on Agriculture;

industrial goods: goods included in the Harmonized System that are not considered agricultural;

samples without commercial value: those goods whose use or sample is intended to serve as a demonstration or other similar purpose and which lack any commercial value, either because it does not have it due to its quantity, weight, volume or other conditions of presentation, or because it has been deprived of that value through physical operations of disabling that prevent any possibility of being commercialized;

consular transactions or requirements: requirements by which the goods of one Party destined for export to the territory of the other Party, must first be presented to the supervision of the consul of the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining consular invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shipper's export declarations, or any other customs document required for or in connection with importation;

export subsidies: those subsidies or subsidies contingent on the export of agricultural goods, including those listed in Article 9 of the Agreement on Agriculture.

 

Section A: Trade in Goods

Article 3.2: Area of ​​application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties.

Article 3.3: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of the other Party, in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part of it, mutatis mutandis.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 mean, with respect to a government at the central, regional or local level, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that government at the central, regional or local level accords to any like, competing good direct or substitute, as the case may be, of the Party of which they are members.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the measures listed in Annex 3.3 and 3.9.

Article 3.4: Tariff Treatment

1. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party undertakes to guarantee access to its respective market, free of customs duties, for originating goods imported from the other Party, with the exception of those included in the Agreement. Annex 3.4.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on an originating good.1

3. Following a unilateral reduction of a customs duty, a Party may increase that customs duty applicable to an originating good to the level established in accordance with Annex 3.4.

4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, with respect to the excluded goods contained in Annex 3.4, any Party may maintain or adopt a prohibition or restriction, or a customs duty, on the importation of those goods, in accordance with its rights and obligations derived from the WTO Agreement.

5. The Parties may examine, in accordance with the procedures established in this Agreement, the possibility of improving the tariff conditions for market access to originating goods included in Annex 3.4. The agreements in this sense will be adopted through decisions of the Administrative Commission. 2

6. The agreement adopted by the Parties based on paragraph 5 shall prevail over any customs duty applicable to an originating good in accordance with Annex 3.4.

7. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party may adopt or maintain measures, in its national legislation, to allocate the tariff quotas established in Annex 3.4, provided that such measures do not have restrictive trade effects for imports.

8. A Party may request consultations on the application of the measures indicated in paragraph 7 to the other Party that applies or intends to apply them on imports.

9. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 6 shall not prevent any of the Parties from increasing a customs duty on imports, when such increase is authorized by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO.

Article 3.5: Customs Duties Refund Programs on Exported Merchandise, Customs Duties Deferral Programs and Customs Duties Exemption Programs Applied to Exported Merchandise

1. Regarding the refund and exemption of customs duties, the Parties will retain their rights and obligations in accordance with their national legislation and the WTO Agreement.

2. When 25 percent of the domestic industry of a Party considers itself affected by the refund and exemption mechanisms of customs duties established in the other Party, they shall hold consultations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.

Article 3.6: Temporary Import of Merchandise

1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary importation free of payment of customs duties for the goods listed below and that are imported from the territory of the other Party into its territory, regardless of their origin and that are located in the territory of that Party. similar, direct competitive or substitute merchandise available:

(a) vehicles entering the customs territory for tourism purposes;

(b) merchandise to be exhibited at international fairs, exhibitions, conventions or congresses;

(c) equipment, vehicles, animals and other merchandise owned by circuses or similar public performances;

(d) equipment and material for the press, radio broadcasting and television; cinematographic equipment and material; and equipment and material necessary for the exercise of a person's art, trade, profession and occupation;

(e) merchandise to deal with situations caused by catastrophes or natural phenomena, including medical-surgical and laboratory equipment and material, for non-profit activities;

(f) merchandise used to be exhibited and serve as support for an activity to strengthen and disseminate the arts, and those classified as educational, religious, and cultural by the competent authority;

(g) goods that serve as technological support or a complement to scientific research, authorized by the competent authority, including the personal implements of scientists;

(h) machines, equipment, apparatus, tools and instruments that will be used in the execution of works or provision of public services that are introduced directly by the contractors, protected by special laws or administrative contracts;

(i) goods that the Party imports temporarily for the fulfillment of its purposes;

(j) the special material, the elements of transport or reusable containers, which are used for the handling and protection of goods;

(k) the units and means of transport affected by customs controls of any kind; and the parts, pieces and equipment destined for its repair, which must be incorporated into the transport units. The replaced parts, pieces and spare parts must be destroyed under the control of the customs authority.

The parts, pieces and equipment related in this subsection shall be subject to the requirements and conditions established for such purpose by the customs authority regarding their temporary importation.

Vehicles and transport units may not be used for internal transport in the customs territory, except as established for transit by sea or air;

(l) those that are used for the demonstration of products and their characteristics, quality tests, exhibition, publicity, propaganda and others, as long as they are not commercialized;

(m) cinematographic films, magnetic tapes, magnetized films and other sound and image supports, in order to be sounded, dubbed, exhibited or reproduced, as long as they are authorized by the copyright holder;

(n) those intended for air services of companies that have an operating certificate or provisional registration issued by the aeronautical authority of the importing Party; and

(o) those authorized by specific regulations, international agreements or by the customs authority.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party may subject the temporary importation free of the payment of customs duties to a good indicated in paragraph 1 to conditions other than those indicated below:

(a) that is imported by a national or resident of the other Party;

(b) that is used exclusively by the visiting person, or under his personal supervision, in the performance of his activity, trade or profession;

(c) that are not subject to sale, lease or assignment in any other way while they remain in their territory under the temporary importation regime;

(d) that the goods that are within subsections (l) and (m) of paragraph 1 and for samples and samples for non-commercial purposes, the customs authority will require that a guarantee be presented, which may be of a global nature, to respond for the total amount of the eventually applicable taxes as established in the national legislation of each of the Parties. For the categories indicated in subsections (a), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (i) of paragraph 1, the customs authority will not require any guarantee. In the other categories not indicated in this subsection, the customs authority will determine the cases in which it is necessary to present a guarantee, which may be of a global nature, when the nature of the operation so requires;

(e) that is susceptible to identification by any reasonable means established by the customs legislation of each Party;

(f) that it is re-exported upon the departure of that person or within the term that corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation;

(g) that is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable, in accordance with the intended use and in accordance with the customs legislation of each Party;

(h) that it does not undergo any transformation or modification during the authorized import period, except for wear and tear due to the normal use of the merchandise; either

(i) that it complies with the sanitary and phytosanitary measures and with the standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, applicable in accordance with the provisions of chapters VIII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and IX (Technical Barriers to Trade) , respectively.

3. When a good is imported temporarily and does not comply with any of the conditions that a Party imposes in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party may apply the customs duties and any other charges that would be owed for the final entry or importation of the good. same.

Article 3.7: Free Import of Customs Duty for Samples without Commercial Value

Each Party will authorize the free import of samples without commercial value from the territory of the other Party.

Article 3.8: Customs Valuation

1. The customs valuation principles applied to trade between the Parties shall be those established in the Customs Valuation Agreement.

2. The Parties may hold consultations at any time, in order to find mutually satisfactory solutions regarding issues on the valuation of merchandise, in order not to hinder trade.

Article 3.9: Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of the other Party, or on the exportation or sale for exportation of any good destined for the territory of the other Party. Party, except as provided for in Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.

2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit export price requirements and, except as permitted for the application of countervailing duty rulings and commitments, import price requirements.

3. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, among others, but not limited to:

(a) quantitative restrictions on imports, according to the parameters of paragraph 1;

(b) minimum prices or values;

(c) voluntary limitations on exports when they do not result from an agreement consistent with the Antidumping Agreement;

(d) the granting of import licenses on the condition that the importer acquires national production;

(e) the granting of import licenses on the condition that the importer exports; and

(f) the granting of import licenses on the condition that the merchandise to be imported includes a certain percentage of content from the importing Party.

4. In cases where a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import or export of goods from or to a non-Party State, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent it from:

(a) limit or prohibit the importation of the goods of the non-Party State, from the territory of the other Party; either

(b) require as a condition for the export of those goods from the Party to the territory of the other Party, that they not be re-exported to the non-Party State, directly or indirectly, without being consumed in the territory of the other Party.

5. In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a good from a non-Party State, at the request of any of them, the Parties shall consult in order to avoid interference or undue distortion in the mechanisms pricing, marketing and distribution in the other Party.

6. Paragraphs 1 to 4 do not apply to the measures set out in Annex 3.3 and 3.9.

Article 3.10: Register of Importers

1. If as a result of the application and administration of a registry of importers, a Party considers that the access of a good of that Party to the territory of the Party that applies the measure is hindered or prevented, both Parties, in accordance with the provisions of the Committee on Trade in Goods, shall hold consultations with the aim of reaching a mutually satisfactory solution.

2. The Party that establishes in its national legislation new provisions or requirements for the registration of importers, must notify the contact point of the Committee on Trade in Goods of the other Parties, as indicated in Article 3.24.1, in order to avoid unnecessary barriers to trade.

Article 3.11: Customs Measures

Each Party shall ensure that the application, administration and publication of customs measures are in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, its national legislation and the Agreement on the WTO.

Article 3.12: Establishment of Specific Customs

1. When a Party contemplates the establishment of limitations on the customs clearance of certain types of goods to specific customs, it shall consult with the other Parties to avoid that they could affect its interests in accordance with this Agreement.

2. The Party that establishes such limitations will allow the entry of the goods into its territory through any of the legally established border posts, so that the goods reach the specific customs office for the respective clearance, provided that they comply with the corresponding customs formalities.

Article 3.13: Customs Processing Fees

No Party shall impose or collect any customs processing fee on originating goods for the service provided by customs.

Article 3.14: Export Taxes

1. Except as provided in this Article and in Annex 3.14, neither Party shall apply any tax, duty, levy or charge on the export of any good intended for consumption in the territory of the other Party, unless these are adopted or keep on said merchandise when it is destined for internal consumption.

2. For the purposes of this paragraph, "temporarily" shall be understood as up to one year, or a longer period agreed by the Parties. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party may adopt or maintain a tax, duty, levy or charge on exports to the territory of the other Party if such tax, duty, levy or charge is applied temporarily for:

(a) alleviate a critical shortage of a food commodity; either

(b) ensure to a national transformation industry the supply of the essential quantities of raw materials during the periods in which the national price is maintained at a level lower than the world price in execution of a government stabilization plan, provided that such taxes , duties, levies or charges:

(i) do not have the consequence of increasing the exports of that national industry;

(ii) do not have the effect of increasing the protection granted to that national industry;

(iii) do not go against the provisions of this Agreement relating to non-discrimination; and

(iv) are sustained only for the period necessary to maintain the integrity of the stabilization plan.

3. The Parties may hold consultations in relation to the application of the provisions of this Article, tending to the application of measures that seek to avoid unwanted effects in the application of a domestic food aid program.

Article 3.15: Country of Origin Marking

Annex 3.15 applies to measures related to country of origin marking.

Article 3.16: Preferential Tariff Treatment for Goods Classified in Chapter 62 of the Harmonized System that Incorporate Materials from the United States of America

Preferential tariff treatment will be granted to merchandise classified in chapter 62 of the Harmonized System, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 3.16.

Article 3.17: Transactions or Consular Requirements

Neither Party shall require consular transactions or requirements, including related fees and charges, in connection with the importation of any good of the other Party.

 

Section B: Trade in Agricultural Goods

Article 3.18: Area of ​​application

1. This Section applies to measures related to trade in agricultural goods adopted or maintained by the Parties.

2. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Section and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this Section shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 3.19: Internal Help

1. The Parties recognize that domestic support measures can be important for their agricultural sectors, but that they can also distort trade and affect production. In this sense, the Parties may apply domestic support measures in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement on Agriculture, and when a Party decides to support its agricultural producers, it will endeavor to move towards domestic support measures that:

(a) have minimal or no distorting effects on trade or production; and

(b) are in full compliance with the provisions of Annex 2 of the Agreement on Agriculture.

2. To guarantee transparency, the Committee on Trade in Goods will analyze, at least once a year, the status of all domestic support measures in the Parties, as well as any modification to these measures, seeking to assess compliance with the provisions in paragraph 1. In addition, the Parties shall exchange public information in a timely manner or at the request of the Party.

3. Annex 3.19 establishes the bilateral provisions for the application of this Article.

Article 3.20: Domestic Food Aid

1. The Party that establishes a domestic food aid program, in accordance with paragraph 4 of Annex 2 of the Agreement on Agriculture, shall ensure, through the instruments it deems necessary, that the benefits of this program are received only by consumers. of that part.

2. At the request of a Party, consultations will be held to ensure compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1.

3. If no agreement is reached, the Parties will refer to Annex 3.19.

Article 3.21: Export Subsidies

1. The Parties share the objective of achieving the multilateral elimination of export subsidies for agricultural goods and in this sense they will cooperate in the effort to reach an agreement within the framework of the WTO.

2. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party may apply export subsidies on agricultural goods in their reciprocal trade.

Article 3.22: Special Agricultural Safeguard

Annex 3.22 establishes the bilateral provisions for the application of this Article.

 

Section C: General Provisions

Article 3.23: Publication and Notification

1. Each Party undertakes to publish the measures that affect the import or export of goods and the requirements that importers or exporters must meet for trade in goods. Said measures must be notified without delay to the other Parties, once they enter into force.

2. Neither Party shall apply before its official publication any measure of a general nature adopted by that Party that has the effect of increasing a customs duty or other charge on the import of goods of the other Party, or that imposes a new or more onerous measure, restriction or prohibition for imports, or that establishes or increases non-tariff type restrictions and prohibitions on imports of goods from the other Party or for transfers of economic resources related to them.

3. Each Party will identify, in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them in accordance with their respective tariff, the measures, restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of merchandise for reasons of national security, public health, preservation of the flora or fauna, the environment, sanitary and phytosanitary regulations, standards, labels, technical regulations, international commitments, public order requirements or any other regulation.

Article 3.24: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Trade in Goods. The Committee will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties, in accordance with Annex 3.24(a), and will assist the Administrative Commission in the performance of its functions.

2. The Committee will establish, if it considers it pertinent, its rules of procedure.

3. The meetings of the Committee will be held at the request of the Administrative Commission, the Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement or at the request of any of the Parties to deal with matters of interest.

4. The agreements of the Committee must be adopted by consensus and reported to the corresponding instances.

5. Committee meetings may be held in person or through any technological means. When the meetings are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Committee may meet to discuss bilateral matters of interest to Mexico and one or more Central American Parties, provided that the other Parties are notified sufficiently in advance so that, if applicable, they may participate in the meeting. The agreements derived from the meeting will be adopted by consensus between the Parties on which the bilateral matter is concerned and will take effect only with respect to these.

7. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the application and administration of this Chapter;

(b) examine the proposals submitted by the Parties in accordance with Article 3.4.5;

(c) formulate pertinent recommendations to the Administrative Commission regarding issues within its competence;

(d) coordinate the exchange of commercial information between the Parties;

(e) evaluate the evolution of trade in goods between the Parties;

(f) recommend to the Administrative Commission the formation of the subcommittees it deems necessary to address specific issues of merchandise trade; and

(g) any other matter instructed by the Administrative Commission.

8. The Parties hereby establish the Sub-Committee on Agricultural Trade, composed as indicated in Annex 3.24(b). This subcommittee will have the functions assigned to it by the Merchandise Trade Committee.


 

Chapter IV

Rules of origin

 

Article 4.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

Shipping Containers and Packaging Materials: Goods that are used to protect merchandise during transportation, other than retail packaging and materials;

Shipping and repackaging costs: the costs incurred in repackaging and transporting a merchandise outside the territory where the producer or exporter of the merchandise is located;

sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs: the following costs related to sales promotion, marketing and after-sale service:

(a) sales promotion and marketing; advertising in broadcast media; advertising and market research; promotional and demonstration materials; merchandise displayed; sales promotion conferences; trade fairs and conventions; banners; trade shows; free samples; sales, marketing and after-sales service publications such as merchandise brochures, catalogues, technical publications, price lists, service manuals and sales support information; establishment and protection of logos and trademarks; sponsorships; restocking charges for wholesale and retail sales; and representation expenses;

(b) marketing, sales or merchandise incentives; and discounts to wholesalers, retailers and consumers;

(c) for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel: wages and salaries, sales commissions; bonuses; medical, insurance and pension benefits; travel, lodging and living expenses; and membership and professional fees;

(d) recruitment and training of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel; and training to the client's employees after the sale;

(e) insurance premiums for civil liability derived from the merchandise;

(f) office supplies for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales services;

(g) telephone, mail, and other means of communication for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales services;

(h) rents and depreciation of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service offices, as well as distribution centers;

(i) insurance premiums on property, taxes, costs of public services, and costs of repair and maintenance of offices, as well as distribution centers; and

(j) payments from the producer to others for warranty repairs;

net cost: total cost less the costs of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales services; royalties; shipping and repackaging; as well as non-admissible interest costs, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 4.4;

non-allowable interest costs: the interest that a producer has paid on its financial obligations that exceeds 10 percentage points above the highest interest rate of debt obligations issued by the government at the federal or central level, as the case may be, of the Party in which the producer is located, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 4.4;

total cost: the sum of the following elements in accordance with the provisions of Annex 4.4:

(a) the costs or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;

(b) the costs of direct labor used in the production of the good; and

(c) an amount for direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the merchandise, reasonably assigned to it, except for the following concepts:

(i) the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to that good;

(ii) the costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the company of the producer of the merchandise, which constitutes a discontinued operation;

(iii) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of generally accepted accounting principles;

(iv) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good;

(v) the costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure;

(vi) the profits made by the producer of the good, regardless of whether they were retained by the producer or paid to others as dividends and the taxes paid on those profits, including capital gains taxes; and

(vii) the interest costs that have been agreed between related parties and that exceed those interests that are paid at market interest rates;

direct manufacturing costs and expenses: those incurred in a period, directly related to the merchandise, different from the costs or value of direct materials and direct labor costs;

indirect manufacturing costs and expenses: those incurred in a period, other than direct manufacturing costs and expenses, direct labor costs, and direct material costs or value;

FOB: the value of the merchandise free on board, including the cost of transportation to the final port or place of shipment, regardless of the means of transportation;

place where the producer is located: in relation to a merchandise, the production plant of that merchandise;

material: a good used in the production of another good;

Own manufacturing material: that produced by the producer of a merchandise and used in the production of that merchandise;

fungible materials or merchandise: materials or merchandise that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical and that it is not possible to differentiate them by simple visual examination;

indirect material: that used in the production, verification or inspection of a merchandise, which is not physically incorporated into the merchandise; or that used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of a good, including:

(a) fuel and power;

(b) tools, dies and molds;

(c) spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

(d) lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;

(e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;

(f) equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the merchandise;

(g) catalysts and solvents; either

(h) any other material that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be a part of that production;

intermediate materials: self-manufactured materials used in the production of a good, and designated in accordance with Article 4.7;

merchandise: any good, product, article or matter;

Identical goods: those that are the same in everything, including their physical characteristics, quality and commercial prestige. Minor differences in appearance shall not prevent goods that otherwise conform to the definition from being considered identical;

Similar merchandise: those that, although they are not the same in everything, have similar characteristics and composition, which allows them to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable. In order to determine if the goods are similar, their quality, commercial prestige and the existence of a trademark must be considered, among other factors;

non-originating merchandise or non-originating material: a merchandise or a material that does not qualify as originating in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;

goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties:

(a) minerals extracted in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(b) vegetables harvested or gathered in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(c) live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(d) goods obtained from hunting, fishing or aquaculture in the territory of one or more of the Parties;

(e) fish, crustaceans and other species obtained from the sea by vessels registered or registered by a Party and flying the flag of that Party;

(f) goods produced on board manufacturing ships from the goods identified in subparagraph (e), provided that such manufacturing ships are registered or registered by a Party and fly the flag of that Party;

(g) goods obtained by a Party or a person from a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;

(h) waste1 and waste derived from:

(i) production in the territory of one or more of the Parties; either

(ii) goods used or collected in the territory of one or more of the Parties, provided that such goods serve only for the recovery of raw materials; either

(i) the goods produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties exclusively from the goods mentioned in subparagraphs (a) to (h) or their derivatives, at any stage of production;

related person: a person who is related to another person, in accordance with the following:

(a) one of them holds positions of responsibility or direction in a company of the other;

(b) are legally recognized as business associates;

(c) are in an employer-employee relationship;

(d) a person has, directly or indirectly, ownership, control or possession of 25 percent or more of the outstanding shares or securities and with voting rights of both;

(e) one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;

(f) both persons are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;

(g) together directly or indirectly control a third person; either

(h) are from the same family and includes only children, siblings, parents, grandparents, or spouses;

generally accepted accounting principles: those on which there is a recognized consensus or that enjoy substantial and authorized support in the territory of a Party, regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements and that are applied in the territory of that Party. These standards can be broad guidelines of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;

production: cultivation, breeding, extraction, harvesting, gathering of vegetables or fruits, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing or assembly of a merchandise;

producer: a person located in the territory of a Party who cultivates, raises, extracts, harvests, gathers vegetables or fruits, fishes, hunts, manufactures, processes or assembles a good;

royalties: payments made for the exploitation of intellectual property rights;

used: used or consumed in the production of goods;

transaction value of a good: the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction from the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Articles 8.1 , 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the merchandise is sold for export. For the purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the producer of the merchandise; and

transaction value of a material: the price actually paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Articles 8.1 , 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the material is sold for export. For the purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the supplier of the material and the buyer referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the producer of the merchandise.

Article 4.2: Instruments of Application and Interpretation

1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) the basis of tariff classification is the Harmonized System;

(b) the determination of the transaction value of a good or a material shall be made in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Agreement; and

(c) all costs referred to in this Chapter shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, when applying the Customs Valuation Agreement to determine the origin of a merchandise:

(a) the principles of that Agreement shall apply to domestic transactions, as modified by circumstances, as they would apply to international transactions; and

(b) the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail over those of this Agreement insofar as they are incompatible.

Article 4.3: Originating Goods

1. A good will be originating when:

(a) is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties, as defined in Article 4.1;

(b) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

(c) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in Annex 4.3 and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of This chapter;

(d) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification and other requirements, and the good meets a regional value content requirement, as specified in Annex 4.3, and with the other applicable provisions of this Chapter;

(e) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties and meets a regional value content requirement, as specified in Annex 4.3, and meets the other applicable provisions of this Chapter; either

(f) except for goods included in chapters 61 through 63 of the Harmonized System, the good is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties, but one or more of the non-originating materials used in the production of the good does not comply with a change in tariff classification because:

(i) the good has been imported into the territory of a Party without assembly or disassembly, but has been classified as an assembled good in accordance with rule 2 a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System; either

(ii) the heading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and that heading is not divided into subheadings or the subheading is the same for both the good and its parts;

provided that the regional value content of the good, determined in accordance with Article 4.4, is not less than 50 percent when the transaction value method is used or 41.66 percent when the net cost method is used, except provision to the contrary contained in Annex 4.3 and the merchandise complies with the other applicable provisions of this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the production of a good from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in Annex 4.3, must be made entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties and any regional value content requirement of a good must be fully satisfied in the territory of one or more of the Parties.

Article 4.4: Regional Value Content

1. Each Party shall provide that the regional value content of a good shall be calculated, at the option of the exporter or producer of the good, in accordance with the transaction value method set forth in paragraph 2 or with the net cost method set forth in in paragraph 4.

2. To calculate the regional content value of a merchandise based on the transaction value method, the following formula will be applied:

VT - VMN
VCR= ----------------- x 100
VT

where:

RVC: regional value content expressed as a percentage;

VT: transaction value of a merchandise adjusted on the FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 3; and

VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the merchandise, determined in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.5.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, when the producer of the merchandise does not export it directly, the transaction value will be adjusted up to the point in which the buyer receives the merchandise within the territory where the producer is located.

4. To calculate the regional content value of a merchandise based on the net cost method, the following formula will be applied:

CN - VMN
VCR= ----------------- x 100
CN

where:

RVC : ​​regional value content expressed as a percentage.

CN : net cost of the merchandise.

VNM : value of the non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the merchandise, determined in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.5.

5. For the purposes of paragraph 2, there will be no transaction value when the merchandise is not the object of a sale or when the circumstances established in Article 1.1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement are not met.

In these cases, for the purposes of calculating the regional content value of a good, the producer or exporter may make said calculation based on:

(a) the net cost method; either

(b) the transaction value method. In this case, the customs value calculated in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Agreement, will replace the transaction value in the formula of paragraph 2.

6. Except for goods covered by Article 4.16, a producer may average the regional value content of one or all of the goods covered by the same subheading, which are produced in the same plant or in different plants within the territory of a Party. , either based on all the goods produced by the producer or only the goods that are exported to the other Party:

(a) in its fiscal year or period; either

(b) in any monthly, bimonthly, quarterly, quarterly or semi-annual period.

Article 4.5: Value of Materials

1. The value of a material:

(a) will be the transaction value of the material; either

(b) in the event that there is no transaction value or the transaction value of the material cannot be determined in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, it shall be calculated in accordance with the principles of Articles 2 to 7 of that Agreement.

2. When they are not considered in subsections (a) or (b) of paragraph 1, the value of a material will include:

(a) freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the port of importation in the Party where the producer of the good is located, except as provided in paragraph 3 ; and

(b) the cost of scrap and scrap resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less any recovery of these costs, provided that the recovery does not exceed 30 percent of the value of the material, determined in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. When the producer of the good acquires a non-originating material within the territory of the Party where it is located, the value of the material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located.

4. For the purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with Article 4.4, except as provided in Article 4.16.2, for a motor vehicle identified in Article 4.16.3, or a component identified in Annex 4.16( b), the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used by:

(a) another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either

(b) the producer of the good in the production of an intermediate material.

Article 4.6: de minimis

1. A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good that do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.3, does not exceed 10 percent of the transaction value of the good adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraphs 2 or 3, as the case may be, of Article 4.4 or, in the event that the transaction value of the good is not admissible in accordance with Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, if the value of all non-originating materials referred to above does not exceed 10 percent of the total cost of the merchandise.

2. When the merchandise indicated in paragraph 1 is additionally subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of those non-originating materials shall be taken into account in the calculation of the regional value content of the merchandise and the merchandise must satisfy the other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

3. A good that is subject to a regional value content requirement set out in Annex 4.3 will not have to satisfy it if the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 10 percent of the good's transaction value adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraphs 2 or 3, as the case may be, of Article 4.4, or, in the event that the transaction value of the merchandise is not admissible in accordance with Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, if the value of all non-originating materials referred to above does not exceed 10 percent of the total cost of the merchandise.

4. Paragraph 1 does not apply to:

(a) goods included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System; and

(b) a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 01 through 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material is included in a different subheading than the good for which the subheading is being determined. origin in accordance with this Article.

5. A good included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System that is not originating because the fibers and yarns, with the exception of elastomeric materials classified in subheading 5402.44 or 5404.11, used in the production of the material that determines the tariff classification of that good, do not comply with the change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.3, it will nevertheless be considered as originating if the total weight of those fibers and yarns of that material does not exceed 10 percent of the total weight of that material.

6. A good included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System that is not originating because the elastomeric materials classified in subheading 5402.44 or 5404.11 used in the production of the material that determines the tariff classification of that good, do not comply with the change of tariff classification established in Annex 4.3, it shall, however, be considered originating if the total weight of the elastomeric materials classified under subheading 5402.44 or 5404.11 does not exceed 7 percent of the total weight of that material.

Article 4.7: Intermediate Materials

1. For the purposes of calculating the regional value content, in accordance with Article 4.4, the producer of a good may designate as an intermediate material any self-manufactured material used in the production of that good, provided that such material complies with the established in Article 4.3, except for the components listed in Annex 4.16(b) and the goods included in heading 87.06, intended for use in motor vehicles included in Article 4.16.3.

2. When an intermediate material is designated and is subject to a regional value content requirement in accordance with Annex 4.3, it shall be calculated in accordance with subparagraphs (a) or (b) of paragraph 5 of Article 4.4.

3. For the purposes of calculating the regional content value of the merchandise, the value of the intermediate material will be the total cost that can be reasonably assigned to that intermediate material in accordance with the provisions of Annex 4.4.

4. If a material designated as an intermediate material is subject to a regional value content requirement, no other self-produced material subject to a regional value content requirement used in the production of that intermediate material may, in turn, be designated by the producer as intermediate material.

5. When a good referred to in Article 4.16.2 is designated as an intermediate material, that designation shall be applied only to the calculation of the net cost of that good, and the value of non-originating materials shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.16.2.

Article 4.8: accumulation

1. Each Party shall provide that:

(a) originating goods or materials of one or more of the Parties, incorporated into a good in the territory of another Party, shall be considered as originating in the territory of that other Party; either

(b) a good is originating, when the good is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties, by one or more producers, provided that the good meets the requirements of Article 4.3 and the other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of cumulation of origin, in accordance with this Article, the Parties shall apply to an originating good in accordance with this Agreement, the customs duty rate established in Chapter III (National Treatment and Market Access of Goods). , as long as:

(a) materials originating in accordance with this Agreement, used in the production of a good in a Central American Party, are found in accordance with this Agreement, free from payment of customs duties between Mexico and the Party that produced the material. Notwithstanding what is established in paragraph 1, in the determination of origin of said good, the materials obtained in the Party that do not meet the previous requirements, shall be considered as if they had been obtained in a non-Party State; either

(b) the originating materials in accordance with this Agreement, used in the production of a good in Mexico do not correspond to a material specified in accordance with the applicable regimes established in Annex A of the General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration and are free of the payment of customs duties between the importing Central American Party and the other Central American Party that produced the material. Notwithstanding what is established in paragraph 1, in the determination of origin of said good, the materials obtained in the Party that do not meet the previous requirements, shall be considered as if they had been obtained in a non-Party State;

(c) for originating materials in accordance with this Agreement there is a common rule of origin in accordance with Annex 4.3, between the Parties involved in cumulation of origin.

Article 4.9: Expanded Origin Accumulation

1. When the Parties have established preferential trade agreements with a non-Party State or group of States, the originating goods or materials of said non-Party, incorporated into a good or material in the territory of a Party, shall be considered as originating in the territory of that Party, provided they comply with the applicable rules of origin for that good or material in accordance with this Agreement.

2. For the application of paragraph 1, each one of the Parties must apply provisions equivalent to those indicated in said paragraph with the State or group of States not Party. The Parties may also establish other conditions that they deem necessary for the application of paragraph 1.

Article 4.10 : Goods and Fungible Materials

1. For the purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined in inventory are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined by one of the methods of handling inventories established in paragraph 3.

2. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory, and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of the other Party, the origin of the goods may be determined based on one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3.

3. The inventory management methods applicable to fungible materials or merchandise will be the following:

(a) "FIFO" (first-in-first-out) is the inventory management method whereby the origin of the number of units of fungible materials or merchandise first received in inventory is considered the origin, in the same number of units of the consumable materials or goods that first come out of inventory;

(b) "LUEP" (last in-first out) is the inventory management method whereby the origin of the number of units of fungible materials or merchandise that was received last in inventory is considered as the origin, in the same number of units, of the consumable materials or goods that first come out of inventory; either

(c) "averages" is the inventory management method by which, except as provided in paragraph 4, the determination as to whether the fungible materials or goods are originating will be made through the application of the following formula:

OMT
PMO= ----------------- x 100
TMOYN

where:

PMO : average originating materials or fungible goods;

TMO : total units of originating materials or fungible goods that are part of the inventory prior to departure; and

TMOYN : total sum of units of originating and non-originating materials or fungible goods that are part of the pre-departure inventory.

4. In the event that the merchandise is subject to a regional content value requirement, the determination of non-originating fungible materials will be made through the application of the following formula:

 

TMN
PMN= ----------------- x 100
TMOYN

where:

PMN : average of non-originating materials;

TMN : total value of non-originating fungible materials that are part of the inventory prior to departure; and

TMOYN : total value of originating and non-originating fungible materials that are part of the pre-departure inventory.

5. Once one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3 is selected, it must be used throughout the fiscal year or period.

Article 4.11: Games or Assortments

1. The sets or assortments of merchandise that are classified as established in rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, as well as the merchandise whose description in accordance with the Harmonized System nomenclature is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the merchandise contained in the set or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of the merchandise in this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed 10 percent of the transaction value of the set. or assortment adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraphs 2 or 3 as the case may be in Article 4.4, or in the event that the transaction value of the merchandise cannot be determined in accordance with Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the kit or assortment does not exceed 10 percent of the total cost of the kit or assortment.

3. The provisions of this Article shall prevail over the specific rules of origin established in Annex 4.3.

Article 4.12: Indirect Materials

Indirect materials will be considered as originating without taking into account the place of their production and the value of these materials will be their cost that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the merchandise.

Article 4.13: Accessories, Spare Parts or Spare Parts and Tools

1. The accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools delivered with the merchandise as part of the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and usual tools of the merchandise, will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the goods comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.3, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the merchandise, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately on the invoice itself; and

(b) the quantity and value of said accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the merchandise.

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools will be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, when calculating the regional value content of the goods.

Article 4.14: Containers and Packaging Materials for Retail Sale

1. The containers and packaging materials in which a good is presented for retail sale, when classified with the good they contain, shall not be taken into account in deciding whether all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.3.

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the containers and packaging materials for retail sale will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the goods.

Article 4.15: Shipping Containers and Packaging Materials

Shipping containers and packing materials will not be taken into account to determine if a good is originating.

Article 4.16: Merchandise of the Automotive Industry

1. For the purposes of this Article, it shall be understood as:

frame: the bottom plate of a motor vehicle;

class of motor vehicles: any of the following categories of motor vehicles:

(a) motor vehicles included in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 16 persons or more, or in subheading 8701.20, 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90 or in heading 8705 or 8706;

(b) motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.10 or in 8701.30 to 8701.90;

(c) motor vehicles included in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 15 persons or less, or in subheading 8704.21 or 8704.31; either

(d) motor vehicles included in subheading 8703.21 through 8703.90;

motor vehicle assembler: a producer of motor vehicles and any related person or joint venture in which the producer participates;

original equipment: material that is incorporated into a motor vehicle prior to the first transfer of title to or consignment of the motor vehicle to a person other than a motor vehicle assembler. That material is:

(a) a good covered by Annex 4.16(a); either

(b) an assembly of automotive components, an automotive component, or a material listed in Annex 4.16(b);

model line: a group of motor vehicles having the same platform or model name;

model name: the word or group of words, letter or letters, number or numbers, or similar designation assigned to a motor vehicle by a marketing division of a motor vehicle assembler for:

(a) differentiate the motor vehicle from other motor vehicles using the same bed design;

(b) associate the motor vehicle with other motor vehicles using a different platform design; either

(c) indicate a platform layout;

plant: a building or buildings near but not necessarily contiguous, machinery, apparatus and accessories that are under the control of a producer and are used for the production of motor vehicles;

platform: the primary assembly of a load-carrying structural assembly of a motor vehicle that determines the basic size of that vehicle and forms the structural base that supports the powertrain, and serves as a link to the motor vehicle in various types of frames, such as for assembly of bodywork, dimensional frame and unitary bodywork; and

motor vehicle: a good covered by heading 8701, 8702, 8703, 8704, 8705 or 8706.

2. For the purposes of calculating the regional content value when the exporter or producer uses the net cost method established in Article 4.4, for:

(a) Goods that are motor vehicles included in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 15 persons or less, or in subheadings 8703.21 through 8703.90, 8704.21 or 8704.31; either

(b) goods covered by Annex 4.16(a), when subject to a regional value content and intended for use as original equipment in the production of goods that are motor vehicles covered by subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are vehicles motor vehicles designed for the transport of 15 persons or less, or in subheadings 8703.21 through 8703.90, 8704.21 or 8704.31;

the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of those goods shall be the sum of the values ​​of non-originating materials, determined in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 4.5, imported from non-Party States, included in Annex 4.16(a) and used in the production of those goods or in the production of any materials used in the production of those goods.

3. For the purposes of calculating the regional content value, when the exporter or producer uses the net cost method established in Article 4.4, for goods that are motor vehicles included in heading 8701, subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 16 or more persons, or under subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90 or heading 8705 or 8706, or for a component identified in Annex 4.16(b) to be used as original equipment In the production of the motor vehicles described in this paragraph, the value of the non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good will be the sum of:

(a) for each material used by the producer of the good and listed in Annex 4.16(b), whether or not produced by that producer, at that producer's choice, and determined in accordance with Article 4.5 or Article 4.7.3 , any of the following 2 values:

(i) the value of the non-originating material; either

(ii) the value of non-originating materials used in the production of that material; and

(b) the value of any other non-originating material used by the producer of the good, that is not included in Annex 4.16(b), determined in accordance with Article 4.5 or Article 4.7.3.

4. For the purposes of calculating the regional content value of a motor vehicle identified in paragraphs 2 or 3, the producer may average the calculation in its fiscal year or period using any of the following categories, either taking as a base all the motor vehicles of that category, or only motor vehicles of that category that are exported to the territory of the other Party:

(a) the same model line of the same class of motor vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;

(b) the same class of motor vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;

(c) the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party; either

(d) the same class of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party.

5. For the purposes of calculating the regional content value of one or all of the goods included in a tariff classification listed in Annex 4.16(a) or of a component or material indicated in Annex 4.16(b), that are produced in the same plant, the producer of the merchandise may:

(a) average your calculation:

(i) in the fiscal year or period of the producer of the motor vehicle to whom the merchandise is sold;

(ii) in any quarterly or monthly period;

(iii) in its own financial year or fiscal period, if the merchandise is sold as a part or replacement;

(b) calculate the average referred to in subsection (a) separately for any or all of the merchandise sold to one or more motor vehicle producers; either

(c) with respect to any calculation made pursuant to this paragraph, calculate separately the regional value content of the goods that are exported to the territory of the other Party.

Article 4.17: Operations and Practices that do not Confer Origin

1. The operations or practices that, individually or in combination with each other, do not confer origin to a good are the following:

(a) the simple2 dilution in water or in another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the merchandise;

(b) simple operations intended to ensure the conservation of the goods during transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, freezing, removal of damaged parts, drying or addition of substances;

(c) dusting, screening, husking, shelling, dividing, painting, grading, sorting, washing, or cutting;

(d) the packaging, repackaging, packaging, repackaging, container or repackaging for retail sale or conditioning for transport;

(e) the assembly of merchandise to form sets or assortments;

(f) the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;

(g) cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings; and

(h) the assembly of non-originating parts and components to form a completely disassembled good that is classified as a good in accordance with rule 2 a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System. The foregoing shall not apply to merchandise that had already been assembled and considered original, and subsequently disassembled for convenience of packaging, handling, or transportation.

2. No activity or price fixing practice confers origin to a merchandise, with respect to which it can be demonstrated, based on sufficient evidence, that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.

3. The provisions of this Article shall prevail over the specific rules of origin established in Annex 4.3.

Article 4.18: Transhipment and Direct Expedition

A good shall not be considered as originating, even if it has been produced in accordance with the requirements of Article 4.3, if:

(a) undergoes further processing, is the subject of a production process, or any other operation outside the territories of the Parties, except unloading, reloading or any other operation necessary to keep the good in good condition or to transport it to the territory Of the other part; either

(b) does not remain under the control or surveillance of the customs authority in the territory of a non-Party State.

Article 4.19: Committee for Regional Integration of Inputs

1. The Parties establish the Committee for the Regional Integration of Inputs (hereinafter "CIRI").

2. Each Party shall designate 2 representatives of the public sector and 2 representatives of the private sector to integrate the CIRI.

3. The CIRI will function while the Treaty is in force.

Article 4.20: CIRI functions

1. The CIRI will evaluate the inability of a producer of goods in the territory of the Parties to provide actual and documented proof of the inability to dispose of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 used by the producer under conditions of opportunity, volume, quality and price. in the production of a commodity.

2. In relation to materials used in the production of a good referred to in paragraph 1:

(a) are those used by the producer in the production of a good classified in the Harmonized System listed in Annex 4.20; and

(b) its use is required by the rule of origin established in Annex 4.3, for that good.

3. Annex 4.20 may be modified at any time by consensus between the Parties.

Article 4.21: Procedure

1. For the purposes of Article 4.20, the CIRI will carry out an investigation procedure that it will initiate at the request of a Party or the Administrative Commission. This procedure will begin within 5 days of receipt of the request and supporting documentation.

2. During this procedure, the CIRI will evaluate the evidence presented to it.

Article 4.22: Deadlines, Opinion and Notification of the CIRI

1. The CIRI will issue an opinion to the Administrative Commission in 30 days, counted from the date of initiation of the investigation procedure.

2. The CIRI will rule on the producer's inability to dispose of materials in the terms indicated in Article 4.20.1 and, when such inability is established, on the terms and conditions of the waiver required in the use of the materials to which Refers to Article 4.20.3, so that a good can receive preferential tariff treatment.

3. The CIRI will forward its opinion to the Administrative Commission within 5 days of its issuance.

Article 4.23: Resolution of the Administrative Commission

1. If the CIRI issues an opinion in the terms of Article 4.22, the Administrative Commission will issue a decision within a period of no more than 10 days from the receipt of the opinion, unless a different period is agreed upon.

2. When the incapacity referred to in Article 4.20.1 is established, the decision of the Administrative Commission will establish a waiver, under the terms and conditions agreed upon by the CIRI in its opinion, for the use of the materials referred to in Article 4.20.3, with the modifications it deems appropriate.

3. If the Administrative Commission has not ruled within the period indicated in paragraph 1, the opinion of the CIRI will be considered ratified and the case resolved.

4. The decision referred to in paragraph 2 will be valid for a maximum of one year from its issuance, depending on the causes of shortages for which it was issued. At the request of the interested Party and within 90 days prior to its expiration, the Administrative Commission may extend, after review by the CIRI, its decision for an equal term if the causes that gave rise to it persist and the necessary information is provided to demonstrate that the waiver was used. In case of extension, the initially authorized volume will be reduced to 50 percent in the next waiver when said volume has been used in less than 30 percent of what was authorized; if the utilization is greater than or equal to 30 percent, the initially authorized volume will be maintained for the next dispensation.

5. The decision contained in paragraph 4 may:

(a) refuse to grant the waiver; or

(b) grant a waiver in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2.

6. Any Party may request, at any time during its validity, the review of the decision of the Administrative Commission. The Administrative Commission may eliminate raw materials from the decision referred to in paragraph 4 at the request of an interested Party, and prior CIRI opinion.

Article 4.24: Referral to the Administrative Commission

1. If the CIRI does not issue the opinion referred to in Article 4.22 within the terms established therein, because there is no consensus on the case in question, the consultations referred to in Article 17.6 (Consultations) will be considered concluded. ) and will forward the case to the attention of the Administrative Commission within 5 days following the expiration of that term.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Administrative Commission will issue a decision under the terms of Article 4.23. If the Administrative Commission does not issue a decision, the provisions of articles 17.8 (Request for the Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) to 17.12 (Model Rules of Procedure) and 17.16 (Final Report) to 17.18 (Breach and Suspension of Benefits) shall apply, accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 3 to 7.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the term for the integration of the Arbitration Panel referred to in Article 17.10 (Integration of the Arbitration Panel) will be 20 days, counted from the following day on which the request for integration of the Arbitration Panel was submitted. Arbitration Panel; and the term for issuing the final report referred to in Article 17.16 (Final Report) will be 40 days, counted from the day following the integration of the Arbitration Panel.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 2, it will be understood that the mandate of the Arbitration Panel will be to issue a report in terms of the provisions of Article 4.22.2.

5. The final report of the Arbitration Panel will be mandatory for the Parties and, if the waiver referred to in Article 4.22.2 is pronounced, it will be valid for a maximum of one year. At the request of the interested Party, within 90 days prior to its expiration and prior review by the CIRI, the Administrative Commission may extend the waiver for an equal term depending on the cause of shortage for which it was issued, if the causes persist. that gave rise to it.

6. The complaining Party may invoke the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 of Article 17.18 (Breach and Suspension of Benefits), if the Arbitration Panel rules in its favor and the defendant Party does not comply with the final report within the term that the Arbitration Panel have fixed.

7. The defendant Party may invoke the provisions of Article 17.19 (Review of Suspension of Benefits or Compliance).

Article 4.25: Operation Regulation

In order to facilitate the administration of the provisions of Articles 4.19 to 4.24, the Parties will strive and work to have an Operation Regulation that will be adopted by the Administrative Commission immediately after the entry into force of this Agreement, or failing that, at no later than 60 business days from its entry into force.

Article 4.26: Transitory Provisions for the Effects of the Accumulation of Article 4.8

1. The Parties for which this Agreement has entered into force in accordance with Article 21.2 (Entry into Force) may use materials originating in a Central American State for which this Agreement has not yet entered into force. This provision will apply for a period of 2 years from the entry into force of the Treaty between Mexico and a State of Central America.

2. For the purposes of applying paragraph 1, materials from a Central American State that does not have this Agreement in force, that are used by a producer or exporter in the territory of a Party and that are incorporated into a good that is exported to the territory of another Party, originating materials shall be considered for the purpose of carrying out the accumulation provided for in Article 4.8, as long as said materials comply with the specific rules of origin and other applicable provisions, provided for in the free trade agreement. that is in force between Mexico and the State of Central America that provides said materials.

3. In case of doubts about the origin of the aforementioned materials, the exporter of the merchandise must demonstrate the origin of said materials. The documents that demonstrate the origin of these materials may include a certificate of origin issued within the framework of the free trade agreement in force between Mexico and the Central American State that provides said material, with the necessary applicable adjustments.

4. In the event that doubts remain about the origin of the accumulated materials referred to in numeral 1 of this Article, the Parties agree that their powers to review the origin of said materials remain safe, in accordance with the treaty of free trade that is in force between that Party of the Treaty and the one that supplies the accumulated material.

 

 

Chapter V

Customs Procedures Related to the Origin of Goods

 

Article 5.1: Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

competent authority: the authority responsible for the application of the provisions of this Chapter, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 5.1;

advance judgment: a resolution issued by the competent authority, in accordance with Article 5.11;

exporter: a person located in the territory of a Party from which the good is exported;

commercial importation: the importation of a good into the territory of a Party for the purpose of selling it or using it for commercial, industrial or similar purposes;

importer: a person located in the territory of a Party into which the good is imported;

origin determination resolution: a resolution issued by the competent authority as a result of a verification that establishes whether a good qualifies as originating, in accordance with Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

preferential tariff treatment: the application of the rate or tariff duty corresponding to an originating good, in accordance with Annex 3.4 (Tariff Treatment Program);

value: the value of a good or material for the purposes of applying Chapter IV (Rules of Origin); and

customs value: the value of a good to calculate customs duties in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

2. In addition to the definitions contemplated in this Article, the definitions established in Chapter IV (Rules of Origin) shall be applicable, as pertinent.

Article 5.2: Declaration and Certification of Origin

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Parties will agree on a single format for the certificate of origin and a single format for the declaration of origin, which may be issued in written or electronic form, shall enter into force together with this Agreement, and They may be subsequently modified by the Administrative Commission.

2. The certificate of origin will serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party qualifies as originating.

3. It shall be considered that a certificate of origin is valid when it is prepared in the format referred to in paragraph 1, and when it is completed and signed by the exporter of the good in the territory of a Party, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and with what is established in its filling instructions.

4. Each Party shall provide that its exporters complete and sign a certificate of origin with respect to the export of a good for which an importer may request preferential tariff treatment, except as provided in Article 5.5.

5. Each Party shall provide that when an exporter is not the producer of the good, complete and sign the certificate of origin based on:

(a) your knowledge that the good qualifies as originating; either

(b) the declaration of origin that covers the exported merchandise, which must be completed and signed by the producer of the merchandise and voluntarily provided to the exporter.

6. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin completed and signed by the exporter cover:

(a) a single importation of one or more goods; either

(b) several imports of identical merchandise to be carried out within a period indicated by the exporter in the certificate of origin, which shall not exceed the period established in paragraph 7.

7. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin be accepted by the competent authority of the importing Party for a period of one year from the date of its signature.

Article 5.3: Obligations regarding Imports

1. Each Party shall require the importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into its territory from the territory of another Party, that:

(a) declare in writing, in the import declaration provided for in its national legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin in the terms of Article 5.2.3, that the good qualifies as originating;

(b) have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time of making that declaration; and

(c) provide a copy of the certificate of origin when requested by your competent authority.

2. Each Party shall provide that, when the importer who has requested preferential tariff treatment has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which his import declaration is based contains incorrect information, he must present a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding customs duties. The importer will not be penalized when he voluntarily submits the aforementioned declaration, before the competent authority has begun the exercise of its powers of verification or verification.

3. Each Party shall provide that, when its importer does not comply with any of the requirements established in paragraphs 1 and 2, preferential tariff treatment shall be denied to the merchandise imported from the territory of another Party for which preference has been requested.

4. Each Party shall provide that, when preferential tariff treatment has not been requested for a good imported into its territory and it is subsequently determined that the good qualifies as originating, the importer of the good, within a period of one year counted from the date of importation, you can request the refund of the duties paid in excess for not having granted preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise, provided that the request is accompanied by:

(a) a writing declaring that the good qualified as originating at the time of importation;

(b) a copy of the certificate of origin; and

(c) the documentation related to the importation of the good, in accordance with the national legislation of that Party.

Article 5.4: Obligations regarding Exports

1. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer, who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin, deliver a copy of the certificate or declaration of origin, if any, to its competent authority when requested.

2. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer, who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin and has reason to believe that said certificate or declaration contains incorrect information, promptly notify in writing any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate or declaration of origin to all persons to whom the certificate or declaration of origin has been delivered, as well as in accordance with the national legislation of each Party to the competent authority of the exporting Party, in which case it may not be penalized for having presented an incorrect certificate or declaration of origin before the competent authority of the importing Party has begun to exercise its powers of verification or verification.

3. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall inform the competent authority of the importing Party in writing of the notification of the exporter or producer referred to in paragraph 2.

4. Each Party shall provide that the false certification or declaration of origin made by its exporter or producer in the sense that a good to be exported to the territory of another Party qualifies as originating, has the same legal consequences as determined by its national legislation. , than those that would apply to your importer who makes false declarations or manifestations in contravention of their national laws and regulations.

Article 5.5: Exceptions

Provided that it is not part of 2 or more imports that are made with the purpose of evading compliance with the requirements indicated in Articles 5.2 and 5.3, the Parties shall not require the certificate of origin when:

(a) the importation for commercial purposes of merchandise whose customs value does not exceed 1,000 United States dollars or its equivalent in national currency or a greater amount that may be established by the importing Party, but it may be required that the invoice contains a statement that the good qualifies as originating;

(b) the importation for non-commercial purposes of goods whose customs value does not exceed 1,000 United States dollars or its equivalent in national currency or a greater amount that may be established by the importing Party; and

(c) the importation of a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement to present the certificate of origin.

Article 5.6: Accounting Records

Each Party shall provide that:

(a) its exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate or declaration of origin keep in the territory where it is located, for a minimum of 5 years after the date of signing that certificate or declaration of origin, all records and documents relative to the origin of the merchandise, as appropriate, including those referring to:

(i) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the merchandise that is exported from its territory;

(ii) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials used in the production of the good that is exported from its territory; and

(iii) the production process of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory;

(b) for the purposes of the origin verification process established in Article 5.7, the exporter or producer provides the competent authority of the importing Party with the records and documents referred to in subparagraph (a). When the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or the producer, the exporter or producer may request the records and documents from the producer or supplier of the materials so that they are delivered through him to the competent authority that performs the verification of origin; and

(c) an importer who obtained preferential tariff treatment for a good that has been imported into the territory of that Party from the territory of another Party, keeps it in the territory where it is located, for a minimum of 5 years from the date of the importation, the certificate of origin and all other documentation related to the importation required by the importing Party.

Article 5.7: Procedures to Verify the Origin

1. The importing Party may request from the exporting Party information regarding the origin of a good through its competent authority.

2. To determine whether a good imported into the territory of a Party from the territory of another Party under preferential tariff treatment qualifies as originating, the importing Party may, through its competent authority, verify the origin of the good by one or more of the following media:

(a) written questionnaires addressed to exporters or producers in the territory of another Party;

(b) written requests addressed to exporters or producers in the territory of another Party;

(c) verification visits to an exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, for the purpose of examining the records and documents that prove compliance with the rules of origin in accordance with Article 5.6, and inspecting the production process in place where the production of the merchandise and, where appropriate, the materials are carried out; or

(d) other procedures that the Parties agree.

The origin verification process referred to in this paragraph must be made known to the competent authority of the exporting Party.

The competent authority of the importing Party shall notify the importer of the initiation of the origin verification process referred to in this paragraph.

3. For the purposes of this Article, shipments and notifications made by the competent authority of the importing Party, which carries out the verification of origin, to its importers in its territory or to exporters or producers of another Party, may be made by any of the following means:

(a) certified mail with acknowledgment of receipt;

(b) any other means that records the receipt of said document by the importer, exporter or producer; either

(c) any other means that the Parties agree.

4. For the purposes of this Article, the shipments or notifications that are made in the place that has been declared as the domicile of the exporter or producer in the certificate of origin will be considered valid.

5. The provisions of paragraph 2 shall be done without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of verification or verification of the competent authorities of the importing Party, in relation to compliance with other obligations, on their own importers, exporters or producers.

6. The exporter or producer who receives a questionnaire or a request in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 2, will respond and return it within a period not exceeding 30 days from the date on which it was received. has received. During this term, the exporter or producer may request an extension in writing to the competent authority of the importing Party, which in its case may not be greater than 30 days. This extension request will not result in the denial of preferential tariff treatment.

The importer will have a period of 30 days from the notification of initiation of the verification of origin process to provide the documents, evidence or statements that he considers pertinent, and may only once request in writing to the competent authority of the Importing Party an extension, which may not exceed 30 days. If the importer does not provide such documentation, it will not be sufficient reason to deny preferential tariff treatment, without prejudice to what is established in the previous paragraph.

7. Each Party shall provide that when the exporter or producer has received the questionnaire or request referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 2 and does not respond in accordance with the information requested and the competent authority of the Party The importing Party determines that the information obtained is not sufficient to prove the origin of the merchandise, or does not answer any of the questionnaires or requests within the corresponding period, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise or merchandise that have been subject to the verification of origin, by means of a written resolution addressed to the importer, exporter or producer, which must include the conclusions of fact and the legal basis of the resolution.

8. Each Party shall provide that when it has received the questionnaire or request referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 2, answered within the corresponding term, and deems that more information is required to decide on the origin of the merchandise or merchandise subject to verification of origin, may request additional information from the exporter or producer, through questionnaires or subsequent requests. In this case, the exporter or producer must respond and return the request within a period of no more than 30 days, counted from the date it was received.

9. Before carrying out an origin verification visit in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2(c), the competent authority of the importing Party shall be obliged to notify the exporter or producer in writing of its intention to carry out the visit, to the competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit will take place and, if requested by the latter, to the embassy of this Party in the territory of the importing Party. The competent authority of the importing Party shall request the written consent of the exporter or the producer whom he intends to visit.

10. The notification referred to in paragraph 9 will contain:

(a) the identification of the competent authority making the notification;

(b) the name of the exporter or producer to be visited;

(c) the date and place of the proposed origin verification visit;

(d) the object and scope of the proposed origin verification visit, making specific mention of the merchandise or merchandise subject to origin verification to which the certificate(s) of origin refer;

(e) the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the origin verification visit; and

(f) the legal basis for the origin verification visit.

11. Any modification to the information referred to in paragraph 10(e) shall be notified in writing to the exporter or producer and to the competent authority of the exporting Party prior to the origin verification visit. Any modification of the information referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (f) of paragraph 10 will be notified in the terms of paragraph 9.

12. If within 15 days following the date of receipt of the notification of the proposed origin verification visit in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9, the exporter or producer does not give their written consent to carry out the same, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise or merchandise that would have been the object of the origin verification visit, by means of a written resolution addressed to the importer, exporter, or producer, which must include the conclusions of fact and the legal basis of the decision.

13. Each Party shall provide that, when its exporter or producer receives a notification in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9, within 15 days following the date of receipt of the notification, it may request the competent authority of the importing Party postpone the date of the proposed verification of origin visit for a period not exceeding 30 days from the date the visit was proposed or for a longer period agreed by the Parties.

14. A Party may not deny preferential tariff treatment based solely on the postponement of the origin verification visit in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 13.

15. Each Party shall allow the exporter or producer, whose good or goods are the subject of an origin verification visit, to designate 2 observers to be present during the visit, provided that the observers are only involved in that capacity. If there is no appointment of observers by the exporter or producer, this omission will not have the consequence of postponing the visit.

16. The competent authority of the importing Party will draw up a record of the visit that will contain the facts verified by it. Said act may be signed in accordance by the producer or exporter and the observers they have designated.

17. In the event that the exporter or producer does not provide the records and documents referred to in Article 5.6(b) or when the competent authority of the importing Party determines, based on the information obtained as a result of an origin verification, that a merchandise or merchandise subject to verification of origin does not qualify as originating, said authority will send to the producer or exporter, a duly founded and reasoned letter, explaining the intention to deny preferential tariff treatment with respect to said merchandise or merchandise, and will grant it a within 30 days from the date of receipt of said letter, to provide the documents or records it deems necessary.

18. Within 120 days after the end of the 30-day period referred to in paragraph 17, the competent authority shall issue a written determination of origin resolution to the importer, exporter or producer, whose merchandise or merchandise have been subject to verification of origin, in which it is determined whether or not the merchandise qualifies as originating, which will include the conclusions of fact and the legal basis for the determination, a copy of which will be sent to the importer. For the issuance of said resolution, the authority must take into consideration the documents or records provided by the exporter or producer within the period of 30 days referred to in paragraph 17.

19. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority determines that a certain good imported into its territory does not qualify as originating in accordance with the tariff classification or the value applied by that Party to one or more materials used in the production of the good, and this differs from the tariff classification or the value applied to the materials by the Party from whose territory the merchandise has been exported, the resolution of that Party will take effect until it notifies the importer of the merchandise and the person who has filled and signed the certificate of origin that protects it.

20. The resolution referred to in paragraph 19 shall not be applicable to imports made prior to the date on which said resolution takes effect, when:

(a) the competent authority of the importing Party has issued an advance judgment in accordance with the provisions of Article 5.11; and

(b) the advance criterion mentioned in subparagraph (a) is prior to the start of the verification of origin.

21. When the verification of origin carried out by a Party establishes that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, the importing Party shall suspend preferential tariff treatment. to the identical goods that that person exports or produces, until the same proves that it complies with the provisions of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin).

Article 5.8: Consularization

When carrying out an origin verification in accordance with Article 5.7, the Parties shall not require consular invoices or consular visas for the certificate of origin and the records and documents established in Article 5.6, relating to the origin of the good that is the subject of the verification. originally.

Article 5.9: Confidentiality

1. Each Party will maintain, in accordance with the provisions of its national legislation, the confidentiality of the information obtained in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and will protect it from any disclosure that could harm the person who provides it.

2. The confidential information obtained in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may only be made known to the authorities responsible for the administration and application of the resolutions of determination of origin and customs and tax matters.

Article 5.10: Sanctions

Each Party shall establish or maintain criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 5.11: Advance Criteria

1. Each Party shall provide that, through its competent authority, advance written criteria be granted expeditiously, prior to the importation of a good into its territory. The anticipated criteria will be issued by the competent authority of the territory of the importing Party, at the request of its importer or of the exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by them, regarding the origin of the goods. .

2. The anticipated criteria do not constitute necessary and indispensable requirements for the importation of goods under preferential tariff treatment.

3. The anticipated criteria will deal with:

(a) if the good qualifies as originating, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

(b) if the non-originating materials used in the production of a good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification indicated in Annex 4.3 (Specific Rules of Origin);

(c) if the merchandise meets the regional content value requirement established in Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

(d) if the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Agreement for the calculation of the transaction value of the good or of the materials used in the production of a good with respect to of which an advance judgment is requested, is adequate to determine if the merchandise complies with the regional content value requirement in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

(e) if the country of origin marking carried out or proposed for a good satisfies the provisions of Article 3.15 (Country of Origin Marking); and

(f) other matters that the Parties agree.

4. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance criteria upon official publication, including at least:

(a) the information that is reasonably required to process the request;

(b) the power of its competent authority to request, at any time, additional information from the person requesting the advance judgment during the application evaluation process;

(c) a period of 120 days for your competent authority to issue the advance judgment, once it has obtained all the necessary information from the person requesting it; and

(d) the obligation to fully explain, founded and motivated, the reasons for the anticipated decision.

5. Each Party shall apply the advance criteria to imports into its territory, from the date of issuance of the criterion, or from a later date indicated therein, unless the advance criterion is modified or revoked in accordance with the established in paragraph 7.

6. Each Party shall grant to any person who requests an advance judgment, the same treatment, and the same interpretation and application of the provisions of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin) referring to the determination of origin, that it has granted to any other person the one that has issued an early criterion, when the facts and circumstances are identical in all substantial aspects.

7. The anticipated criterion may be modified or revoked by the competent authority, when:

(a) the advance judgment was based on some error:

(i) in fact;

(ii) in the tariff classification of the merchandise or materials subject to the criterion; either

(iii) in the application of the regional content value requirement, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

(b) is not satisfied with an interpretation agreed between the Parties or a modification with respect to Article 3.15 (Country of Origin Marking) or Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);

(c) the circumstances or facts that support it change;

(d) is intended to comply with an administrative or judicial decision; either

(e) is based on information that is determined to be incorrect or false.

8. Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance ruling will take effect on the date it is issued or on a later date established therein, and may not be applied to imports of a good made before those dates, except that the person to whom it has been issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.

9. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 8, the Party that issues the advance judgment will postpone the date of entry into force of the modification or revocation for a period of not less than 45 days, when the person to whom the advance judgment has relied on that judgment in good faith.

10. Each Party shall provide that, when examining the regional value content of a good for which advance judgment has been issued, its competent authority shall assess whether:

(a) the exporter or producer complies with the terms and conditions of the advance judgment;

(b) the exporter's or producer's operations are consistent with the substantial facts and circumstances that support that criterion; and

(c) the supporting data and calculations used in applying the criterion or method for calculating value or allocating cost are correct in all material respects.

11. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority determines that any of the requirements set forth in paragraph 10 has not been met, the competent authority may modify or revoke the advance judgment, as the circumstances warrant.

12. Each Party shall provide that, when an advance judgment is issued to a person who has falsely stated or omitted material circumstances or facts on which the advance judgment is based, or has not acted in accordance with the terms and conditions thereof, the authority authority that issues the advance judgment can apply the measures established in the national legislation of each Party.

13. Each Party shall provide that the holder of an advance judgment may not use it if there is a substantial change in the facts and circumstances on which the competent authority relied to issue it.

14. The validity of an early judgment will be subject to the permanent obligation of the holder of the early judgment to inform the competent authority of any substantial change in the facts or circumstances on which it was based to issue that judgment.

Article 5.12: Review and Challenge

1. Each Party shall grant rights to review and challenge resolutions for determination of origin and advance criteria provided for its importers in its national legislation, to exporters or producers of another Party that:

(a) fill out and sign a certificate or declaration of origin that covers a good that has been the subject of an origin determination resolution, in accordance with the provisions of Article 5.7.18; either

(b) have received early judgment in accordance with the provisions of Article 5.11.

2. The rights referred to in paragraph 1 include:

(a) access to at least one instance of administrative review, independent of the official or agency responsible for the decision of determination of origin or advance judgment subject to review, in accordance with the national legislation of each Party; and

(b) access to an instance of judicial review of the resolution or decision made in the last instance of administrative review, in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

Article 5.13: Billing by a Third Country

In the case of importation of originating goods in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty, the invoice presented with the import declaration may be issued by a person located outside the territory of the exporting Party.

Article 5.14: Origin Committee, Customs Procedures related to the Origin of Goods and Trade Facilitation

1. The Parties establish the Committee of Origin, Customs Procedures related to the Origin of Goods and Trade Facilitation. The Committee will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties and will assist the Administrative Commission in the performance of its functions.

2. The Committee will be integrated through the exchange of communications in which its representatives will be designated.

3. The Committee will establish, if it considers it pertinent, its rules of procedure.

4. The meetings of the Committee will be held at the request of the Administrative Commission, the Free Trade Coordinators or at the request of any of the Parties, to discuss matters of interest. However, the Committee shall meet in ordinary session at least once a year, unless the Parties agree otherwise, and in extraordinary session as many times as necessary within the 30 days following the date of the request made in accordance with this paragraph.

5. The agreements of the Committee must be adopted by consensus and reported to the corresponding instances.

6. Committee meetings may be held in person or through any technological means. When the meetings are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

7. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Committee may meet to discuss bilateral matters of interest to Mexico and one or more Central American Parties, provided that the other Parties are notified sufficiently in advance so that, if applicable, they may participate in the meeting. The agreements derived from the meeting will be adopted by consensus between the Parties on which the bilateral matter is concerned and will not prejudge or affect the rights of the other Parties.

8. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) follow up on the application and administration of chapters IV (Rules of Origin), V (Customs Procedures related to the Origin of Goods) and VI (Trade Facilitation), as well as Annex 3.16 (Preferential Tariff Treatment for Goods Classified in Chapter 62 of the Harmonized System that Incorporates Materials from the United States of America);

(b) formulate pertinent recommendations to the Administrative Commission regarding issues within its competence;

(c) seek to reach agreements on:

(i) tariff classification and customs value matters related to origin determination resolutions;

(ii) adaptation to Annex 4.3 (Specific Rules of Origin) due to amendments to the Harmonized System;

(iii) the modifications to the certificate or declaration of origin referred to in Article 5.2; and

(iv) the notification made by the countries on changes in their nomenclature or internal provisions on rules of origin and customs procedures for handling the origin of merchandise that affect this Agreement; and

recommend their adoption to the Administrative Commission, when appropriate;

(d) address issues regarding the interpretation, application and administration of chapters IV (Rules of Origin), V (Customs Procedures related to the Origin of Goods) and VI (Trade Facilitation), as well as Annex 3.16 (Treatment Preferential Tariff for Goods Classified in Chapter 62 of the Harmonized System that Incorporates Materials from the United States of America); and

(e) any other matter instructed by the Administrative Commission.

9. Any Party that considers that chapters IV (Rules of Origin), V (Customs Procedures related to the Origin of Goods) and VI (Trade Facilitation) and their annexes, as well as Annex 3.16 (Preferential Tariff Treatment for Merchandise Classified in Chapter 62 of the Harmonized System that Incorporates Materials from the United States of America), require modification, due to changes in the development of production processes or other matters, may submit a modification proposal to the Committee for its consideration and the reasons and studies that support it. The Committee will submit a report to the Administrative Commission within a period not exceeding 90 days from the receipt of the proposal.

Article 5.15: Uniform Regulations

1. The Parties will agree on Uniform Regulations regarding the interpretation, application, and administration of this Chapter, Chapter IV (Rules of Origin) and any other chapter of this Agreement agreed upon by the Parties, which will be adopted by the Administrative Commission. These Regulations shall be implemented by the Parties through their respective laws and regulations, no later than 60 days from the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Any adaptation or addition to the Uniform Regulations shall be adopted by the Administrative Commission in accordance with the provisions of Article 19.1.3(b) (Administrative Commission), and implemented by each Party no later than 90 days from its adoption, or in any other term that the Parties agree.

 

 

Chapter VI

Trade Facilitation

 

Article 6.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

WCO: the World Customs Organization; and

Authorized Economic Operators: the actors involved in the logistics chain of international merchandise trade that include, among others, manufacturers, importers, exporters, carriers, customs agents, intermediaries, ports, airports, terminal operators, warehouses, and fiscal warehouses.

Article 6.2: Publication

1. Each Party shall publish, including via the Internet, its customs legislation, regulations, and general administrative procedures.

2. Each Party, to the extent possible, shall make available to the public, electronically, all the forms that the competent entities of a Party issue and that must be completed for the import or export of a good.

3. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, make known in advance any regulation of general application in customs matters that it proposes to adopt and shall provide interested persons of the other Party with the opportunity to comment, prior to their adoption, in accordance with their national legislation.

4. Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more contact points to address concerns of persons interested in customs matters and shall make available on the Internet information regarding the procedures adopted to formulate and address queries.

Article 6.3: Clearance of goods

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient clearance of goods, in order to facilitate trade between them.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, each Party shall:

(a) allow, to the extent possible, the goods to be cleared at the point of arrival, without temporary transfer to warehouses or other premises; and

(b) implement procedures that allow the clearance of goods in a period no longer than that required to ensure compliance with its customs legislation and, to the extent possible, clear the goods within 48 hours of arrival, provided that all legal requirements for dispatch are met.

Article 6.4: Risk Management

1. Each Party shall endeavor to adopt or maintain risk management systems aimed at facilitating and simplifying the process and procedures for the clearance of low-risk merchandise, and direct its inspection and control activities towards the clearance of high-risk merchandise. risk.

2. Risk management systems shall not be designed or applied to create a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.

Article 6.5: Automation

1. The customs authorities will endeavor to use information technology to expedite the procedures for the clearance of goods. In choosing the information technology to be used for that purpose, each Party:

(a) will make efforts to use international standards;

(b) make electronic systems accessible to customs users;

(c) will provide for the electronic submission and processing of information and data prior to the arrival of the shipment, in order to allow the clearance of merchandise upon arrival;

(d) will use electronic or automated systems for the analysis and direction of risks;

(e) work on the development of compatible electronic systems between the customs authorities of the Parties, in order to facilitate the exchange of international trade data between governments; and

(f) work to develop a set of common data elements and processes in accordance with the WCO Customs Data Model, related recommendations and guidelines.

2. The customs authorities, to the extent possible, will accept the forms, which must be delivered by an importer or exporter, submitted electronically, as the legal equivalent of the printed version.

Article 6.6: Cooperation

1. In order to facilitate the effective operation of this Agreement, each Party shall endeavor to notify the other Party in advance of any significant modification of its legislation or regulations regarding imports that could affect the execution of this Agreement.

2. The Parties will cooperate to achieve compliance with their respective laws and regulations with respect to:

(a) the implementation and operation of the provisions of this Agreement relating to imports or exports, including origin applications and procedures;

(b) the implementation and operation of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports;

(d) the training of officials and users, and

(e) other customs matters that the Parties may agree.

3. When a Party has reasonable suspicions of any illegal activity related to its import legislation or regulations, it may request the other Party to provide it with specific information, normally collected in the course of importing goods. This is provided that the Party providing the information does not contravene its national legislation.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, "reasonable suspicion of any unlawful activity" means a suspicion based on material factual information obtained from public or private sources, comprising one or more of the following:

(a) historical evidence of non-compliance with import laws or regulations by an importer or exporter;

(b) historical evidence of non-compliance with import laws or regulations by a manufacturer, producer or other person involved in the movement of goods from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

(c) historical evidence that any or all persons involved in the movement of goods from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party, for a specific product sector, have not complied with the Party's legislation or regulations regarding imports; or

(d) other information that the requesting Party and the Party from which the information is requested agree is sufficient in the context of a particular request.

5. The request made by a Party in accordance with paragraph 3 must be in writing, specify the purpose for which the information is required and whether such request is urgent; as well as identify the required information with sufficient specificity for the other Party to locate and provide it in accordance with its national legislation.

6. The Party from which the information is requested shall, in accordance with its national legislation and any relevant international agreement to which it is a party, provide a written response containing such information.

7. Each Party shall endeavor to provide the other Party with any additional information that may assist that Party in determining whether imports or exports from or to the territory of that Party comply with the import laws or regulations of the other. Party, especially those related to the prevention of illegal activities, such as smuggling and other similar.

8. In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, each Party shall endeavor to provide the other Party with advice and technical assistance for the purpose of improving risk assessment and management techniques, simplifying and expediting customs procedures for timely and efficient dispatch of merchandise; improve the technical skills of the personnel, and increase the use of technologies that can lead to better compliance with the legislation or regulations regarding imports of a Party.

9. The Parties will make efforts to cooperate in:

(a) strengthen the ability of each Party to enforce import laws or regulations;

(b) establish and maintain other communication channels in order to facilitate the secure and rapid exchange of information; and

(c) improve coordination on import-related matters.

10. The Parties agree to sign mutual assistance agreements between the customs authorities of Mexico and each Central American Party.

11. The Parties agree to review and update, when necessary, the mutual assistance agreements between the customs authorities of Mexico and of each Central American Party.

Article 6.7: Confidentiality

1. When a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Chapter and designates it as confidential, the other Party will maintain the confidentiality of said information. The Party that has the information may require the Party that requires it, a written guarantee, in the sense that said information will be kept confidential, that it will be used only for the purposes specified in the information request of the other Party, and which shall not be disclosed without the specific permission of the Party supplying it.

2. A Party may refuse to provide the information requested by the other Party when the requesting Party does not provide the guarantee provided for in paragraph 1, or it contravenes its national legislation.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures to ensure that confidential information provided by a Party, including information the disclosure of which could harm the competitive position of the person providing it, is protected from unauthorized disclosure.

Article 6.8: Express Delivery Shipments

The Parties shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for express delivery shipments, maintaining appropriate control and selection systems. These procedures shall:

(a) provide for the electronic transmission and processing of information necessary for the clearance of an express delivery shipment, prior to its arrival;

(b) allow the presentation in electronic means of a single manifest that covers all the goods contained in a shipment transported by an express delivery service;

(c) provide for the clearance of certain goods with a minimum of documentation, in accordance with your national legislation; and

(d) under normal circumstances, provide for the clearance of express delivery shipments within 6 hours of presentation of the necessary customs documents, provided the shipment has arrived and no irregularities have been detected.

Article 6.9: Means of Challenge

Each Party shall guarantee, with respect to its administrative acts on customs matters, access to:

(a) an instance of administrative review independent of the official or agency that issues the administrative acts, in accordance with its national legislation; and

(b) an instance of judicial review of the resolution or decision made in the last instance of administrative review, in accordance with its national legislation.

Article 6.10: Sanctions

The Parties shall adopt or maintain a system that allows for the imposition of civil or administrative sanctions and, when appropriate, criminal sanctions for violation of their customs legislation and regulations, including those governing tariff classification, customs valuation, country of origin, and treatment claims. preferential tariff under this Agreement.

Article 6.11: Authorized Economic Operators

1. Each Party shall promote the implementation of Authorized Economic Operators in accordance with the WCO Regulatory Framework to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade (known as the SAFE Regulatory Framework), with the aim of strengthening the security of the international trade logistics chain and facilitate the clearance of your goods. The obligations, requirements, formalities and benefits of Authorized Economic Operators will be established in accordance with their national legislation.

2. The Parties may negotiate the mutual recognition of their Authorized Economic Operators, with the aim of avoiding duplication of security controls and contributing significantly to the facilitation and control of merchandise circulating in the international trade logistics chain.

Article 6.12: Foreign Trade Single Window

Each Party shall promote the creation of a Single Window for Foreign Trade for the expediting and facilitation of trade. To the extent possible, the Parties will seek interconnection between their respective windows.

 

 

Chapter VII

Commercial Defense

 

Section A: Bilateral Safeguard Measures

Article 7.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Section, it shall be understood as:

threat of serious harm: the clear imminence of serious harm based on facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility;

competent investigating authority:

(a) in the case of Costa Rica, the Directorate of Trade Defense of the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Commerce;

(b) in the case of El Salvador, the Directorate of Administration of Commercial Agreements of the Ministry of Economy;

(c) in the case of Guatemala, the Directorate of Foreign Trade Administration of the Ministry of Economy;

(d) in the case of Honduras, the General Directorate for Economic Integration and Trade Policy of the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce;

(e) in the case of Mexico, the International Trade Practices Unit of the Ministry of Economy; and

(f) in the case of Nicaragua, the Directorate for the Application and Negotiation of Trade Agreements;

or their successors;

serious injury: a significant general impairment of the situation of a domestic industry;

directly competitive merchandise: that which, not being similar to the one being compared, is essentially equivalent for commercial purposes because it is dedicated to the same use and is interchangeable with it;

similar merchandise: that which, although it is not identical in all respects to the merchandise with which it is compared, has similar characteristics and composition, which allows it to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable with it;

transition period: the period of tariff relief that corresponds to each merchandise in accordance with the Tariff Treatment Program, plus an additional period of 2 years counted from the end of the relief for the merchandise in question; and

domestic industry: the group of producers of like or directly competitive goods that operate in the territory of a Party, or those producers whose joint output of like or directly competitive goods constitutes a significant proportion of the total domestic production of said good.

Article 7.2: Imposition of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure

1. A Party may apply a measure described in paragraph 2, only during the transition period, if it has determined that as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty in accordance with this Agreement, an originating good is imported into the territory of the Party in quantities that have increased by such amount in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production and under conditions such as to constitute serious injury or a threat thereof to the domestic industry that produces a like or directly competitive good .

2. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury or threat of serious injury and facilitate adjustment, a Party may:

(a) suspend the future reduction of any customs duty established in this Agreement for the good; either

(b) increase the customs duty on the good to a level not to exceed the lesser of1 :

(i) the applied MFN customs duty at the time the measure is applied, or

(ii) the MFN customs tariff applied on the day immediately prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.

3. Neither Party may adopt bilateral safeguard measures on goods that are subject to the tariff quotas granted by this Agreement.

4. No Party may maintain a bilateral safeguard measure:

(a) for a period exceeding 2 years, including the duration of a provisional safeguard measure adopted in accordance with Article 7.4, except that this period is extended for an additional year, if the competent investigating authority determines, in accordance with the procedures stipulated in Article 7.3, that the measure continues to be necessary to avoid or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment, and that there is evidence that the domestic industry has been complying with the adjustment plan; and

(b) after the expiration of the transition period, except with the consent of the other Party.

5. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a bilateral safeguard measure is greater than one year, the Party applying the measure shall progressively release it, at regular intervals, during the period of application.

6. The Parties may adopt a bilateral safeguard for a second occasion to the same good, provided that a period equal to the duration of the previous bilateral safeguard measure has elapsed, including any extension, starting from the termination of the bilateral safeguard measure. former. The validity of this measure will not exceed 18 months.

7. At the conclusion of the application of the bilateral safeguard measure, the customs tariff that will govern the merchandise in question will be the one that corresponds to that date according to the Tariff Treatment Program.

8. No Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure before one year has elapsed from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 7.3: Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements

1. A Party may only apply a safeguard measure after an investigation by its competent investigating authority, in accordance with Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the Agreement on Safeguards. For these purposes, Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis.

2. In the investigation described in paragraph 1, the Party shall comply with the requirements of Article 4.2(a) and (b) of the Agreement on Safeguards. For these purposes, Article 4.2(a) and (b) of the Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis.

Article 7.4: Provisional Bilateral Safeguard Measures

1. In critical circumstances, in which any delay entails damage that is difficult to repair, a Party may apply a provisional bilateral safeguard measure based on a preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence demonstrating that the increase in imports from the other Party has caused or is threatening to cause serious injury to the domestic industry.

2. The duration of the provisional bilateral safeguard shall not exceed 200 days and shall take any of the forms provided for in Article 7.2.2, during which the pertinent requirements of Articles 7.2 and 7.3 must be met. The guarantees or economic resources received by way of provisional measures will be promptly released or reimbursed when it is determined that it is not appropriate to apply a definitive safeguard.

Article 7.5: Notification and Consultation

1. A Party shall promptly notify in writing the other Party that may be affected, when:

(a) initiate a bilateral safeguard procedure in accordance with this Section;

(b) adopt a provisional bilateral safeguard measure; and

(c) adopts a definitive bilateral safeguard measure or decides to extend it.

2. In addition to the aforementioned notification, the Party that carries out any of the actions referred to in paragraph 1, shall publish its determination in the corresponding official dissemination bodies.

3. The Party that carries out a bilateral safeguard procedure shall provide the Party whose good is subject to said procedure with a copy of the public version of the final report of its competent investigating authority, required in accordance with Article 7.3.1.

4. At the request of the Party whose good is subject to a bilateral safeguard procedure in accordance with this Chapter, the Party carrying out the procedure shall initiate consultations with the requesting Party, in order to review the notifications under paragraph 1 or any public notification or report issued by the competent investigating authority in connection with said proceeding.

Article 7.6: Compensation

1. The Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall, after consultation with the Party against whose good the measure is applied, provide to that Party mutually agreed trade liberalization compensation, in the form of concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects. or equivalent to the value of additional customs duties applied as a result of the measure. The Party against whose good the bilateral safeguard measure is applied shall provide an opportunity for such consultations within 30 days following the application of the final bilateral safeguard measure.

2. If consultations pursuant to paragraph 1 do not result in a trade liberalization offset agreement or are not carried out within 30 days, the Party against whose good the bilateral safeguard measure is applied may suspend the granting of tariff concessions substantially equivalent to those of the bilateral safeguard measure.

3. The Party that decides to suspend tariff concessions in accordance with paragraph 2 shall notify the Party applying the bilateral safeguard measure in writing at least 30 days before suspending concessions.

4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph 1 and the right to suspend tariff concessions under paragraph 2 shall terminate on the date the bilateral safeguard measure is removed.

 

Section B: Global Safeguard Measures

Article 7.7: Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.

2. This Section does not confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with respect to actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards, except the obligation that the Party imposing a global safeguard measure shall exclude to imports of an originating good of the other Party, if such imports:

(a) do not represent a substantial part of total imports; and

(b) do not contribute materially to serious harm or threat of serious harm.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the following criteria shall be taken into account:

(a) imports of a good from the other Party shall not normally be considered to represent a substantial part of total imports, if they are not among the top 5 suppliers of the good subject to the proceeding, based on their participation in total imports of said merchandise, during the 3 immediately preceding years;

(b) imports of the other Party shall not normally be considered to be a significant contributor to serious injury or threat of serious injury if their growth rate during the period in which the injurious increase in imports occurred is substantially less than the growth rate of total imports of like or directly competitive merchandise, from all sources of supply, during the same period; and

(c) The changes in the Party's participation in total imports and their volume shall be taken into account to determine the material contribution to the serious injury or threat of serious injury.

4. Neither Party shall apply, with respect to the same good and during the same period:

(a) a bilateral safeguard measure; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.

5. Except for the provisions set forth in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to this Section.

 

Section C: Antidumping and Countervailing Measures

Article 7.8: Antidumping and Countervailing Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement, and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement, including those in Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement), shall be construed to impose any right or obligation on the Parties with respect to anti-dumping and countervailing measures.

 

Section D: Cooperation between the Parties

Article 7.9: Cooperation

The Parties agree to establish a cooperation mechanism between their competent investigative authorities, which may include, among others, the exchange of non-confidential information from investigations in trade defense matters with third parties and technical assistance.

 

 

 

Chapter VIII

Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

 

Article 8.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

competent authority: those authorities that hold the legal responsibility of guaranteeing compliance with the sanitary and phytosanitary requirements contemplated in this Chapter, and those in charge of preparing and issuing sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

Additionally, the definitions established in Annex A of the SPS Agreement will be used, and in matters not provided for in that Annex, those established by:

(a) the World Organization for Animal Health (hereinafter "OIE");

(b) the International Plant Protection Convention (hereinafter "IPPC"); and

(c) the Codex Alimentarius Commission.

Article 8.2: Goals

The objectives of this Chapter are to protect the life and health of people and animals, and to preserve plants, in the territories of the Parties, as well as to facilitate and increase trade in goods, identifying, preventing and eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade. between the Parties, which may arise as a consequence of the preparation, adoption and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures within the terms of the SPS Agreement.

Article 8.3: Incorporation of Rights and Obligations

The rights and obligations established in the SPS Agreement are incorporated into and form part of this Agreement, without prejudice to what is established in this Chapter.

Article 8.4: Area of ​​application

This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures that may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods between the Parties.

Article 8.5: Rights and obligations

1. The Parties may adopt, maintain or apply sanitary or phytosanitary measures to achieve an adequate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection, provided they are based on scientific principles.

2. The Parties may adopt, maintain or apply sanitary or phytosanitary measures with a higher level of protection than that which would be achieved by the application of a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that there is a scientific justification for it. .

3. Neither Party may adopt, maintain or apply sanitary or phytosanitary measures that have the purpose or consequence of creating a disguised restriction on trade or an unnecessary obstacle to it.

Article 8.6: Equivalence

At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall accept the equivalence of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure even when they differ from its own, provided that the exporting Party objectively demonstrates that such measure provides an adequate level of sanitary and phytosanitary protection. For these purposes, the Parties will hold consultations aimed at said recognition, based on international standards and guidelines or recommendations and the SPS Agreement.

Article 8.7: Risk Assessment and Appropriate Level of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Protection

1. In addition to what is established in Article 5 of the SPS Agreement, when carrying out a risk assessment on a good, including food additives and physical, chemical and biological contaminants, the Parties shall take into account the following factors:

(a) the epidemiology of risk diseases and pests;

(b) the critical control points in the production, handling, packaging, packing and transportation processes; and

(c) the applicable quarantine measures and treatments that satisfy the importing Party in terms of risk mitigation.

2. When the exporting Party requests access for its products and by-products to the market of the importing Party, the latter must respond within a period not exceeding 30 days, informing whether:

(a) it is necessary to carry out a risk assessment, as well as the procedures and information required for its preparation;

(b) once the exporting Party has submitted sufficient information to the importing Party to complete the risk assessment referred to in subparagraph (a), both Parties shall agree on a time frame for its completion and, where appropriate, the Importing Party shall immediately modify the provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure; and

(c) upon completion of the risk analysis process, the resulting document and its supporting documents shall be communicated to the exporting Party.

3. When a Party is able to achieve its appropriate level of protection, through the gradual application of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, it may, at the request of the other Party and, in accordance with this Chapter, allow such gradual application or grant specific exceptions for the measure, during established periods, taking into consideration the export interests of the requesting Party.

Article 8.8: Recognition of Areas or Zones Free of Pests or Diseases and Areas or Zones of Low Prevalence of Pests or Diseases

1. The Parties recognize the concept of areas or zones free of pests or diseases and areas or zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases, in accordance with the SPS Agreement, as well as the standards, guidelines, recommendations and recognitions of the OIE and the IPPC.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures shall develop a procedure.

Article 8.9: Control, Inspection and Approval Procedures

1. The Parties, through the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, shall establish control, inspection and approval procedures, taking into account Article 8 and Annex C of the SPS Agreement.

2. The expenses derived from the control, inspection and approval procedures will be borne by the interested parties.

Article 8.10: Transparency

1. The Parties will make their best efforts to make their annual or semi-annual work program in the field of sanitary and phytosanitary measures known at the same time that it is made publicly known to their nationals.

2. The Parties shall transmit, preferably electronically, to the notification and information services established in accordance with the SPS Agreement, the draft sanitary and phytosanitary regulations that they intend to adopt. Each Party shall ensure that the draft sanitary and phytosanitary regulations that they intend to adopt are submitted for consultations for a period of 60 days, so that the interested Party may know their content, in addition to allowing observations from any Party or interested persons, and that they can be considered. Emergency situations will be exempt from the term indicated above, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.

3. When a Party considers that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the other Party affects or may adversely affect its exports, and the measure is not based on relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, it may request that Party to inform it in writing and within a period not exceeding 30 days, on the reasons for the measure.

4. Additionally, the Parties will notify each other:

(a) changes that occur in the field of animal health and food safety, such as the appearance of exotic diseases or sanitary alerts in food products within 24 hours after the diagnostic detection of the problem;

(b) changes that occur in the phytosanitary field, such as the appearance of quarantine pests or the spread of pests under official control, within 72 hours after their verification;

(c) findings of epidemiological importance and significant changes in relation to diseases and pests not included in subparagraphs (a) and (b) that may affect trade between the Parties, within a maximum period of 10 days;

(d) disease outbreaks in which the consumption of imported processed or unprocessed foods is scientifically proven to be the cause;

(e) the causes or reasons why a good from the exporting Party is rejected, within a period of 7 days, with the exception of emergency situations, which will be notified immediately; I

(f) the exchange of information on matters related to the development and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures that affect or may affect trade between the Parties, with a view to minimizing their negative effects on trade.

Article 8.11: Emergency measures

1. The importing Party may adopt, for reasons of high risk to the life and health of people and animals or the preservation of plants, the emergency measures necessary for their protection, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of Annex B of the SPS Agreement. For shipments in transit between the Parties, the importing Party will consider the most appropriate and proportional solution in order to avoid unnecessary interruptions to trade.

2. The importing Party that adopts the measures provided for in paragraph 1 shall inform the exporting Party no later than 3 days after its adoption. The exporting Party may request any information related to the sanitary and phytosanitary situation and the measures adopted by the importing Party, and the importing Party will respond as soon as the requested information is available.

3. Any of the Parties involved may request consultations related to the situation within 15 days of the request. These consultations will be carried out to avoid unnecessary interruptions to trade, considering options that facilitate the implementation or even the replacement of the measures.

Article 8.12: Regulatory Cooperation

1. The regulatory cooperation between the Parties aims to strengthen the mechanisms to increase transparency in the processes of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as well as simplify the regulatory processes and promote the compatibility and harmonization of sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

2. The Parties, through the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, shall create work programs at the bilateral or regional level on regulatory cooperation that include the regulatory authorities involved, the corresponding sectors and the work schedules, in order to establish specific actions that facilitate trade between the Parties.

3. Regulatory cooperation activities may include, among others:

(a) exchange of information in order to learn about the regulatory systems of the other Parties;

(b) promote the harmonization and compatibility of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, based on the standards, guidelines, and recommendations of the competent international organizations;

(c) promote the recognition of equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(d) to the extent possible, bring common positions to the competent international organizations, based on mutual interests; and

(e) development of mechanisms to carry out tasks of technical assistance and trust building between the Parties.

Article 8.13: Technical Cooperation

1. The Parties:

(a) facilitate the provision of technical assistance, under mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen their sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as well as their related activities, including research, process technology, and infrastructure, among others; and

(b) provide information on their technical assistance programs related to sanitary or phytosanitary measures in areas of particular interest.

2. Expenses derived from technical assistance activities will be subject to the availability of economic resources and priorities in the matter for each Party.

Article 8.14: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures. The Committee will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties, with responsibilities in sanitary, phytosanitary and food safety matters, and will assist the Administrative Commission in the performance of its functions.

2. The Committee will be integrated through the exchange of communications in which its representatives will be designated. The term for its installation will be within 90 days from the entry into force of this Agreement.

3. The Committee will establish, if it considers it pertinent, its rules of procedure.

4. The meetings of the Committee will be held at the request of the Administrative Commission, the Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement or at the request of any of the Parties, to discuss matters of interest.

5. The agreements of the Committee must be adopted by consensus and reported to the corresponding instances.

6. The Committee shall meet in ordinary session at least once a year, unless the Parties agree otherwise, and in extraordinary session as many times as necessary, within 30 days of the date of the request made in accordance with paragraph 4. Committee meetings may be held in person or through any technological means. When the meetings are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

7. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Committee may meet to discuss bilateral matters of interest to Mexico and one or more Central American Parties, provided that the other Parties are notified sufficiently in advance so that, if applicable, they may participate in the meeting. The agreements derived from the meeting will be adopted by consensus between the Parties on which the bilateral matter is concerned and will take effect only with respect to these.

8. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the application and administration of this Chapter;

(b) formulate pertinent recommendations to the Administrative Commission regarding issues within its competence;

(c) facilitate technical consultations and issue expedited recommendations on specific sanitary, phytosanitary and food safety matters, as well as serve as a forum for discussion of problems arising from the application of certain sanitary or phytosanitary measures, in order to reach mutually acceptable alternatives;

(d) establish ad hoc technical working groups in the areas of animal health, plant health or food safety, and indicate their mandate and terms of reference, with the objective of addressing a matter entrusted by the Committee;

(e) agree on the actions, procedures and deadlines for the recognition of equivalences; streamlining the risk assessment process; the recognition of areas or zones free of pests or diseases and areas or zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases and control, inspection and approval procedures, recommending their adoption to the Administrative Commission;

(f) consult on issues, positions and agendas for the meetings of the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, the different Committees of the Codex Alimentarius (including the meetings of the Codex Alimentarius Commission); the IPPC; the OIE and other international and regional forums on food safety, human and animal health and plant preservation;

(g) create work programs on regulatory cooperation, taking into account the activities established in Article 8.12, for the facilitation of trade between the Parties;

(h) coordinate the exchange of information on sanitary and phytosanitary measures between the Parties;

(i) carry out the necessary actions for the training and specialization of technical personnel, promoting the exchange of technical experts, including cooperation in the development, application and observance of sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(j) report annually to the Administrative Commission on the application of this Chapter; and

(k) any other matter in relation to this Chapter instructed by the Administrative Commission.

Article 8.15: Technical Consultations

1. The Parties may hold technical consultations on specific trade concerns that concern Mexico and one or more Central American Parties. In this case, Mexico and the Party or Parties involved will meet in the modality agreed upon (such as face-to-face meetings, videoconferences or others), in order to seek a solution.

2. The Party or Parties to which technical consultations have been requested shall meet with the requesting Party or Parties (in the agreed modality) within 15 days of the request and, if necessary, may request an additional term.

 

 

Chapter 9

Technical Barriers to Trade

Article 9.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms and definitions included in Annex 1 of the OTC Agreement, ISO/IEC Guide 2 "General Terms and their Definitions in Relation to Standardization and Related Activities" and ISO 17000 Standard shall apply. /IEC "Vocabulary and General Principles-Assessment of Conformity", in force.

Article 9.2: Aim

The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate and increase trade in goods, identifying, preventing, and eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties that may arise as a result of the preparation, adoption, and application of standards, technical regulations, and quality assessment procedures. accordance.

Article 9.3: Incorporation of Rights and Obligations

The rights and obligations established in the TBT Agreement are incorporated into and form part of this Agreement, without prejudice to what is established in this Chapter.

Article 9.4: Rights and obligations

1. Each Party may set the level of protection it considers appropriate to achieve its legitimate objectives. Likewise, it may prepare, adopt or maintain the necessary measures to ensure compliance with its standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, in accordance with the provisions of the TBT Agreement.

2. The Parties shall use as a basis for the preparation, adoption and application of their standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, international or imminently formulated standards, guidelines and recommendations, except when these do not constitute an effective or adequate means. to achieve its legitimate objectives, in accordance with the provisions of the TBT Agreement.

3. The standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures shall be prepared, adopted, and applied in such a way that products imported from the other Party are granted treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar products of national origin. and to similar products imported from another Party or non-Party State.

4. To the extent possible, the Parties will comply with present and future recommendations issued by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, derived from the triennial reviews carried out within it.

Article 9.5: Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter applies to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures1 developed, adopted and applied by the Parties, as defined in the TBT Agreement, which may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods between the Parties.

2. This Chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures, nor to purchase specifications established by government institutions for their production or consumption needs.

Article 9.6: Rules

1. The Parties reiterate their obligation under Article 4.1 of the TBT Agreement to ensure that their standard-setting bodies accept and comply with the Code of Good Practice for the Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards set out in Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement .

2. To the extent possible, the Parties will comply with the application of the principles established in the Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade since January 1, 1995 (Document G/TBT /1/Rev.9, published by the WTO on September 8, 2008).

3. The Parties shall promote the application of ISO/IEC Guides 21-1:2005, 212:2005, or those that replace them, in the adoption of international standards.

Article 9.7: Technical Regulations

1. Regarding technical regulations, the provisions of Article 2.7 of the TBT Agreement shall apply.

2. When a Party does not consider a technical regulation under the terms of Article 2.7 of the TBT Agreement, it must justify the reasons for its decision.

Article 9.8: Conformity Assessment

1. To the extent possible, a Party shall accept the results of conformity assessment procedures with respect to standards and technical regulations of the other Party, even when those procedures differ from its own, provided that it is satisfied that offer a degree of conformity with the relevant technical regulations or standards equivalent to that provided by the procedures that the accepting Party carries out or whose result it accepts.

2. If a Party does not accept the results of a conformity assessment procedure carried out in the territory of the other Party, it must justify the reasons for its decision.

3. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, the Parties may initiate negotiations for the conclusion of mutual recognition agreements between the competent bodies in areas of conformity assessment, following the principles of the TBT Agreement and the recommendations issued by your committee.

4. If a Party rejects a request from the other Party to start or conclude negotiations, in order to reach a mutual recognition agreement that facilitates the acceptance in its territory of the results of the conformity assessment procedures carried out by bodies in the territory of the other Party, it must justify the reasons for its decision.

5. The Parties will encourage the activities carried out in the framework of cooperation and technical assistance to serve as a reference in a process of recognition of conformity assessment.

6. Each Party shall accredit, approve or, in accordance with its national legislation, recognize conformity assessment entities in the territory of the other Party, under terms no less favorable than those granted to conformity assessment entities in his territory.

7. If a Party refuses to accredit, approve or, in accordance with its national legislation, recognize a conformity assessment entity in the territory of the other Party, it must justify the reasons for its decision.

Article 9.9: Transparency

1. The Parties shall transmit, preferably electronically, through the contact point established by each Party under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, the notifications of the draft technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures to which they refer. Articles 2.9, 3.2, 5.6 and 7.2 of the TBT Agreement, at the same time that the Party notifies the WTO, under the terms of said Agreement.

2. To the extent possible, the Parties shall communicate those draft technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures that are consistent with the technical content of the relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations.

3. The Parties, to the extent possible, will make known their annual or semi-annual work program on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures at the same time that it is made publicly known to their nationals.

4. Each Party must grant a term of at least 60 days so that the interested parties of the other Party have the possibility of making observations and consulting the draft technical regulation or notified conformity assessment procedure; and take into account such observations and queries. To the extent possible, a Party will give favorable consideration to requests to extend the period established for comments.

5. In urgent cases, when a Party makes a notification of a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure adopted as established in Articles 2.10, 3.2, 5.7 and 7.2 of the TBT Agreement, it must preferably transmit it electronically to the another Party, through the established contact point, at the same time that Party notifies the WTO under the terms of the TBT Agreement. To the extent possible, the Parties shall communicate those technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures that are consistent with the technical content of the relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations.

6. Each Party shall publish or make available to the public its responses to comments received, if possible, before the date on which the final technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure is published.

7. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, provide information about the objective and justification of a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that the Party has adopted or proposes to adopt. To the extent possible, each Party shall promote technological mechanisms that favor the exchange of information in stages prior to the publication of draft technical regulations and/or conformity assessment procedures.

8. The Parties will guarantee the transparency of their technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, publishing their drafts, as well as those adopted, on official, free and publicly accessible Internet pages, to the extent that they exist or be implemented.

9. The authorities of the Parties in charge of the notification referred to in this Article are indicated in Annex 9.9.

Article 9.10: Regulatory Cooperation

1. The regulatory cooperation between the Parties has the following objectives, among others:

(a) strengthen the mechanisms to increase transparency in the processes of technical regulation, standardization and conformity assessment;

(b) simplify compliance with the requirements established in technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures; and

(c) promote the compatibility and harmonization of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures.

2. The Parties, through the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, will create work programs on regulatory cooperation at the bilateral or regional level. Said programs will establish the regulatory authorities involved, the corresponding sectors and the work calendars, in order to establish specific actions that facilitate trade between the Parties.

3. Regulatory cooperation activities may include, among others:

(a) in terms of standardization and technical regulations:

(i) exchange of information in order to learn about the regulatory systems of the Parties;

(ii) harmonization and compatibility of standards and technical regulations, based on international standards, guides, and guidelines;

(iii) to the extent possible, bring common positions to international standardization forums, based on mutual interests;

(iv) development of mechanisms to carry out technical assistance and trust-building tasks between the Parties; and

(v) each Party shall allow nationals of the other Party to participate in the development of its standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures;

(b) in matters of conformity assessment:

(i) promote the compatibility and harmonization of conformity assessment procedures;

(ii) encourage the conclusion of mutual recognition agreements, in order to recognize the results of the conformity assessment of the other Party and thereby simplify the procedures regarding tests, inspection, certification and accreditation, under the principles of mutual and satisfactory benefits; and

(iii) encourage private organizations that carry out conformity assessment activities in the territories of the Parties to enter into mutual recognition agreements with each other.

Article 9.11: Technical Cooperation

The Parties agree to provide cooperation and technical assistance, under mutually agreed terms and conditions, for the purpose of, among others:

(a) promote the application of this Chapter;

(b) favor the application of the TBT Agreement;

(c) strengthen the capacities of their respective bodies for standardization, technical regulations, conformity assessment, metrology, and information and notification systems within the scope of the TBT Agreement;

(d) collaborate in the education and training of human resources;

(e) collaborate in the development and application of international standards, guidelines or recommendations;

(f) collaborate in strengthening good regulatory practices; and

(g) share information of a non-confidential nature that has served as a basis for a Party in the development of a technical regulation.

Article 9.12: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade. The Committee will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties, in accordance with Annex 9.12, and will assist the Administrative Commission in the performance of its functions.

2. The Committee will establish, if it considers it pertinent, its rules of procedure.

3. The meetings of the Committee will be held at the request of the Administrative Commission, the Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement or at the request of any of the Parties to deal with matters of interest.

4. The agreements of the Committee must be adopted by consensus and reported to the corresponding instances.

5. The Committee shall meet in ordinary session at least once a year, unless the Parties agree otherwise, and in extraordinary session as many times as necessary within 30 days following the date of the request made in accordance with the paragraph 3. Committee meetings may be held in person or through any technological means. When the meetings are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Committee may meet to discuss bilateral matters of interest to Mexico and one or more Central American Parties, provided that the other Parties are notified sufficiently in advance so that, if applicable, they may participate in the meeting. The agreements derived from the meeting will be adopted by consensus between the Parties on which the bilateral matter is concerned and will take effect only with respect to these.

7. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the application and administration of this Chapter;

(b) formulate pertinent recommendations to the Administrative Commission regarding issues within its competence;

(c) facilitate technical consultations and issue expedited recommendations on specific issues regarding technical barriers to trade, as well as serve as a forum for discussion of problems arising from the application of certain standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures , in order to reach mutually acceptable alternatives;

(d) establish ad hoc technical working groups on technical barriers to trade and indicate their mandate and terms of reference, with the objective of addressing a matter mandated by the Committee;

(e) consult on issues, positions and agendas for the meetings of the TBT Agreement Committee, the different international standardization organizations and other international and regional forums on technical barriers to trade;

(f) create work programs on regulatory cooperation, taking into account the activities established in Article 9.10, for the facilitation of trade between the Parties;

(g) carry out the necessary actions for the training and specialization of technical personnel, promoting the exchange of technical experts, including cooperation in the development, application and observance of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;

(h) report annually to the Administrative Commission on the application of this Chapter; and

(i) any other matter instructed by the Administrative Commission.

Article 9.13: Technical Consultations

1. The Parties may hold technical consultations on specific trade concerns that concern Mexico and one or more Central American Parties. In this case, Mexico and the Party or Parties involved will meet in the modality agreed upon (such as face-to-face meetings, videoconferences or others) in order to seek a solution.

2. The Party or Parties to which technical consultations have been requested shall meet with the requesting Party or Parties (in the agreed modality) within 15 days of the request and, if necessary, may request a additional term.

Article 9.14: Exchange of Information

In accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, any information or explanation requested by a Party must be provided by the other Party in printed or electronic form, within a reasonable period. The Party shall endeavor to respond to each request within 30 days of the submission of such request and, if necessary, may request additional time.

 

 

Chapter X

Public Procurement

Article 10.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

special compensatory conditions: the conditions or commitments imposed or considered by a procuring entity, to promote local development or improve the balance of payments accounts of a Party through local content requirements, licenses for the use of technology, investments, countertrade or similar requirements;

contracting entity: an entity listed in Annex 10.2;

written or written: any expression in words or numbers that can be read, reproduced and subsequently communicated and includes information transmitted and stored electronically;

technical specification: a specification that establishes the characteristics of the goods to be procured or their related processes and production methods, or the characteristics of services to be procured or their related methods of operation, including applicable administrative provisions and requirements related to the evaluation procedures that a procuring entity sets. A technical specification may also include or refer exclusively to matters relating to terminology, symbols, packaging, or marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process, service, or method of production or operation;

conformity assessment procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine that the relevant requirements of technical regulations or standards are fulfilled;

open bidding procedures: any type of procurement method of a Party, except direct procurement methods as set out in Article 10.13, provided that such methods are consistent with this Chapter;

supplier: a person who has provided, provides, or may provide goods or services to a procuring entity;

publish: disseminate information through an electronic or paper medium that is widely distributed and readily available to the general public; and

services: includes construction services, unless otherwise specified.

Article 10.2: Scope of Application and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to any measure of a Party relating to covered government procurement.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, covered public procurement means a procurement of goods, services, or both:

(a) made through any contractual means, including purchase, rental or lease, with or without an option to purchase;

(b) listed and subject to the conditions stipulated in Annex 10.2; and

(c) carried out by a contracting entity listed in Annex 10.2.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) non-contractual arrangements or any form of assistance that a Party or a State enterprise provides, including grants, loans, capital transfers, tax incentives, subsidies, guarantees, cooperative agreements, government provision of goods and services to persons or state, regional or local governments, and purchases for the direct purpose of providing foreign assistance;

(b) acquisitions financed by donations, loans or other forms of international assistance, in which the delivery of such assistance is subject to conditions incompatible with the provisions of this Chapter;

(c) the contracting of agency or fiscal depository services, liquidation and administration services for regulated financial institutions, and sales and distribution services for public debt;

(d) the hiring of public employees and measures related to employment;

(e) purchases made under exceptionally favorable conditions that only occur for a very short period, such as extraordinary disposals made by companies that are not normally suppliers or the disposal of assets of companies in liquidation or under receivership, provided that this subsection is not used as a means to avoid competition;

(f) the acquisition or lease of land, existing real estate or other immovable property or rights thereon;

(g) Procurements made by a procuring entity or State enterprise to another government entity or enterprise of that Party; and

(h) financial services.

4. When a contracting entity awards a contract in a procurement that is not covered by this Chapter, nothing established in this Chapter may be interpreted as covering the merchandise or service that is the object of said contract.

5. No procuring entity may prepare, design, structure or divide a covered public procurement in order to evade the obligations of this Chapter.

6. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from developing new procurement policies, procedures or contractual modalities, provided they are not inconsistent with this Chapter.

7. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures:

(a) related to goods or services for persons with disabilities, minorities, philanthropic institutions, or prison labor; either

(b) necessary to protect public morals, security or order, health or human, animal and plant life, including environmental measures and those related to the conservation of exhaustible living or non-living natural resources, and intellectual property ,

provided that such measures are not applied in a discriminatory manner or constitute a disguised restriction on trade.

Article 10.3: National Treatment

1. With respect to any measure covered by this Chapter, each Party shall accord to the goods and services of the other Party, and to the suppliers of the other Party of those goods and services, treatment no less favorable than that accorded by such Party, or their respective contracting entities to their own merchandise, services and suppliers.

2. With respect to any measure covered by this Chapter, neither Party may:

(a) grant a locally established supplier treatment less favorable than that accorded to another locally established supplier, by reason of the degree of association or foreign ownership; either

(b) discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the goods or services offered by this supplier for a particular covered public procurement are goods or services of the other Party.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to measures relating to customs duties or other charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation, to the method of collection of such duties or charges, to other regulations import, including restrictions and formalities, or measures that affect trade in services other than the measures that specifically regulate public procurement covered by this Chapter.

Article 10.4: Rules of origin

For the purposes of applying Article 10.3, in public procurement covered by this Chapter, neither Party shall apply rules of origin that are different or incompatible with the rules of origin that the Party applies in normal commercial operations to goods imported from the other part.

Article 10.5: Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits derived from this Chapter to a service provider of the other Party, prior notification and consultation in accordance with Article 17.6 (Consultations), when the Party demonstrates that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out substantive business activities1 in the territory of the Parties and is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party State2 .

Article 10.6: Special Compensatory Conditions

With respect to covered procurement, a procuring entity shall refrain from considering, requesting, or imposing special compensatory conditions at any stage of a procurement.

Article 10.7: Contract Valuation

1. When calculating the value of a contract for the purposes of implementing this Chapter, the procuring entities shall base their valuation on the maximum total estimated value of the public procurement covered for the entire duration of the contract. For greater clarity, the maximum total estimated value of the contract will take into account all optional contracts that may have been indicated in the contract documents, and other forms of remuneration, such as bonuses, fees, commissions and interest.

2. In addition to what is established in Article 10.2.5, a contracting entity may not choose a valuation method or divide the contracts into independent contracts, in order to evade the obligations contained in this Chapter.

Article 10.8: Publication of Future Hiring Notices

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 10.13, a procuring entity shall publish in advance in the media listed in Annex 10.8, a notice inviting interested suppliers to submit bids for each covered public procurement.

2. The information in each notice will include, at a minimum:

(a) an indication that procurement is covered by this Chapter;

(b) a description of the procurement; and

(c) any conditions required of suppliers to participate, the name of the procuring entity, the address where any documentation related to the procurement can be obtained, if applicable, any amounts that must be paid for the procurement documents, the deadlines and Address for submission of bids.

3. Each Party shall encourage its procuring entities to publish information regarding plans for future covered public procurement as early as possible in each year.

Article 10.9: Deadlines for Bid Submission and Delivery

1. A procuring entity shall provide suppliers with sufficient time to prepare and submit bids, taking into account the nature and complexity of the covered procurement. In no case, a contracting entity will grant a period of less than 40 days from the date of publication of the contracting notice, until the deadline for the presentation of offers.

2. A contracting entity may establish a contracting term of less than 40 days, but in no case less than 10 days, in the following circumstances:

(a) in the case of a second recruitment notice;

(b) in the event that a procuring entity, subject to the provisions of Article 10.13.3, procures commercial goods and services that are regularly sold or offered for sale to non-governmental buyers for non-governmental purposes; either

(c) when an unforeseen emergency situation duly justified by the contracting entity makes it impossible to meet the deadline set in paragraph 1.

3. In establishing the date of delivery of the goods or services, and in accordance with its reasonable needs, a procuring entity shall take into account the nature and complexity of the procurement.

Article 10.10: Procurement Documents

1. A procuring entity shall provide interested suppliers with bidding documents that include all necessary information to enable them to prepare and submit suitable bids. The information will include the elements indicated in Annex 10.10.

2. A procuring entity may comply with paragraph 1 through an electronic publication, accessible to all interested providers. When a procuring entity does not publish the bidding documents by electronic means accessible to all interested suppliers, it shall, at the request of any supplier, promptly make the documents available in written form.

3. In the event that a contracting entity in the course of a tender modifies the criteria referred to in paragraph 1, it shall transmit these modifications in writing:

(a) to all the suppliers that are participating in the procurement at the time of the modification of the criteria, if the identities of those suppliers are known and in cases where the identity of the participating suppliers is unknown, the same dissemination will be given as to the original information; and

(b) in sufficient time to allow suppliers to modify and resubmit their offers, as appropriate.

Article 10.11: Technical specifications

1. A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specification or require any conformity assessment procedure that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

2. Where applicable, a procuring entity shall establish any technical specification:

(a) in terms of performance rather than in terms of design or descriptive features; and

(b) based on international standards when applicable, on national technical regulations, recognized national standards or building codes.

3. A procuring entity shall not establish technical specifications that require or refer to certain trademarks or trade names, patents, designs or types, or specific origins, producers or suppliers, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or understandable way to describe the requirements of covered public procurement and provided that, in such cases, expressions such as "or equivalent" are included in the procurement documents.

4. A procuring entity shall not solicit or accept, in a manner that may have the effect of preventing competition, advice that could be used in preparing or adopting any technical specification for a specific covered procurement, from a person who may have a commercial interest in it. that hiring.

5. For greater certainty, this Article is not intended to prevent a Party from preparing, adopting, or applying technical specifications that promote the conservation of natural resources, living or non-living, exhaustible, that protect the environment, provided that those specifications are not applied in discriminatory manner or constitute a disguised restriction on trade and that are consistent with this Article.

Article 10.12: Requirements and Conditions for Participation in Procurement

1. Where a procuring entity requires suppliers to meet registration, qualification or any other requirements or conditions for participation in a covered public procurement "conditions for participation", the procuring entity shall publish a notice inviting suppliers to apply for that record or qualification, or to satisfy any other participation requirement. The procuring entity will publish the notice sufficiently in advance so that interested suppliers have sufficient time to prepare and submit their requests and for the procuring entity to evaluate and make its determinations based on such requests.

2. Each contracting entity must:

(a) limit the conditions for participation to those that are essential to guarantee that the provider has the legal, technical and financial capacity to fulfill the corresponding contract, if awarded;

(b) recognize as a qualified supplier any supplier of the other Party that has fulfilled the necessary conditions for participation; and

(c) base qualification decisions solely on conditions for participation that have been set forth in advance, in notices, or in procurement documents.

3. The contracting entities may make available to the public lists of qualified suppliers to participate in the covered public procurement. Where a procuring entity requires suppliers to qualify for such a list as a condition of participation and an unqualified supplier requests qualification for inclusion on the list, the procuring entity shall promptly initiate qualification procedures and allow the supplier to submit a bid if qualified. determines that it is a qualified provider. The foregoing as long as there is sufficient time to meet the conditions for participation within the period established for submitting bids.

4. No procuring entity shall make as a condition for participating in a covered procurement that a supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts by a procuring entity, or that the supplier has prior work experience in the Party's territory. A procuring entity shall assess the financial and technical capacity of a supplier in accordance with the supplier's business activity outside the territory of the procuring entity's Party, as well as its activity, if any, in the territory of the procuring entity's Party .

5. A contracting entity will promptly notify any provider that has requested qualification of its decision in this regard. In the event that a contracting entity rejects a qualification request, or stops recognizing a supplier as qualified, said contracting entity must, at the supplier's request, provide the reasons for its decision in writing.

6. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a procuring entity from prohibiting the participation of a supplier in a covered public procurement for reasons such as bankruptcy or false declarations.

Article 10.13: Procurement Procedures

1. A procuring entity shall award contracts through open bidding procedures, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 2.

2. Provided that procurement procedures are not used as a means to prevent competition or to protect domestic suppliers, a procuring entity may award contracts by means other than open bidding procedures in the following circumstances:

(a) in the absence of offers or those submitted that do not comply with the essential requirements established in the procurement documents, including any conditions for participation, provided that the requirements have not been substantially modified;

(b) in the case of works of art or for reasons related to the protection of exclusive intellectual property rights, such as patents or copyrights, or reserved information, or when for technical reasons there is no competition, the goods or services only can be supplied by a specific supplier and there is no other reasonable alternative or substitute;

(c) in the case of additional deliveries from the original supplier that are intended to be used as replacements, extensions or continuous services for existing equipment, software, services or facilities, in which a change of supplier would oblige the procuring entity to purchase merchandise or services that do not meet the requirements for compatibility with existing equipment, software, services, or facilities;

(d) in the case of merchandise purchased on a commodity market ;

(e) when a contracting entity acquires prototypes or a first product or service that is developed at its request in the course of, and for the execution of, a specific research, experimentation, study or original development contract. Once such contracts have been executed, subsequent acquisitions of products or services will be in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;

(f) in the case of additional construction services, which were not included in the original contract, but which appear within the objectives of the original contract documentation and which due to unforeseen circumstances are necessary to complete the construction services described. However, the total value of the contracts awarded for such additional construction services shall not exceed 50 percent of the original contract amount;

(g) to the extent that it is strictly necessary, when, for reasons of urgency caused by unforeseeable events for the procuring entity, it is impossible to obtain the goods or services on time through open bidding procedures and the use of these procedures would cause damage serious to the procuring entity, to its responsibilities with respect to its program or to the Party; and

(h) in the case of contracts that will be awarded to the winner of an architectural design contest, provided that the contest has been organized in a manner consistent with the principles of this Chapter and that it has been decided by a jury or independent body.

3. A procuring entity shall maintain records or prepare written reports stating the specific justification for any contract awarded pursuant to paragraph 2, consistent with Article 10.15.3.

Article 10.14: Award of Contracts

1. A procuring entity shall require that, in order for a bid to be considered for award, it be submitted in writing and comply with the essential requirements of the procurement documents provided in advance by the procuring entity to all participating suppliers, and proceed from a provider that meets the conditions for participation that the procuring entity has communicated in advance to all participating providers.

2. Unless, for reasons of public interest, a contracting entity decides not to award a contract, the contract will be awarded to the supplier that submits, as established in accordance with the specific objective evaluation criteria contained in the contracting documents:

(a) the offer determined to be the most advantageous; either

(b) the lowest price offer.

3. No contracting entity may annul a contract, or rescind or modify a contract that it has awarded in order to evade the obligations of this Chapter.

Article 10.15: Information on the Award of Contracts

1. A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating providers of decisions on the award of contracts. The contracting entity must, at the express request of the supplier whose offer has not been chosen, provide pertinent information to that supplier on the reasons why its offer was not chosen and the relative advantages of the winning offer.

2. Immediately after the award of a contract in a covered public procurement, the procuring entity must publish, in a medium listed in Annex 10.8, a notice that includes at least the following information:

(a) the name of the procuring entity;

(b) a description of the goods or services included in the contract;

(c) the name of the supplier to whom the contract was awarded;

(d) the value of the award; and

(e) the type of contract used.

3. A procuring entity shall maintain records and reports related to contracting and contract award procedures in public procurement covered by this Chapter, including the records or reports established in Article 10.13.3, for at least 3 years after the date of awarding a contract.

Article 10.16: Guarantee of Integrity in Contracting Practices

Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures to declare ineligible to participate in its covered procurement, either indefinitely or for a set period, suppliers that it determines have engaged in illegal, fraudulent, or evasive procurement-related activities.

Article 10.17: National Review of Supplier Challenges

1. Each Party shall establish or designate at least one authority, impartial and independent of its contracting entities, to receive and review the challenges that suppliers present with respect to the obligations of the Party and its contracting entities under this Chapter and to issue resolutions. and relevant recommendations.

2. When an authority other than that impartial authority initially reviews a challenge by a supplier, the Party shall ensure that suppliers may appeal the initial decision to an impartial administrative or judicial body, independent of the procuring entity that is the subject of the challenge.

3. Each Party shall provide that the authority established or designated in paragraph 1 may take appropriate precautionary measures, pending the resolution of a challenge, to preserve the opportunity to correct a potential breach of this Chapter, including the suspension of the award. of a contract or the performance of a contract that has been awarded.

4. Each Party shall ensure that its review procedures are publicly available in written form and that they are timely, transparent, effective, and consistent with the principle of due process.

5. Each Party shall ensure that all documents related to a challenge to a covered government procurement are available to any impartial authority established or designated pursuant to paragraph 1.

6. A contracting entity will answer in writing the claim of any supplier.

7. Each Party shall ensure that the impartial authority established or designated pursuant to paragraph 1 provides the following to suppliers:

(a) a sufficient term to prepare and present the objections in writing, which shall not be less than 10 days, counted from the moment in which the basis of the claim was known by the supplier or in which it reasonably should have been known by this;

(b) an opportunity to review the relevant documents and be heard by the authority in a timely manner;

(c) an opportunity to respond to the procuring entity's response to the supplier's claim; and

(d) the written delivery of its conclusions and recommendations regarding the challenge, together with an explanation of the grounds used to reach each decision.

8. Each Party shall ensure that the submission of a challenge by a supplier does not prejudice the supplier's participation in current or future tenders.

Article 10.18. Information Provision

1. Each Party from time to time:

(a) publish all laws and regulations, and their amendments, related to covered public procurement, in the media listed in Annex 10.8; and

(b) make available to the public any administrative resolution of general application related to covered public procurement.

2. At the request of a Party, the other Party will provide, on a reciprocal basis, available statistical information regarding the procurement provided for in this Chapter.

Article 10.19: Confidentiality of information

1. A Party, its procuring entities and its review authorities shall not disclose confidential information, without the formal consent of the person who provided it, when such disclosure could prejudice the legitimate business interests of a particular person or could prejudice fair competition between the parties. providers.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party or its contracting entities from refraining from disclosing information if such disclosure could:

(a) constitute an obstacle to compliance with the law;

(b) prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

(c) harm the legitimate business interests of certain providers or entities, including the protection of intellectual property; either

(d) otherwise go against the public interest.

Article 10.20: Modifications and Rectifications to the Coverage

1. A Party may make technical rectifications of a purely formal nature with respect to the coverage of this Chapter or minor modifications to its lists of contracting entities, as long as it notifies the other Party in writing and that the other Party does not object in writing within within 30 days of notification. A Party that makes said rectification or minor modification shall not be obliged to provide compensatory adjustments to the other Party.

2. A Party may modify its coverage under this Chapter as long as:

(a) notifies the other Party in writing, and the other Party does not object in writing within 30 days after the notification; and

(b) except as provided in paragraph 3, offer the other Party within 30 days after notifying the other Party, acceptable compensatory adjustments to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that which existed before the modification.

3. A Party shall not be required to provide compensatory adjustments, in cases where the proposed modification covers one or more procuring entities in which the Parties agree that governmental control or influence has been effectively eliminated. In the event that the Parties do not agree that such control or influence has been effectively eliminated, the objecting Party may request further information or consultations, with a view to clarifying the nature of any governmental control or influence and reaching an agreement regarding the continuation of the contracting entity's coverage under this Chapter.

4. The Administrative Commission will adopt decisions regarding the corresponding modifications of Annex 10.2 in such a way that it reflects any agreed modification, technical rectification or minor modification.

 

 

Chapter XI

Investment

 

Section A: Definitions and Scope of Application

 

Article 11.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

ICSID: the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes established by the ICSID Convention;

Inter-American Convention: the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, held in Panama on January 30, 1975;

ICSID Convention: the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, concluded in Washington, DC, on March 18, 1965;

New York Convention: the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held in New York, June 10, 1958;

claim: the claim submitted by a disputing investor against a Party, whose foundation is an alleged violation of the provisions contained in this Chapter;

respondent: the Party that is a party to a dispute relating to an investment;

claimant: the investor of a Party who is a party to an investment dispute with the other Party;

company: a company, as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application), and the branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party: an enterprise constituted or organized in accordance with the national law of that Party and having its domicile in the territory of that Party or a branch located in the territory of a Party, which carries out substantive business activities therein;

protected information: confidential business information or information that is privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure in accordance with the Party's domestic law;

investment: any asset owned or controlled by an investor of a Party, directly or indirectly, established or acquired in accordance with the national laws and regulations of the other Party in whose territory the investment is made, which has the characteristics of an investment, including characteristics such as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of profit or profit, or the assumption of risk. Forms an investment can take include:

(a) a company;

(b) shares, capital, and other forms of equity or equity participation in a company;

(c) debt instruments of a company:

(i) when the company is an affiliate of the investor; either

(ii) when the original maturity date of the debt instrument is at least 3 years;

but does not include a debt instrument of a Party or of a State enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;

(d) a loan to a company:

(i) when the company is an affiliate of the investor; either

(ii) when the original maturity date of the loan is at least 3 years;

but does not include a loan to a Party or to a State enterprise, regardless of the original due date1 ;

(e) other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property rights and rights related to property, such as leases, mortgages and pledges, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining economic benefit or for other business purposes;

(f) the participation resulting from the capital or other resources destined for the development of an economic activity in the territory of the other Party, such as:

(i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of the other Party, including concessions, construction contracts, and turnkey contracts; either

(ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company;

(g) futures, options and other derivatives;

(h) intellectual property rights;

(i) licences, authorizations, permits and similar instruments to the extent that they generate rights in accordance with national legislation;

but investment does not include:

(j) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:

(i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of a Party to a company in the territory of the other Party; either

(ii) the granting of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, except for a loan covered by the provisions of subsection (d); either

(k) any other pecuniary claim, which does not entail the interest rates established in subsections (a) to (i); and

(l) an order or sentence within a judicial or administrative process.

A change in the manner in which assets have been invested or reinvested does not affect their investment status under this Agreement, provided that such change falls within the definitions of this Article and is made in accordance with the domestic law of the Party to whose territory the investment has been admitted;

investor of a Party: a Party or a State enterprise, or a national or an enterprise of such Party, that intends to2 make, is making or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party; considering, however, that a natural person who has dual nationality shall be considered exclusively a national of the State of his dominant and effective nationality;

investor of a non-Party State: an investor that is not an investor of a Party that intends to3 make, is making or has made an investment in the territory of a Party;

freely usable currency: the freely usable currency as determined in accordance with the Articles of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

disputing party: the plaintiff or the defendant;

disputing parties: the plaintiff and the defendant;

Non-disputing Party: the Party that is not a party to a dispute relating to an investment under Section C;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), approved by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules: the Additional Facility Rules for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

Secretary General: the Secretary General of ICSID; and

tribunal: an arbitral tribunal established pursuant to Articles 11.20, 11.23 or 11.29.

Article 11.2: Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) the investors of the other Party in everything related to their investment;

(b) investments of investors of the other Party made in the territory of the Party; and

(c) with respect to Articles 11.7 and 11.16, to all investments in the territory of the Party.

2. This Chapter covers both existing investments on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, as well as investments made or acquired afterward.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) the measures adopted or maintained by a Party in the field of financial services;

(b) the measures adopted by a Party to restrict the participation of the investments of investors of the other Party in its territory, for reasons of national security or public order;

(c) the controversies or demands initiated prior to the entry into force of this Agreement related to acts or facts that occurred prior to its entry into force, including if its effects remain even after it;

(d) services supplied in the exercise of governmental powers within the territory of the respective Party, such as, and not limited to, the enforcement of laws relating to social rehabilitation services, security or income insurance, security or social security, social welfare, public education, public training, health and child care; and

(e) to the economic activities reserved for each Party, as indicated in Annex III.

4. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

5. The requirement of a Party that a service provider of the other Party post a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service in its territory does not, by itself, make this Chapter applicable to that supply. cross-border of a service. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Party relating to the deposited financial guarantee or guarantee, to the extent that such financial guarantee or guarantee is an investment by an investor of the other Party.

 

Section B: Investment

 

Article 11.3: Minimum Treatment Level

1. Each Party shall accord to the investments of investors of the other Party treatment in accordance with customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as full protection and security within its territory.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes that the minimum level of treatment for aliens under customary international law is the minimum level of treatment to be accorded to the investments of investors of the other Party. The concepts of "fair and equitable treatment" and "full protection and security" do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that required by that level, and do not create additional substantive rights. The obligation in paragraph 1 to grant:

(a) "fair and equitable treatment" includes, but is not limited to, the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil or administrative proceedings, in accordance with the principle of due process incorporated in the main legal systems of the world; and

(b) "full protection and security" requires a Party to grant the level of police protection that is required by customary international law.

3. The determination that another provision of this Agreement or of another international agreement has been violated does not establish that this Article has been violated.

4. With respect to this Article, the customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens refers to all principles of customary international law that protect the rights and economic interests of aliens.

Article 11.4: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant to the investor of the other Party and to the investment of an investor of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors and to the investments of said investors in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. A Party may comply with the provisions of paragraph 1 by granting to the investments and investors of the other Party formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to that which it grants to its own similar investments and similar investors.

3. A formally identical treatment or a formally different treatment shall be considered less favorable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favor of the investments or investors of the Party, in comparison with similar investments or similar investors of the other Party.

4. Treatment accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a regional-level government, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that regional-level government accords, in like circumstances, to investors and investments of investors of the Party of which it is a part.

Article 11.5: Most Favored Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to the investor of the other Party and to the investment of an investor of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in similar circumstances, to the investor and to the investment of an investor of any State that is not Party, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. The most favored nation treatment to be granted in similar circumstances does not extend to dispute settlement mechanisms, such as those contained in Section C, that are provided for in other international investment treaties or agreements.

3. If a Party has granted special treatment to investors or their investments, coming from a State that is not a Party, by virtue of bilateral investment treaties, tax agreements, or agreements that establish free trade zones, existing or future customs unions, common markets, economic or monetary unions or other similar economic integration institutions, that Party shall not be obliged to grant the treatment in question to investors or to investments of investors of the other Party.

Article 11.6: Treatment in Case of Losses

1. Each Party shall grant the investor of the other Party and the investment of an investor of the other Party, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to the measures it adopts or maintains in relation to losses suffered by investments in its territory due to armed conflicts or civil strife.

2. Paragraph 1 does not apply to existing measures relating to subsidies or donations that might be inconsistent with Article 11.4, except for Article 11.9.4(b).

Article 11.7: Performance Requirements

1. Neither Party may impose or compel compliance with the following requirements or commitments, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or any other form of disposition of an investment of an investor of the other Party or of a non-Party State in its territory to:

(a) export a certain type, level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(c) acquire, use or grant preference to goods produced in its territory, or acquire goods from producers or services from service providers in its territory;

(d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment;

(e) restrict the sales in its territory of the merchandise or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to earnings generated in foreign currency;

(f) transfer to a person in its territory, technology, production process or other reserved knowledge, except:

(i) when the requirement is imposed by a judicial or administrative court or competent authority, to remedy an alleged violation of national competition law or to act in a manner that is not inconsistent with other provisions of this Agreement4 ; either

(ii) when a Party authorizes the use of an intellectual property right in accordance with Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement or to measures requiring the disclosure of proprietary information that are within the scope of application, and are compatible with Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement5 ;

(g) act as the exclusive supplier of the goods it produces or services it provides for a specific, regional or global market.

2. A measure that requires an investment to use a technology to meet generally applicable health, environmental, or safety requirements shall not be considered inconsistent with paragraph 1(f). To provide greater certainty, articles 11.4 and 11.5 apply to said measure.

3. No Party may condition the receipt of an advantage, or the continued receipt thereof, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale, or any other form of disposition of an investment in its territory by of an investor of the other Party or of a non-Party State, upon compliance with any of the following requirements:

(a) acquire, use or give preference to goods produced in its territory or to purchase goods from producers in its territory;

(b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(c) relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; either

(d) restrict the sales in its territory of the merchandise or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to earnings generated in foreign currency.

4. Nothing established in paragraph 3 shall be construed as an impediment for a Party, in its territory, to impose in relation to an investment of an investor of the other Party or of a non-Party State, legally established requirements of geographical location of production units, provision of a service, job creation or workforce training, construction or expansion of private facilities or carrying out research and development activities in its territory.

5. Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in paragraphs 1(b), (c) and (f) and 3(a) ) and (b) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including those of an environmental nature, necessary to:

(a) ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

(b) protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

(c) the preservation of natural resources, living or non-living.

6. Paragraphs 1(a), (b) and (c), and 3(a) and (b), shall not apply to the requirements for qualification of goods or services with respect to export promotion programs and of foreign aid.

7. Paragraphs 1(b), (c), (f) and (g), and 3(a) and (b), shall not apply to public procurement.

8. Paragraphs 3(a) and (b) shall not apply to requirements imposed by an importing Party with respect to the contents of the goods, necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.

9. This Article does not exclude the application of any commitment, obligation or requirement between private parties, when a Party did not impose or demand the commitment, obligation or requirement.

10. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 3 do not apply to any requirements other than those stated in those paragraphs.

Article 11.8: Senior Business Management and Boards of Directors

1. Neither Party may require that an enterprise of that Party, which is an investment of an investor of the other Party, appoint natural persons of any particular nationality to senior management positions.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of the governing bodies or of any committee of such bodies of an enterprise of that Party that is an investment of an investor of the other Party be of a particular nationality, or is resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control over his investment.

Article 11.9: Reservations and Exceptions

1. Articles 11.4, 11.5, 11.7 and 11.8 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party in:

(i) government at the central level, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii) a government at the regional level, as established by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; either

(iii) a government at the local level;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subsection (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subsection (a) provided that said modification does not diminish the conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with articles 11.4, 11.5, 11.7 or 11.8.

2. Articles 11.4, 11.5, 11.7 and 11.8 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. Neither Party may require, pursuant to any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and included in its Schedule in Annex II, an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an existing investment at the time the measure takes effect.

4. Articles 11.4, 11.5 and 11.8 do not apply to:

(a) public procurement; either

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance.

5. Parties are not required to list government measures at the local level.

Article 11.10: Transfers

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to the investment of an investor of the other Party in its territory to be made freely and without delay to and from its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administrative expenses, technical assistance and other charges, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;

(b) products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;

(c) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or its investment is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

(d) payments made in accordance with Article 11.11; and

(e) payments that come from the application of the provisions related to the dispute resolution mechanism contained in Section C.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, a transfer is considered made without delay when it has been made within the period normally necessary to comply with the transfer formalities.

3. Neither Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits, or profits or other amounts derived from, or attributable to, investments carried out in the territory of the other Party, nor shall it penalize them in the event that they do not carry out the transfer.

4. Each Party shall allow transfers to be made in freely usable currency, at the prevailing market exchange rate on the date of the transfer.

5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 4, each Party may prevent transfers through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of measures related to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal, administrative or judicial offenses;

(e) guarantee of compliance with orders or rulings in judicial or administrative proceedings;

(f) establishment of the necessary instruments or mechanisms to ensure the payment of income taxes, by means such as withholding the amount related to dividends or other concepts, in accordance with national legislation; either

(g) social security, public retirement or mandatory savings programs.

Article 11.11: Expropriation and Compensation

1. Neither Party may nationalize or expropriate, directly or indirectly, an investment of an investor of the other Party in its territory, or take any measure equivalent to the expropriation or nationalization of that investment, unless it is:

(a) for public purposes in accordance with the provisions of Annex 11.11;

(b) on a non-discriminatory basis;

(c) in accordance with the principle of legality and Article 11.3; and

(d) by indemnification in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4.

2. The compensation will be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out ("expropriation date"), and will not reflect any change in value, due to the fact that the intention of expropriate is known in advance of the expropriation date. The valuation criteria will include the declared fiscal value of tangible assets, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value.

3. The payment of the compensation will be made without delay, it will be fully payable and freely transferable.

4. The amount paid will not be less than the equivalent amount that would have been paid for compensation in a currency of free use in the international financial market on the date of expropriation, and this currency would have been converted at the current market price on the date of valuation, plus the interest that would have been generated at a bank or commercial rate until the date of the payment day.

5. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights; to the extent that said issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is consistent with Chapter XVI (Intellectual Property).

6. This Article shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 11.11.

Article 11.12: Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 11.4 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of the other Party, such as investments being constituted in accordance with with the domestic law of the Party, provided that such formalities do not substantially impair the protection afforded by that Party under this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding what is established in Articles 11.4 and 11.5, each Party may require, in its territory, an investor of the other Party, to provide routine non-confidential information regarding their investment, exclusively for information or statistical purposes. A Party may only request confidential information if its national legislation allows it and will protect such information from any disclosure that could negatively affect the competitive situation of the investment or the investor.

Article 11.13: Denial of Benefits

Subject to prior notice and consultation, a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) an investor of the other Party and its investments, if the investor is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party State and such enterprise does not maintain substantive business operations in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) an investor of the other Party and its investments, if the investor is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of the denying Party and such enterprise does not maintain substantive business operations in the territory of the other Party.

Article 11.14: Surrogacy

1. If a Party or a designated agency of a Party makes a payment to any of its investors under a guarantee, insurance contract, or other form of indemnity that it has granted with respect to an investment of an investor of that Party, the other Party will recognize the subrogation or transfer of any right or title with respect to said investment. The subrogated or transferred right or claim shall not be greater than the investor's original right or claim.

2. When a Party or a designated agency of a Party has made a payment to an investor of that Party and has acquired the investor's rights and claims, that investor shall not exercise such rights and claims against the other Party, except as authorized to act on behalf of the Party or the designated agency of the Party that has made the payment.

Article 11.15: Extraterritorial Inapplicability of the Legislation of a Party

1. The Parties, in relation to the investments of their investors, constituted and organized in accordance with the national legislation of the other Party, may not exercise jurisdiction or adopt any measure that has the effect of the extraterritorial application of their national legislation or the obstruction of trade between the Parties, or between a Party and a non-Party State.

2. If any of the Parties fails to comply with the provisions of paragraph 1, the Party where the investment has been established may, at its discretion, adopt the measures and exercise the actions it deems necessary, in order to nullify the legislation or the measure in question and the obstacles to trade resulting therefrom.

Article 11.16: Measures Related to the Environment

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure, otherwise compatible with this Chapter, that it deems appropriate to ensure that investment activities in its territory are carried out taking take environmental concerns into account.

2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by relaxing domestic measures applicable to health, safety or the environment. Consequently, neither Party shall eliminate or undertake to exempt from the application of those measures the investment of an investor, as a means to induce the establishment, acquisition, expansion or maintenance of the investment in its territory. If a Party believes that the other Party has encouraged an investment in this way, it may request consultations with that Party.

Article 11.17: Investment Promotion and Information Exchange

1. With the intention of significantly increasing the reciprocal participation of investments, the Parties may promote and support the preparation of documents to promote investment opportunities and the design of mechanisms for their dissemination. In addition, the Parties may create, maintain and improve financial mechanisms that make investments by one Party in the territory of the other Party viable.

2. The Parties shall make available information available on opportunities for:

(a) investment in its territory, which may be developed by investors of the other Party;

(b) strategic alliances between investors of the Parties, through research and combination of interests and association opportunities; and

(c) investment in specific economic sectors of interest to the other Party and its investors, in accordance with the express request made by this Party.

3. In order to stay informed and updated, the Parties will exchange information regarding:

(a) national legislation that, directly or indirectly, affects foreign investment including, among others, exchange and tax regimes;

(b) the behavior of foreign investment in their respective territories; and

(c) the investment opportunities referred to in paragraph 2, including the dissemination of available financial instruments that help increase investment in the territory of the Parties.

 

Section C: Settlement of Disputes between a Partyand an Investor of the other Party

 

Article 11.18: Aim

This Section establishes a mechanism for the solution of controversies that arise between a Party and an investor of the other Party derived from an alleged breach of an obligation established in Section B.

Article 11.19: Consultations and Negotiation

In the event of an investment dispute, the claimant and respondent must first attempt to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may include the use of non-mandatory third-party procedures such as conciliation and mediation.

Article 11.20: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot be resolved through consultation and negotiation:6

(a) the claimant may, at its own expense, submit a claim to arbitration under this Section alleging that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section B and that the claimant has suffered loss or damage by virtue of or as a result of such violation; and

(b) the claimant, on behalf of a company incorporated under the defendant's domestic law that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the claimant, may, in accordance with this Section, submit to arbitration a claim alleging that the defendant has breached an obligation under Section B and that the business has suffered loss or damage by reason of or as a result of that breach.

2. At least 90 days before a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section, the claimant shall give the respondent a written notice of its intention to submit the claim to arbitration ("notice of intent"). The notification will specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and, in the case that the claim is submitted on behalf of a company, the name, address and place of incorporation of the company;

(b) for each claim, the provision of this Agreement alleged to have been violated and any other applicable provision;

(c) the issues of fact and law on which each claim is based; and

(d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

3. As long as 6 months have elapsed since the events giving rise to the claim, the claimant may submit the claim referred to in paragraph 1 in accordance with:

(a) the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the respondent and the Party to the claimant are parties to the ICSID Convention;

(b) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the respondent or the Party of the claimant, but not both, are parties to the ICSID Convention; either

(c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

4. If a disputing investor chooses to submit a dispute of the type described in this Article to the courts or judicial or administrative tribunals of the disputing Party or to any other national or international dispute settlement procedures, that choice shall be final, and the disputing investor may not subsequently submit the dispute to conciliation or arbitration under this Article.

5. A claim shall be deemed to be submitted to arbitration under this Section when the claimant's notice or request for arbitration ("notice of arbitration"):

(a) referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention is received by the Secretary General;

(b) referred to in Article 2 of Annex C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules is received by the Secretary-General; either

(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together with the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, is received by the respondent.

A claim first raised after such notice of arbitration has been submitted shall be deemed to be submitted to arbitration under this Section on the date of its receipt under the applicable arbitration rules.

6. The arbitration rules applicable pursuant to paragraph 3, and in effect on the date of the claim or claims submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section, shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by this Section. Treaty.

7. The claimant shall deliver together with the notice of arbitration:

(a) the name of the arbitrator appointed by the claimant; either

(b) the written consent of the claimant for the Secretary General to appoint such an arbitrator.

Article 11.21: Consent of each of the Parties to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to submit a claim to arbitration, in accordance with the procedures established in this Agreement.

2. The consent referred to in paragraph 1 and the submission of the claim to arbitration in accordance with this Section, will comply with the requirements indicated in:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the parties to the dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention which requires a "written agreement"; and

(c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention which requires an "agreement".

Article 11.22: Conditions and Limitations to the Consent of the Parties

1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section if more than 3 years have elapsed from the date the claimant first had or should have known of the alleged violation pursuant to the provisions of Section Article 11.20.1 and knowledge that the claimant (for claims brought under Article 11.20.1(a)), or the company (for claims brought under Article 11.20.1(b)) suffered loss or damage .

2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration, in accordance with the procedures provided in this Agreement; and

(b) the notice of arbitration is accompanied by:

(i) the claimant's written waiver of claims submitted to arbitration under Article 11.20.1(a); and

(ii) the claimant's and company's written waivers of claims submitted to arbitration under Article 11.20.1(b);

of any right to initiate before any judicial or administrative court in accordance with the national legislation of any of the Parties, or other national and international dispute resolution procedures, any action with respect to any measure that is alleged to have constituted a violation of the referred to in Article 11.20.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims brought under Article 11.20.1(a)) and the claimant or company (for claims brought under Article 11.20.1(b)) ) may initiate or continue an action in which the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declaratory or extraordinary nature is requested, and that does not imply the payment of monetary damages before a judicial or administrative court of the defendant, provided that the action is interposed with the sole purpose of preserving the rights and interests of the plaintiff or the company during the waiting period for arbitration.

Article 11.23: Selection of Arbitrators

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the court will be made up of 3 arbitrators, one arbitrator designated by each of the disputing parties and the third, who will be the presiding arbitrator, will be designated by agreement of said parties.

2. The Secretary General shall appoint the arbitrators in arbitration proceedings in accordance with this Section.

3. When a tribunal is not established within 90 days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section, the Secretary General, at the request of a disputing party, shall, at his discretion, appoint , to the arbitrator or arbitrators who have not yet been appointed.

4. For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator on grounds other than nationality:

(a) the respondent accepts the appointment of each of the members of the tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

(b) the claimant referred to in Article 11.20.1(a) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or continue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only provided that the plaintiff consents in writing to the appointment of each of the members of the court; and

(c) the claimant referred to in Article 11.20.1(b) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or pursue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only provided that the plaintiff and the company express their consent in writing to the appointment of each of the members of the tribunal.

Article 11.24: Conduct of Arbitration

1. The disputing parties may agree on the legal seat where any arbitration is to be held in accordance with the arbitration rules applicable in accordance with Article 11.20.3. In the absence of agreement between the disputing parties, the court will determine said place in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place is in the territory of a State that is party to the New York Convention.

2. A non-disputing Party may submit oral or written submissions to the tribunal regarding the interpretation of this Agreement. For these purposes, the disputing parties and the court may include in the procedural calendar a term for the presentation of said communications.

3. The court will be empowered to accept and consider amicus curiae communications that come from a person or entity that is not a disputing party.

4. Notwithstanding the court's power to hear other objections as preliminary questions, a court shall hear and decide as a preliminary question any objection by a respondent that, as a matter of law, the claim submitted is not a claim that can be render an award favorable to the claimant in accordance with Article 11.30.

(a) Such objection shall be filed with the court as soon as possible after the constitution of the court and in no event later than the date the court sets for the respondent to file its answer to the complaint (or in the case of a modification of the notice of arbitration, the date that the court sets for the respondent to file its response to the modification).

(b) At the time an objection is received under this paragraph, the court shall suspend any proceedings on the merits of the dispute, establish a schedule for the consideration of the objection that will be consistent with any schedule that has been established for the consideration of any other preliminary issue, and will issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds thereof.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall presume as true the allegations of fact advanced by the claimant in support of any claim appearing in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereto), and , in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The court may also consider any other relevant fact that is not in dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection with respect to jurisdiction or any substantive argument, simply because it has or has not raised an objection under this paragraph, or makes use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5.

5. In the event that the defendant so requests, within 45 days after the constitution of the tribunal, the tribunal shall decide, in an expeditious manner, on an objection pursuant to paragraph 4 and any other objection in the sense that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the court. The court will suspend any action on the merits of the litigation and will issue, no later than 150 days after the date of the request, a decision or award on said objection, exposing the grounds thereof. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the court may take an additional 30 days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing has been requested, the court may, by showing extraordinary cause,

6. When the court decides a respondent's objection under paragraph 4 or 5, it may, if warranted, award the prevailing disputing party reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in filing the objection or oppose this. In determining whether such award is justified, the tribunal will consider whether the claimant's claim or respondent's objection was frivolous, and will give the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

7. The court may order a provisional measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or in order to ensure the full exercise of the jurisdiction of the court, including an order to preserve evidence in the possession or under the control of the court. control of a disputing party or to protect the jurisdiction of the court. The court may not order the seizure or prevent the application of a measure that is considered a violation mentioned in Article 11.20. For purposes of this paragraph, an order includes a recommendation.

Article 11.25: Transparency of Arbitration Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent, upon receipt of the following documents, shall deliver them as soon as possible to the non-disputing Parties and make them publicly available:

(a) the notice of intent;

(b) the notice of arbitration;

(c) the pleadings, statements of claim and explanatory notes submitted to the tribunal by a disputing party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Articles 11.24.2, 11.24.3 and 11.29;

(d) the minutes or transcripts of court hearings, when available; and

(e) the orders, awards and decisions of the court.

2. The court will hold hearings open to the public and will determine, in consultation with the disputing parties, the pertinent logistical arrangements. However, any disputing party that intends to use information classified as protected information in a hearing must so inform the court. The court will make appropriate arrangements to protect the information from disclosure.

3. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent to make available protected information or to provide or allow access to information that it may withhold pursuant to Article 20.3 (National Security) or Article 20.4 (Disclosure of Information). .

4. Any protected information that is submitted to the court must be protected from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) Subject to subparagraph (d), neither the disputing parties nor the tribunal shall disclose to any non-disputing Party or to the public any protected information where the disputing party providing the information clearly so designates it in accordance with subparagraph (b). );

(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes protected information will clearly designate that information at the time it is submitted to the court;

(c) a disputing party shall, at the same time that it files a document that contains information claimed to be protected information, file a redacted version of the document that does not contain the information. Only the redacted version will be provided to the non-disputing Parties and will be made public in accordance with paragraph 1; and

(d) the court will decide on any objection in relation to the designation of information claimed as protected information. If the tribunal determines that such information was not properly designated, the disputing party that submitted the information may:

(i) remove all or part of the presentation containing such information; either

(ii) agree to resubmit completed and redacted documents with corrected designations pursuant to the court's determination and subsection (c).

In any case, the other disputing party shall, when necessary, resubmit complete and redacted documents, which omit the information withdrawn pursuant to subsection (i) by the disputing party that first submitted the information or that they designate again. the information in a manner consistent with the designation made pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of the disputing party that first submitted the information.

5. Nothing in this Section requires the respondent to deny the public access to information that, in accordance with its national law, must be disclosed.

Article 11.26: Applicable Law

1. Subject to paragraph 2, a tribunal established pursuant to this Section shall decide disputes submitted to it in accordance with this Agreement and applicable provisions of international law.

2. A decision of the Administrative Commission declaring the interpretation of a provision of this Agreement, pursuant to Article 19.1.3(c) (Administrative Commission), shall be binding on a tribunal established pursuant to this Section, and any decision or award issued by the court must be compatible with that decision.

Article 11.27: Interpretation of the Annexes

1. When the defendant exposes as a defense that the measure alleged to be in violation is within the scope of application of Annex I or Annex II, at the request of the defendant, the court will request an interpretation of the matter from the Administrative Commission. Within 60 days following the delivery of the application, the Administrative Commission shall present in writing to the court any decision declaring its interpretation, in accordance with Article 19.1.3(c) (Administrative Commission).

2. The decision rendered by the Administrative Commission in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be binding on the court and any decision or award rendered by the court shall be consistent with that decision. If the Administrative Commission does not issue said decision within the term of 60 days, the court will decide on the matter.

Article 11.28: Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the court, at the request of a disputing party or on its own initiative, unless the disputing parties do not accept it, may designate one or more experts to report on in writing any matter of fact relating to environmental, health, safety or other scientific matters raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.

Article 11.29: Accumulation of Procedures

1. In cases where 2 or more separate claims have been submitted to arbitration under Article 11.20.1, and the claims contain a common issue of fact or law and arise out of the same facts or circumstances, either party The disputing party may seek to obtain a joining order, subject to the agreement of all disputing parties in respect of whom the joining order is sought or in accordance with the terms of paragraphs 2 through 10.

2. The disputing party that seeks to obtain a consolidation order in accordance with this Article shall deliver, in writing, a request to the Secretary General and to all the disputing parties in respect of which the consolidation order is sought and shall specify in the request what following:

(a) the name and address of all disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

3. Unless the Secretary General determines, within 45 days after receipt of a request pursuant to paragraph 2, that the request is manifestly unfounded, a tribunal shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought agree otherwise, the tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall be made up of 3 arbitrators:

(a) an arbitrator appointed by agreement of the claimants;

(b) an arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the presiding arbitrator appointed by the Secretary General, who shall not be a national of either Party.

5. If, within 60 days of the receipt by the Secretary General of the request made pursuant to paragraph 2, the respondent or claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator pursuant to paragraph 4, the Secretary General , at the request of any disputing party in respect of which the consolidation order is sought, will appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators that have not yet been appointed. If the respondent fails to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of the disputing Party and, if the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of a Party of the claimants.

6. In the event that the tribunal established pursuant to this Article has found that 2 or more claims have been submitted to arbitration pursuant to Article 11.20.1, which raise a common issue of fact or law, and which arise out of the same facts or circumstances, the court may, in the interest of achieving a fair and efficient resolution of the claims and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction, hear and jointly determine all or part of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction, hear and determine one or more claims, the determination of which it considers would contribute to the resolution of the others; either

(c) instruct a tribunal previously established in accordance with Article 11.23 to assume jurisdiction, hear and determine jointly, over all or part of the claims, provided that:

(i) that tribunal, at the request of any claimant who was not previously a disputing party before that tribunal, be reinstated with its original members, except that the arbitrator for the claimants shall be appointed in accordance with paragraphs 4(a) and 5 ; and

(ii) that court decides whether to repeat any previous hearing.

7. In the case where a tribunal has been established pursuant to this Article, a claimant who has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to Article 11.20.1, and whose name is not mentioned in a request made pursuant to paragraph 2, you may make a written request to the court for such plaintiff to be included in any order made pursuant to paragraph 6, specifying in the request:

(a) the name and address of the claimant;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

8. The claimant shall deliver a copy of his request to the Secretary General.

9. A tribunal established pursuant to Article 11.23 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, over which a tribunal established or directed pursuant to this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

10. At the request of a disputing party, a tribunal established pursuant to this Article may, pending its decision pursuant to paragraph 6, order that the proceedings of a tribunal established pursuant to Article 11.23 be adjourned, unless that last court has suspended its proceedings.

11. A tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall conduct proceedings in accordance with the provisions of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

Article 11.30: Awards

1. When a court renders a final award unfavorable to the defendant, the court may grant, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and applicable interest;

(b) restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the defendant may pay pecuniary damages, plus any applicable interest in lieu of restitution.

A court may also award costs and attorneys' fees in accordance with this Section and the applicable arbitration rules.

2. Subject to paragraph 1, when a claim is submitted to arbitration under Article 11.20.1(b):

(a) the award providing for the restitution of the property will provide that the restitution be granted to the company;

(b) the award awarding pecuniary damages and applicable interest will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company; and

(c) the award shall provide that it is made without prejudice to any right that any person may have to relief under applicable national law.

3. A court is not empowered to order punitive damages.

4. The award issued by a court will be binding only for the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.

5. Subject to paragraph 6 and the review procedure applicable to an interim award, the disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.

6. A disputing party may not request enforcement of the final award until:

(a) in the case of a final award rendered in accordance with the ICSID Convention:

(i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested its review or annulment; either

(ii) the review or annulment procedures have been completed; and

(b) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:

(i) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has initiated a proceeding to review, revoke or annul it; either

(ii) a court has dismissed or admitted a request for review, revocation or annulment of the award and this decision cannot be appealed.

7. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.

8. When the respondent breaches or does not comply with a final award, upon delivery of a request from the claimant's Party, the establishment of an Arbitration Panel shall be requested in accordance with Article 17.8 (Request for the Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

9. The requesting Party may invoke such procedures for a determination that non-compliance or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement and a recommendation in accordance with the procedures established in Article 17.15 (Preliminary Report ), in the sense that the Party complies with and abides by the final award.

10. A disputing party may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether the mechanism contemplated in paragraphs 8 and 9 has been applied.

11. For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or operation.

Article 11.31: Documents delivery

The delivery of the notification and other documents to a Party shall be made at the place designated by it in Annex 11.31.

 

 

Chapter XII

Cross-Border Trade in Services

Article 12.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following shall be understood as: cross-border trade in services: the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party, by a person of that Party, to a person of the other Party; either

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by an investor of the other Party, as defined in Article 11.1 (Definitions) or an investment by an investor of the other Party;

company: a company, as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application), and the branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the domestic law of that Party and having its domicile in the territory of that Party; and a branch located in the territory of a Party that carries out substantive business activities therein;

measures that a Party adopts or maintains: the measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) central, regional or local governments or authorities; and

(b) non-governmental institutions or organizations in the exercise of powers delegated to them, in accordance with national legislation, by the governments or authorities indicated in the preceding paragraph;

national: a physical or natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application), or a permanent resident of a Party;

person: a national or a company;

service provider of a Party: a person of a Party who intends to provide or provides a service;1

services: includes any service, except services provided in the exercise of governmental authority;

service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority: any service that is not supplied on commercial terms or in competition with one or more service providers;

specialized air services: any air service other than transport, such as aerial mapping, aerial surveying, aerial photography, forest fire control, firefighting, aerial advertising, glider towing, skydiving services, aerial construction services, air transportation of logs or logs, scenic flights, training flights, aerial inspection and surveillance and aerial spraying, and other aerial services related to agriculture, industry and inspection;

professional services: services, which for their supply require specialized higher education or equivalent training or experience and the exercise of which is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft ; and

transfers: remittances and international payments.

Article 12.2: Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains on cross-border trade in services carried out by service providers of the other Party, including those relating to:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a service;

(b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

(c) access to and use of distribution systems, transportation or telecommunication networks and services related to the provision of a service;

(d) the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; and

(e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.

2. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) air services, including national and international air transport, with and without a fixed itinerary, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;

(ii) specialized air services; and

(iii) computerized reservation systems;

(b) financial services;

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance;

(d) services provided in the exercise of governmental authority such as, and not limited to, enforcement of laws relating to rehabilitation services, income security or insurance, social security or insurance, the social welfare, public education, public training, health and care for children; and

(e) public procurement.

3. This Chapter does not impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor does it confer any right on that national, with respect to said access or employment nor will it apply to measures relating to citizenship or residence on a permanent basis.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry or temporary stay of persons of the other Party in its territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of its borders and guarantee the orderly movement of persons through from the same.2

5. Articles 12.6 and 12.9 shall apply to the measures of a Party that affect the supply of a service in its territory by an investment as defined in Article 11.1 (Definitions).3

6. For the purposes of this Treaty, the extraction of natural resources, the generation of electricity, the refining of crude oil and its derivatives, hunting and fishing will not be considered services.

Article 12.3: Most Favored Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant to the services and service providers of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to the services and service providers of any State that is not a Party.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from conferring advantages on adjacent States, in order to facilitate exchanges, limited to contiguous border areas, of services that are produced or consumed locally.

Article 12.4: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant the other Party's services and service providers treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own services and service providers.

2. A Party may comply with the provisions of paragraph 1 by granting to the services and service providers of the other Party, a formally identical treatment or a formally different treatment to the one that it grants to its similar services and similar service providers.

3. Formally identical treatment or formally different treatment shall be considered less favorable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favor of the services or service providers of the Party, in comparison with similar services or service providers of the Party. other part.

4. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require either Party to compensate for any intrinsic competitive disadvantages resulting from the foreign nature of the services or of the relevant service providers.

5. Treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1 means, with respect to a regional-level government, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded by that regional-level government to like services and service providers similar of the Party to which they belong.

Article 12.5: Local presence

Neither Party shall require a service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of business, or to reside in its territory as a condition for the cross-border provision of a service.

Article 12.6: Market Access

No Party shall adopt or maintain, on the basis of a regional subdivision or its entire territory, measures that:

(a) impose limitations on:

(i) the number of service providers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies or exclusive service providers or through the requirement of an economic needs test;

(ii) the total value of assets or service transactions in the form of numerical quotas or by requiring an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of service operations or the total amount of service production, expressed in designated numerical units, in the form of quotas or through the requirement of an economic needs test;4

(iv) the total number of persons that can be employed in a certain service sector or that a service provider can employ and who are necessary for the provision of a specific service and are directly related to it, in the form of numerical quotas or through the requirement of an economic needs test; either

(b) restrict or prescribe the specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service provider may provide a service.

Article 12.7: Reservations and Exceptions

1. Articles 12.3, 12.4, 12.5 and 12.6 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party in:

(i) the central level government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii) a regional level government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; either

(iii) a government at the local level;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subsection (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subsection (a), provided that said modification does not diminish the conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with articles 12.3, 12.4, 12.5 and 12.6.

2. Articles 12.3, 12.4, 12.5 and 12.6 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. Parties are not required to list government measures at the local level.

Article 12.8: Transparency in the Development and Application of Regulations

In addition to what is established in Chapter XVIII (Transparency):

(a) the Parties shall establish or maintain adequate mechanisms to respond to queries from interested persons regarding their regulations relating to the matters covered by this Chapter;

(b) when adopting final regulations relating to the subject matter of this Chapter, to the extent possible, a Party shall provide the other Party and interested persons of the other Party a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed regulations . In addition, that Party shall respond in writing, to the extent possible, including upon request, to the substantive comments received; and

(c) to the extent possible, the Parties will allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of final regulations and the date they enter into force.

Article 12.9: National Regulation

1. When a Party requires authorization for the provision of a service, the competent authorities of that Party shall, within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application that is considered complete in accordance with its laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the authorization. decision regarding your application. At the request of such an applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information regarding the status of the application. This obligation shall not apply to authorization requirements that fall within the scope of Article 12.7.2.

2. In order to ensure that measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, each Party shall endeavor to ensure, as appropriate for each specific sector, that any of those measures that it adopts or maintains:

(a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability to provide the service;

(b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, do not in themselves constitute a restriction on the provision of the service.

3. If the results of the negotiations related to GATS Article VI:4 (or the result of any similar negotiation, conducted in another multilateral forum in which the Parties participate) enter into force for each Party, this Article shall be modified, as appropriate, after consultations between the Parties, so that those results are in force in accordance with this Agreement. The Parties shall make their best efforts to coordinate among themselves in such negotiations.

Article 12.10: Mutual Recognition

1. For the purposes of compliance, in whole or in part, with its standards or criteria for the authorization or certification of service providers or the granting of licenses to them, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, a Party may recognize the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in a certain State, including the other Party or a State that is not a Party. This recognition, which may be carried out through harmonization or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or convention with the State in question or may be granted autonomously.

2. When a Party recognizes, autonomously or through an agreement or agreement, the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the territory of the other Party or of a State that is not a Party, no provision of Article 12.3 shall be construed to require that the Party grant such recognition to education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certificates granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. A Party that is a party to an existing or future agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party, if that other Party is interested, to negotiate its accession to that agreement or agreement or to negotiate with it another comparable one. When a Party grants recognition autonomously, it shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunities to demonstrate that education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained or requirements fulfilled in the territory of that other Party should be recognized.

4. No Party shall grant recognition in a way that constitutes a means of discrimination between States in the application of their standards or criteria for the authorization or certification of service providers or the granting of licenses to them, or a disguised restriction on trade. of services.

5. Each Party, within one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, shall examine the possibility of eliminating any nationality or permanent residence requirement indicated in its list in Annex I that it maintains for the recognition of titles to professional service providers of the other Party. Where a Party is unable to remove these requirements with respect to a particular sector, the other Party may, in the same sector and for as long as the non-compliant Party maintains its requirement, maintain, as the sole remedy, a requirement equivalent.

6. Annex 12.10 establishes procedures for the recognition of education, experience, standards and requirements that govern professional service providers.

Article 12.11: Transfers and Payments

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers and payments related to the cross-border provision of services to be made freely and without delay to and from its territory.

2. Each Party shall allow such transfers and payments related to the cross-border provision of services to be made in a freely usable currency at the exchange rate prevailing in the market at the time of the transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent the making of a transfer or payment, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal offences;

(e) guarantee of compliance with orders or rulings in judicial or administrative proceedings; either

(f) social security, public retirement or mandatory savings programs.

Article 12.12: Denial of Benefits

Subject to prior notice and consultation, a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) a service provider of the other Party, if the service provider is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party State and such enterprise does not maintain substantive business operations in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) a service provider of the other Party, if the service provider is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of the denying Party and such enterprise does not maintain substantive business operations in the territory of the other Party.

Article 12.13: Technical Cooperation

The Parties shall establish, no later than one year after the entry into force of this Agreement, a system to provide service providers with information regarding their markets in relation to:

(a) the commercial and technical aspects of the provision of services;

(b) the possibility of obtaining technology in terms of services; and

(c) all those aspects that the Administrative Commission agrees on regarding services.

 

 

Chapter XIII

Telecommunications services 1

Article 13.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

regulatory authority: the body or bodies, in the telecommunications services sector, in charge of any of the regulatory tasks assigned in accordance with the national legislation of each Party;

essential telecommunications facilities: facilities in a publicly available telecommunications network or service that:

(a) are supplied exclusively or predominantly by a single supplier or by a limited number of suppliers; and

(b) whose replacement with a view to supplying a service is not economically or technically feasible;

interconnection: the connection between public telecommunications networks of providers providing publicly available telecommunications services, for the purpose of enabling users of one provider to communicate with users of another provider and to access the publicly available telecommunications services provided by another provider;

major supplier2 in the telecommunications sector:a provider of publicly available telecommunications services, which has the ability to materially affect the terms of participation (with respect to price and supply/supply) in a relevant market for publicly available telecommunications services, as a result of the control of essential facilities or the use of its position in the market;

public telecommunications network: the telecommunications network through which publicly available telecommunications services are commercially operated. The network does not include the telecommunications terminal equipment of the users, nor the private telecommunications networks that are beyond the terminal connection point;

telecommunications services: all services consisting of the transmission and reception of signals through telecommunications networks, not including the economic activity consisting of the provision of content that requires telecommunications networks or services for its transport; and

telecommunication services available to the public: any telecommunication service that a Party authorizes to be offered to the general public, in accordance with its national legislation.

Article 13.2: Scope

1. This Chapter establishes the regulatory principles applicable to telecommunications services available to the public, committed in accordance with chapters XI (Investment) and XII (Cross-Border Trade in Services).

2. Except to ensure that persons operating broadcast stations3 and cable distribution have continued access to and use of telecommunication services directed to the public in accordance with national law, this Chapter does not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to cable broadcasting or distribution radio or television programming.

3. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, this Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 13.3: Regulatory Authority

1. The regulatory authority will be legally distinct and functionally independent from any telecommunications service provider.

2. Each Party shall endeavor to ensure that its regulatory authority has adequate resources to carry out its functions.

3. Decisions and procedures applied by a regulatory authority shall be impartial with respect to all market participants.

4. A provider authorized to provide telecommunications services available to the public, affected by the decision of a regulatory authority of a Party, shall have the right, in accordance with the respective national legislation, to appeal said decision before that regulatory authority or other competent body. independent of the providers authorized to provide telecommunications services available to the public involved. When the competent body is not of a judicial nature, it must justify and motivate the appealed decisions in writing. These decisions will also be subject to review by an impartial and independent judicial authority.

5. The decisions made by said competent bodies will be executed in accordance with the applicable legal procedures. While the outcome of said legal proceedings is pending, the decision of the regulatory authority will stand, unless the competent body or applicable national legislation determines otherwise.

Article 13.4: Authorization to Provide Telecommunications Services Available to the Public4

1. The provision of publicly available telecommunications services shall be authorized in accordance with the procedures established by the national legislation of the authorizing Party.

2. A specific authorization may be required to deal with number and frequency assignment matters, in accordance with the national legislation of the authorizing Party. The terms and conditions for such specific authorizations shall be made publicly available.

3. When a Party requires an authorization from a provider of publicly available telecommunications services, the Party shall make available to the public:

(a) the applicable authorization criteria, terms and conditions; and

(b) the period of time, which is required in accordance with its national legislation to make a decision regarding the application for an authorization.

4. In accordance with applicable national law, each Party shall ensure that, upon request, an applicant receives well-founded and motivated reasons for denying an authorization.

5. The applicant for an authorization may appeal to the regulatory authority or other competent body, in accordance with the respective national legislation, in the event that an authorization is denied.

Article 13.5: Competition Safeguards on Major Suppliers

The Parties shall introduce or maintain appropriate measures in order to prevent those providers authorized to provide publicly available telecommunications services that, individually or together, are a major provider, use or continue to use anti-competitive practices. These anti-competitive practices could include, in particular:

(a) carry out anti-competitive cross-subsidies;

(b) use information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive results; and

(c) failure to make available to other publicly available telecommunications service providers in a timely manner technical information on essential facilities and commercially relevant information that is necessary for them to provide these services5 .

Article 13.6: Interconnection6

1. Any provider authorized to provide publicly available telecommunications services shall have the right to negotiate interconnection with other providers of publicly available telecommunications networks and services. In principle, interconnection should be agreed on the basis of a commercial negotiation between the involved providers of publicly available telecommunications services, without prejudice to the powers of the regulatory authority to intervene in accordance with the respective national legislation.

2. Publicly available telecommunications service providers that acquire information from other publicly available telecommunications service providers during the process of negotiating interconnection agreements shall be obliged to use such information solely for the purpose for which it was provided. and will respect at all times the confidentiality of the information transmitted or stored.

3. Telecommunications service providers available to the public must register with the regulatory authority all interconnection agreements that they have negotiated, in the manner and when required by national legislation.

4. The interconnection with the important providers of telecommunications services available to the public will be ensured at mobile commercial points or rural providers of telecommunications services. For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent a Party from imposing the requirements set forth in this Article on providers of commercial mobile public telecommunications network services where technically feasible and in accordance with the respective national legislation. . This interconnection will be facilitated:

(a) under non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications) and rates, and will be provided in a timely manner, on cost-based terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications) and rates7 that are transparent and reasonable, take into account economic feasibility and are sufficiently disaggregated so that the provider of publicly available telecommunications services does not have to pay for components or facilities of the public telecommunications network that it does not need for the provision of the services telecommunication;

(b) of a quality not inferior to that provided for its own similar telecommunications services or for similar telecommunications services of unaffiliated publicly available telecommunications service providers or their affiliates, subsidiaries or other affiliated companies; and

(c) in accordance with the national legislation of each Party, upon request at points additional to the termination points of the public telecommunications network offered to the majority of users, subject to charges that reflect the cost of construction of the additional facilities necessary.

5. The procedures applicable to the interconnection with important providers of telecommunications services must be made available to the public in accordance with the applicable national legislation.

6. Major providers of telecommunications services will make available to the public their current interconnection agreements or their reference interconnection offers, or both, in accordance with the respective national legislation.

Article 13.7: Scarce Resources

1. Procedures for the allocation and use of scarce resources, including frequencies, numbers, and rights-of-way, will be administered in an objective, timely, transparent, and non-discriminatory manner, in accordance with national law.

2. The current status of the assigned frequency bands will be made available to the public, but it is not necessary to identify in detail the frequencies assigned to specific official uses.

Article 13.8: Universal Service

1. Each Party, in accordance with its national legislation, has the right to define the type of universal service obligations that it wishes to maintain or establish.

2. Said obligations will not be considered anti-competitive per se, as long as they are administered in a transparent, objective and non-discriminatory manner. In addition, the administration of such obligations shall be neutral with respect to competition and shall not be more burdensome than necessary for the type of universal service defined by the Party.

3. Telecommunications service providers available to the public may be eligible to ensure universal service. The designation will be made through efficient, transparent and non-discriminatory mechanisms, in accordance with the respective national legislation.

Article 13.9: Transparency

In addition to the provisions of Article 13.4.3 and in accordance with its national legislation, each Party shall ensure that measures relating to publicly available telecommunications services are made available to the public, including measures relating to:

(a) the bodies responsible for the preparation, modification and adoption of measures related to standardization that affect access and use; and

(b) the conditions for the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment to public telecommunications networks.

Article 13.10: Confidentiality of information

Each Party, in accordance with its national legislation, shall ensure the confidentiality of telecommunications and associated traffic data, including their content, that are carried out through a public telecommunications network and publicly available telecommunications services. , subject to the requirement that the measures are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or disguised discrimination against trade in telecommunications services.

Article 13.11: Disputes Between Providers

In the event of a dispute that arises between providers of public telecommunications networks or publicly available telecommunications services in relation to the rights and obligations arising from articles 13.5 and 13.6, the national regulatory authority involved or another competent authority will issue, at the request of any provider and in accordance with the procedures established in national legislation, a binding decision to resolve the dispute in the shortest possible time.

 

 

Chapter XIV

Temporary Entry for Business Persons

 

Article 14.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

business activities: those legitimate activities of a commercial nature created and operated in order to obtain profit in the market. It does not include the possibility of obtaining employment, nor salary or remuneration from a labor source in the territory of a Party;

labor certification: the procedure carried out by the competent administrative authority, aimed at determining whether a foreign individual from a Party who intends to temporarily enter the territory of the other Party, displaces national labor in the same labor branch or substantially impairs working conditions Of the same;

temporary entry: the entry, stay and stay of a business person of one Party to the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence, in accordance with the national legislation of the latter;

immigration measure: any immigration measure, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision or administrative provision or requirement;

business person: the national of a Party who is engaged in trade in goods or provision of services, or in investment activities; and

recurring practice: a practice carried out by the migration authorities of a Party on a repetitive basis, during a representative period prior to and immediately following its execution.

Article 14.2: General principles

The provisions of this Chapter reflect the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with their national laws, regulations and provisions, and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose. Likewise, they reflect the need to guarantee the security of the borders, to protect the work of their nationals and permanent employment in their respective territories.

Article 14.3: Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter applies to measures affecting the temporary entry of nationals of one Party into the territory of the other Party for business purposes.

2. This Chapter does not apply to measures affecting nationals seeking access to the labor market of the Parties, nor to measures related to nationality, citizenship or residence, or employment on a permanent basis.

3. This Chapter shall not prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry of nationals of the other Party into its territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity and ensure the orderly movement of people across its borders, guaranteeing that those measures are not applied in such a way that they nullify or impair the benefits received from the other Party, under the terms of the categories of business persons in Annex 14.3. The mere fact of requiring a visa for individuals shall not be considered as nullifying or impairing the provisions established in Chapters XI (Investment) and XII (Cross-Border Trade in Services), in accordance with this Agreement.

Article 14.4: Temporary Entry Authorization

1. Pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, including those contained in Annex 14.3, each Party shall authorize temporary entry to business persons who comply with the immigration measures applicable to temporary entry and with other applicable measures, as well as those relating to public health and safety, and national security.

2. A Party may deny the issuance of a migration document that authorizes activity or employment to a business person, in accordance with its national legislation, when its temporary entry adversely affects:

(a) the solution of any labor dispute that exists in the place where they are employed or will be employed; either

(b) the employment of any person involved in that dispute.

3. When a Party denies the issuance of an immigration document that authorizes activity or employment, in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party:

(a) inform the affected business person of the reasons for the refusal in writing; and

(b) at the request of the Party whose national is refused entry, notify the Party in writing and within a reasonable time, the reasons for the refusal.

4. Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees caused by the processing of applications for temporary entry to the approximate cost of the services rendered.

5. The temporary entry of a business person does not authorize the professional exercise, nor does it replace the requirements required for the exercise of a profession or activity, in accordance with the specific national legislation in force in the territory of the Party that authorizes the temporary entry.

Article 14.5: Information Availability

1. In addition to what is established in Article 18.3 (Publication), each Party:

(a) provide the other Party with the information that allows it to know the measures related to this Chapter; and

(b) no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish, and make publicly available, in physical or electronic form, explanatory material in a consolidated document relating to the requirements for temporary entry of accordance with this Chapter.

2. Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to the other Party, upon request and in accordance with its national legislation, the information related to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this Chapter, to persons of the other Party to who have been issued immigration documentation. This compilation will include information for each authorized category, contemplated in Annex 14.3.

Article 14.6: Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons

1. The Parties establish the Committee for the Temporary Entry of Business Persons. The Committee will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 14.6, and will assist the Administrative Commission in the performance of its functions.

2. The Committee will establish, if it considers it pertinent, its rules of procedure.

3. The meetings of the Committee will be held at the request of the Administrative Commission, the Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement or at the request of any of the Parties to deal with matters of interest.

4. The agreements of the Committee must be adopted by consensus and reported to the corresponding instances.

5. The Committee shall initially meet no later than 6 months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Committee meetings may be held in person or through any technological means. When the meetings are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Committee may meet to discuss bilateral matters of interest to one or more Parties of Central America and Mexico, provided that the other Parties are notified sufficiently in advance so that, if applicable, they may participate in the meeting. The agreements derived from the meeting will be adopted by consensus between the Parties on which the bilateral matter is concerned and will take effect only with respect to these.

7. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the application and administration of this Chapter;

(b) formulate pertinent recommendations to the Administrative Commission regarding issues within its competence;

(c) consider the development of measures that further facilitate the temporary entry of business persons, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;

(d) examine the establishment of procedures for the exchange of information on the measures that affect the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with this Chapter;

(e) examine proposals for modifications or additions to this Chapter; and

(f) any other matter instructed by the Administrative Commission.

Article 14.7: Dispute Resolution

1. The Parties may not request that the Administrative Commission meet in accordance with Article 17.7 (Intervention of the Administrative Commission - Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation), regarding a refusal of temporary entry authorization in accordance with this Chapter, except that:

(a) the matter concerns a recurring practice; and

(b) the affected business person has exhausted, in accordance with applicable national laws, regulations and provisions, the administrative remedies available to him/her with respect to that particular matter.

2. The remedies mentioned in paragraph 1(b) shall be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution within a period of 12 months from the start of the administrative procedure and the resolution has not been delayed for imputable reasons. to the affected business person.

 

 

Chapter XV

Electronic Commerce

 

Article 15.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

carrier medium: any physical device or object capable of storing digital codes that form a digital product by any method now known or later developed, and from which a digital product can be directly or indirectly perceived, reproduced, or communicated, and includes an optical medium , diskettes and magnetic tapes;

electronic means: the use of computerized processing;

digital products: computer programs, text, video, images, sound recordings, and other products that are digitally encoded 1 ; and

electronic transmission or electronically transmitted: the transfer of digital products using any electromagnetic or photonic means.

Article 15.2: General disposition

1. The Parties recognize the economic growth and opportunity that electronic commerce creates, the importance of avoiding obstacles to its use and development, and the applicability of WTO provisions to measures affecting electronic commerce.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from imposing internal taxes, directly or indirectly, on digital products, provided they are imposed in a manner consistent with this Agreement.

Article 15.3: Electronic Supply of Services

For greater certainty, the Parties affirm that the measures that affect the supply of a service using electronic means are within the scope of application of the obligations contained in the relevant provisions of chapters XI (Investment) and XII (Cross-Border Trade in Services). , subject to any exception or non-conforming measure established in this Agreement, which are applicable to said obligations.

Article 15.4: Digital Products

1. No Party shall impose customs duties related to the import or export of digital products by electronic transmission.

2. For the purposes of determining the applicable customs duties, each Party shall determine the customs value of an imported carrier medium, which incorporates a digital product based solely on the cost or value of the carrier medium, regardless of the cost or value of the digital product stored in the carrier medium.

3. Neither Party shall grant less favorable treatment to digital products transmitted electronically:

(a) that are created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned, or first made available on commercial terms in the territory of the other Party, than that which grants to the same or similar digital products transmitted electronically that are created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted, commissioned or first made available on commercial terms in your territory2 ; either

(b) whose author, performer, producer, manager, or distributor is a person of the other Party that the treatment granted to the same or similar digital products transmitted electronically whose author, performer, producer, manager, or distributor is a person of his territory.3

4. Neither Party shall grant less favorable treatment to digital products transmitted electronically:

(a) that are created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned, or first made available on commercial terms in the territory of the other Party, than that which grants to the same or similar digital products transmitted electronically that are created, produced, published, stored, transmitted, contracted for, commissioned, or made available for the first time under commercial conditions in the territory of a non-Party State; either

(b) whose author, interpreter, producer, manager, or distributor, is a person of the other Party than the one that grants the same or similar digital products transmitted electronically whose author, performer, producer, manager, or distributor, is a person of a State not Party.

5. Paragraphs 3 and 4 do not apply to any non-conforming measure referred to in Articles 11.9 (Reservations and Exceptions) or 12.7 (Reservations and Exceptions).

Article 15.5: Cooperation

The Parties recognize the importance of implementing cooperation programs that promote electronic commerce, which will mainly focus on the following activities:

(a) work together to overcome the obstacles that small and medium-sized businesses face when using electronic commerce;

(b) share information and experiences on laws, regulations and programs in the field of electronic commerce, including those related to data privacy, consumer confidence in electronic commerce, cyber security, electronic signature, intellectual property rights and electronic government;

(c) make their best efforts to work together in order to establish the mechanisms and requirements so that digital certificates issued by certification service providers authorized or accredited by one Party are accepted in the other Party, in accordance with its national legislation. ;

(d) work to maintain cross-border flows of information as an essential element in promoting a dynamic environment for electronic commerce; and

(e) actively participate in hemispheric and multilateral forums to promote the development of electronic commerce.

Article 15.6: Transparency

Each Party shall publish or otherwise make available to the public its laws, regulations, and other measures of general application that relate to electronic commerce.

 

 

Chapter XVI

Intellectual property

Section A: General Provisions and Basic Principles

 

Article 16.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

Lisbon Agreement: the Lisbon Agreement Concerning the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration (1979);

Rome Convention: the International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations (1961);

Berne Convention: the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1971);

Brussels Convention: the Convention on the Distribution of Program-Carrying Signals Transmitted by Satellite (1974);

Geneva Convention: the Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against Unauthorized Duplication of Their Phonograms (1971);

Paris Convention: the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1967);

intellectual property rights: includes all categories of intellectual property that are protected by this Chapter, in the terms indicated therein;

Trademark: any sign or combination of signs that makes it possible to distinguish the goods or services of one person from those of another, since these are considered sufficiently distinctive or capable of identifying the products or services to which they are applied, compared to those of the same kind or class. . The marks will include the collective ones;

nationals of the other Party: with respect to the relevant intellectual property right, persons who would meet the eligibility criteria for protection under the TRIPS Agreement; and

encrypted program-carrying satellite signal: one that is transmitted in a form by which auditory or visual characteristics, or both, are modified or altered to prevent reception of the program carried in that signal by persons without the equipment for which it is designed to remove the effects of such modification or alteration.

Article 16.2: Protection of Intellectual Property Rights

1. Each Party shall grant in its territory to the nationals of the other Party adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights and shall ensure that the measures designed to enforce those rights do not become, in turn, obstacles to the legitimate trade.

2. Each Party may grant in its national legislation, a broader protection to intellectual property rights than that required in this Chapter, provided that such protection does not contravene the provisions of the same.

3. The Parties may freely establish the appropriate method to apply the provisions of this Chapter, within the framework of their own legal system and practice.

Article 16.3: Provisions on the Matter

In order to grant adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights, the Parties incorporate their rights and obligations established in the following international agreements, without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter:

(a) TRIPS Agreement;

(b) Lisbon Agreement;1

(c) Rome Convention;

(d) Berne Convention;

(e) Brussels Convention;

(f) Geneva Convention;

(g) Paris Convention;

(h) Patent Cooperation Treaty (2001);

(i) WIPO Copyright Treaty (1996); and

(j) WIPO Treaty on Performances and Phonograms (1996).

Article 16.4: National Treatment and Most Favored Nation

Subject to the exceptions and exemptions provided for in Articles 3, 4 and 5 of the TRIPS Agreement, each Party shall grant to nationals of the other Party:

(a) treatment no less favorable than that accorded to its own nationals with respect to protection2 of intellectual property; and

(b) any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity that it grants to nationals of any other State with respect to the protection of intellectual property.

Article 16.5: Control of Abusive or Anti-Competitive Practices and Conditions

Provided that they are compatible with the provisions of this Chapter, each Party may apply appropriate measures to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by their holders or the use of practices that unjustifiably limit trade or are detrimental to international transfers. of technology.

Article 16.6: Technical Cooperation and Technology Transfer

1. The Parties recognize the importance of technical cooperation that facilitates the application of the provisions of this Chapter and ensures effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights, for which the Parties will cooperate on the basis of equity and reciprocal benefit, in the terms and conditions that their competent authorities mutually agree. This cooperation may include the following:

(a) development of activities to create public awareness about the importance of intellectual property protection;

(b) seminars, workshops, meetings, visits and exchanges of experts; and

(c) implementation of joint projects and programs.

2. The implementation of this Article shall be subject to the availability of economic resources and the applicable laws and regulations of each Party.

3. The costs of cooperative activities in accordance with this Article shall be borne in the manner that the Parties mutually agree.

4. The competent authorities in matters of intellectual property will be in charge of establishing the details and procedures of the cooperation activities in accordance with this Article.

5. The Parties will cooperate with a view to eliminating trade in goods that infringe intellectual property rights. For these purposes, the Parties will establish and make known the contact points established in their governments, dedicated to exchanging information related to the trade of these goods.

 

Section B: Copyright and Related Rights

 

Article 16.7: Protection of Copyright and Related Rights

1. Each Party shall protect the moral and economic rights of the authors of the works included in Article 2 of the Berne Convention, including any other that incorporates an original expression in the sense that this term is conferred by that Convention, such as television programs. computing, or the compilations of data that for reasons of selection, compendium, arrangement or disposition of its content constitute creations of an intellectual nature.

2. The protection conferred on data compilations shall not extend to the data or materials themselves, nor shall it be granted to the detriment of any copyright that exists in such data or materials.

3. Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights:

(a) any person who acquires or holds economic rights may, freely and separately, transfer them by contract for purposes of exploitation and enjoyment by the assignee; and

(b) any person who acquires and holds those economic rights by virtue of a contract, including employment contracts that imply the creation of any type of work and production of phonograms, has the capacity to exercise those rights in his own name and to enjoy fully benefit from such rights.

Article 16.8: Interpreter artists or executants

The rights that have not been expressly transferred by the interpreter or performer shall be understood as reserved in favor of him, except in the cases provided for in the national legislation of each Party.

Article 16.9: Broadcasting Organizations

Each Party shall grant broadcasters the right to authorize or prohibit the reception of their broadcasts in connection with commercial activities.

Article 16.10: Protection of Encrypted Satellite Signals Carrying Programs

Each Party shall establish as a cause of civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with its national legislation, the reception in connection with commercial activities, or the subsequent distribution of an encrypted satellite signal carrying programs, which has been received without authorization of the legitimate distributor of the signal.

 

Section C: Trademarks

 

Article 16.11: Well-Known Trademarks

1. It shall be understood that a trademark is well-known when a certain sector of the public or business circles of the Party in which the reputation is claimed, knows the trademark as a result of commercial or promotional activities carried out by a person who uses that trademark. brand in relation to its products or services. In order to demonstrate the notoriety of the brand, all the means of proof admitted in the Party in question may be used.

2. The Parties will not register as a trademark those signs that are the same or similar to a well-known trademark that, to be applied to any merchandise or service, their use could indicate a connection with the owner of the well-known trademark, or harm the interests of the owner. of the well-known mark.

Article 16.12: Duration of Protection

The initial registration of a trademark will last 10 years from the date of filing the application or the date of its registration, according to the national legislation of each Party, and may be renewed indefinitely for successive periods of 10 years. , provided the conditions for renewal are met.

Article 16.13: Usage Requirement

1. The registration of a trademark may be declared expired or canceled due to lack of use only after an uninterrupted period of non-use of 3 years has elapsed, unless the owner of the trademark demonstrates valid reasons based on the existence of obstacles to use. Valid reasons for non-use will be recognized as circumstances that arise, regardless of the will of the trademark holder and that constitute an obstacle to its use, such as import restrictions or other government requirements applicable to goods or branded services.

2. It shall be understood that a trademark is in use when the goods or services that it distinguishes have been placed on the market or are available on the market, in the quantity and in the manner that normally corresponds, taking into account the nature of the merchandise or services and the modalities under which their commercialization is carried out.

 

Section D: Patents

 

Article 16.14: Patentable Subject Matter

In relation to Article 27.3(b) of the TRIPS Agreement, the Parties shall grant protection to all plant varieties through patents, an effective sui generis system or a combination thereof, in accordance with the provisions of their national legislation. To the extent that it is compatible with its national legislation, without implying any adherence commitment, each Party will consider complying with the current substantive provisions of the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV 1991).

 

Section E: Utility Models

 

Article 16.15: Protection of Utility Models

Each Party shall protect utility models in accordance with its national legislation.

 

Section F: Industrial Designs

 

Article 16.16: Conditions and Duration of Protection

1. Each Party shall grant protection to independently created industrial designs, which are new or original. Each Party may establish that designs are not considered new or original if they do not differ significantly from known designs or from combinations of characteristics of known designs. Each Party may establish that this protection does not extend to designs based essentially on functional or technical considerations.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the requirements for obtaining industrial design protection, particularly as it relates to any cost, examination, or publication, do not unreasonably hinder a person's opportunity to apply for and obtain such protection. The Parties shall be free to fulfill this obligation through their industrial design legislation or through their copyright legislation.

3. Each Party shall grant a period of protection equivalent to at least 10 years, which may be counted from the date of filing the application.

Article 16.17: Rights Conferred

1. The owner of a protected industrial design shall have the right to prevent third parties without their consent from manufacturing, selling or importing items that display or incorporate a protected design or fundamentally a copy of it, when these acts are carried out for commercial purposes.

2. The Parties may provide limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of protected industrial designs, nor cause unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design, taking into account the legitimate interests of third parties.

 

Section G: Undisclosed Information

 

Article 16.18: Protection of Undisclosed Information

1. To grant protection, each Party may require that a trade secret be recorded in documents, electronic or magnetic media, optical discs, microfilms, films or other similar instruments.

2. No Party may limit the duration of protection for industrial or commercial secrets, as long as the conditions described in paragraph 2 of Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement exist.

3. No Party shall discourage or prevent the voluntary licensing of trade or trade secrets by imposing excessive or discriminatory conditions on such licences, or conditions that dilute the value of trade or trade secrets.

 

Section H: Geographical Indications and Appellations of Origin

 

Article 16.19: Protection of Geographical Indications and Appellations of Origin

1. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of the TRIPS Agreement, the names that appear in Annex 16.19(a) are geographical indications and appellations of origin that are protected in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala , Honduras or Nicaragua; and the names that appear in Annex 16.19(b) are geographical indications and appellations of origin that are protected in Mexico.

2. Any Party that grants protection to the geographical indications and appellations of origin of Annexes 16.19(a) and 16.19(b) through the Lisbon Agreement shall maintain that protection. Said geographical indications and appellations of origin will also enjoy the protection provided for in Article 16.20.3 The protection granted in accordance with this paragraph shall extend to geographical indications and appellations of origin that, after the entry into force of this Agreement, are protected through the Lisbon Agreement by the Parties or in accordance with the legislation and national procedures of the other Party.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 4 and Article 16.20.6, any Party that does not grant protection to geographical indications and appellations of origin through the Lisbon Agreement, shall protect those names as geographical indications or appellations of origin. in its territory, subject to the requirements and procedures provided for in its national legislation. Once these procedures are concluded, the geographical indications or appellations of origin will have the protection granted in Article 16.20.

4. Until the procedures referred to in paragraph 3 are completed, the Parties shall take the necessary measures to prevent the registration of distinctive signs that may cause confusion as to their origin and any other act that may be considered unfair competition, which impair the rights of the holders of the geographical indications and appellations of origin contained in Annex 16.19(b), in the territory of the Party concerned.

5. Mexico will grant the geographical indications and appellations of origin listed in Annex 16.19(a), the protection provided for in Article 16.20.

6. Until its national legislation on the subject of protection of foreign geographical indications enters into force, Mexico will grant the protection established in Article 16.20 to new geographical indications, provided that it is demonstrated that they are protected in accordance with the national legislation of the interested Party and there are no precedents of contradictory brands in their databases. Once said procedures are concluded, Mexico will notify the interested Party.

Article 16.20: Content of the Protection of Geographical Indications and Appellations of Origin

1. Each Party shall protect geographical indications and appellations of origin, under the terms of its national legislation.

2. In relation to geographical indications and appellations of origin, each Party shall establish the legal means so that interested persons can prevent:

(a) the use of any means which, in the description or presentation of the product, indicates or suggests that the product in question comes from a territory, region or locality other than the true place of origin, so as to induce the public to error as to the geographical origin of the product; and

(b) any other use that constitutes an act of unfair competition, within the meaning of Article 10 bis of the Paris Convention.

3. The Parties, ex officio, if their national legislation allows it, or at the request of an interested party, will deny or invalidate the registration of a trademark that contains or consists of a geographical indication or appellation of origin with respect to products not originating from the indicated territory. , if the use of such indication in the mark for those goods in that Party is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true place of origin.

4. Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall apply to any geographical indication or appellation of origin which, while correctly indicating the territory, region or locality in which the goods originate, misleads the public that the goods originate from another territory, region or locality.

5. In relation to geographical indications and appellations of origin, each Party shall establish the means to prevent the importation4 , manufacture or sale of a good that uses a geographical indication or appellation of origin protected in the other Party, unless it has been produced and certified in that Party, in accordance with the laws, regulations and standards applicable to those goods.

6. The Parties that do not grant protection to geographical indications and appellations of origin through the Lisbon Agreement recognize Tequila and Mezcal as distinctive products of Mexico for the purposes of standards and labeling. Consequently, those Parties will not allow the sale of any product such as Tequila or Mezcal, unless they have been produced in Mexico in accordance with its laws and regulations regarding the production of Tequila and Mezcal. The protection referred to in this paragraph will begin with the entry into force of this Agreement and will be in force until protection is obtained in accordance with the internal legal procedures referred to in Article 16.19.3.

 

 

Chapter XVII

Dispute Resolution

 

Article 17.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

Code of Conduct: the Code of Conduct established by the Administrative Commission in accordance with Article 19.1.3(b)(iv) (Administrative Commission);

Dispute Settlement Understanding: the Understanding on the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

perishable merchandise: perishable agricultural and fish merchandise classified in chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized System;

designated office: the one provided for in Article 19.3 (Administration of Dispute Settlement Procedures);

Arbitration Panel: the Arbitration Panel established in accordance with Article 17.8 and, if applicable, in accordance with Article 17.19;

Consulting Parties: the consulted Party and the consulting Party;

Disputing Party: the complaining Party or the Party complained against;

Respondent Party: the one against which a claim is made, which may be made up of one or more Parties; in no case may Mexico be a Party that is sued jointly with any other Party;

Complaining Party: the party that makes a claim, which may be made up of one or more Parties:

(a) in no case may Mexico file the claim jointly with any other Party; and

(b) Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, individually or jointly, may only use this dispute resolution procedure to formulate claims against Mexico; and

Third Party: a Central American State that has a substantial interest in the dispute and that is not a Party to the dispute.

Article 17.2: Cooperation

1. The Parties shall at all times endeavor to reach agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement through cooperation and consultation, and shall endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that might affect its operation.

2. All solutions to matters raised in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter must be compatible with this Agreement and must not nullify or impair the benefits resulting from it for the Parties, nor must they hinder the achievement of its objectives. .

3. The solutions referred to in paragraph 2 will be notified to the Administrative Commission within a period of 15 days from the agreement of the Parties.

Article 17.3: Area of ​​application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply:

(a) to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement; either

(b) when a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of another Party is or could be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement; either

(c) cases where a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of another Party causes or could cause nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 17.3.

Article 17.4: Choice of Forum

1. Controversies that arise in relation to the provisions of this Agreement and the WTO Agreement may be resolved in the forum chosen by the complaining Party.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested the establishment of an Arbitration Panel pursuant to Article 17.8 or a panel pursuant to Article 6 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding, the forum selected shall be exclusive of any other in relation to that same issue.

Article 17.5: Perishable Goods

In controversies relating to perishable goods, the terms established in this Chapter will be reduced by half, without prejudice to the fact that the disputing Parties by mutual agreement decide to modify them.

Article 17.6: Queries

1. Any Party may request in writing to the other Party or Parties consultations regarding any current or proposed measure, or regarding any other matter that it considers could affect the operation of this Agreement in the terms of Article 17.3.

2. The consulting Party shall deliver the request to the consulted Party, through the designated office, with a copy to the other Parties. In it, you must indicate the reasons for the request and include the identification of the current or projected measure or other matter in question and an indication of the legal grounds of the claim. When appropriate, the other Central American Parties may participate in the consultations as consulting Parties, provided that they state in writing their substantial commercial interest in the matter, within 5 days following the presentation of the request for consultations.

3. A Party that considers it has a substantial commercial interest in the matter, may participate in the consultations in its capacity as a third Party, if it notifies the other Parties in writing through the designated offices within 5 days of the date on which the request for consultations was delivered.

4. Through the consultations provided for in this Article or in accordance with any other advisory provision of the Agreement, the consulting Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter. For these purposes, the consulting Parties:

(a) they will examine with due diligence the inquiries made to them;

(b) provide sufficient information to allow an examination of how the measure adopted or proposed, or any other matter, could affect the operation of this Agreement; and

(c) treat confidential information exchanged during consultations in the same manner as the Party that provided it.

5. In consultations under this Article, a consulting Party may request another consulting Party to, to the extent possible, make available to it personnel from its government agencies or other regulatory entities that have jurisdiction over the matter under discussion. the queries.

6. The consultations may be carried out in person or by technological means, in the place agreed by the consulting Parties, or in case of disagreement, in the capital of the consulted Party.

7. The term for consultations may not exceed 30 days from the date of receipt of the request for consultations, unless the consulting Parties agree to extend this term.

8. Consultations will be confidential and will not prejudice the rights of any Party in other possible proceedings.

9. Consultations made in accordance with articles 8.15 (Technical Consultations) and 9.13 (Technical Consultations), or under any other Chapter, will not substitute the consultations referred to in this Article.

Article 17.7: Intervention of the Administrative Commission - Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation

1. Any consulting Party may request in writing, through the designated office, that the Administrative Commission meet.1 provided that a matter is not resolved in accordance with Article 17.6 within:

(a) 30 days after receipt of the request for consultations; either

(b) any other term that the consulting Parties agree.

2. A consulting Party may also request in writing, through the designated office, that the Administrative Commission meet when technical consultations have been carried out in accordance with other provisions provided for in the Agreement.

3. The requesting Party shall deliver the request to the other Parties through the designated offices. The request will state the reasons, include identification of the current or proposed measure or other matter in question, and an indication of the legal grounds for the claim.

4. The Administrative Commission must meet within 10 days of receipt of the request and may, in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute:

(a) convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary;

(b) resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other alternative means for the resolution of disputes; either

(c) make recommendations.

5. Unless it decides otherwise, the Administrative Commission may accumulate 2 or more procedures that it hears in accordance with this Article, related to the same current measure or project or matter in question. In addition, the Administrative Commission may accumulate 2 or more procedures regarding other matters that it hears in accordance with this Article, when it deems convenient to examine them jointly.

Article 17.8: Request for the Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

1. Any consulting Party may request in writing the establishment of an Arbitration Panel when the matter has not been resolved within:

(a) within 10 days of receiving the request for intervention from the Administrative Commission, if it has not met in accordance with Article 17.7.1;

(b) 30 days after the meeting of the Administrative Commission, in accordance with the provisions of Article 17.7.4;

(c) 30 days after the Administrative Commission has met to discuss the most recent matter submitted to its consideration, when several procedures have been accumulated in accordance with Article 17.7.5; either

(d) any other term that the consulting Parties agree.

2. The complaining Party shall deliver the request through the designated office, to the other Parties. The request shall state the reasons and shall include identification of the measure or issue in question and an indication of the legal grounds for the claim.

3. With the presentation of the request, it will be understood that the Arbitration Panel has been established by the Administrative Commission2 .

4. A Party that is entitled pursuant to paragraph 1 to request the establishment of an Arbitration Panel, may participate in the proceeding as a complaining Party by delivering its request in writing to the other Parties through the designated offices. The request shall be delivered as soon as possible, but in no event later than 5 days from the date a Party has delivered the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel.

5. If a Party decides not to intervene as a complaining Party in accordance with paragraph 4, it shall thereafter refrain from bringing in respect of the same matter, absent a significant change in economic or commercial circumstances:

(a) a dispute resolution procedure in accordance with this Chapter; either

(b) a dispute settlement procedure in accordance with the Dispute Settlement Understanding, invoking grounds substantially equivalent to those that said Party may invoke in accordance with this Agreement.

6. Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, the Arbitration Panel will be integrated and will perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Model Rules of Procedure and the Code of Conduct.

Article 17.9: List and Qualifications of the Panelists

1. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall adopt and maintain an indicative list of up to 36 individuals. For these purposes, each Party will select up to 6 individuals who are nationals of that Party to integrate the "Indicative List". Each Party may modify the panelists on its list when it deems it necessary, prior notification to the other Parties.

2. Likewise, the Parties will adopt by agreement between them upon the entry into force of the Treaty an "Indicative List of Panelists from Non-Party States" in which they will designate up to 6 panelists in order to serve as Chairpersons of the Panel in a possible case. At the request of any of the Parties, the Administrative Commission may modify the "Indicative List of Panelists from Non-Party States" at any time.

3. The lists provided for in this Article will be adopted through decisions of the Administrative Commission.

4. The members of the lists:

(a) have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters related to this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;

(b) they will be chosen strictly on the basis of their objectivity, reliability and good judgment;

(c) they will be independent, they will not be linked to the Parties and they will not receive instructions from them; and

(d) they will comply with the Code of Conduct, which is adopted by the Administrative Commission no later than 90 days after the entry into force of this Agreement.

5. The Parties may use the indicative lists even when they have not been completed with the number of members established in paragraphs 1 and 2.

6. All panelists must meet the requirements indicated in paragraph 4.

7. The persons who have intervened in a controversy, under the terms of Article 17.7, may not be panelists for the same controversy.

Article 17.10: Integration of the Arbitration Panel

1. The Arbitration Panel will be integrated as follows:

(a) the Arbitration Panel will be made up of 3 members;

(b) within 10 days of receiving the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel, in accordance with Article 17.8, each Party shall appoint a panelist, preferably from the "Indicative List";

(c) by mutual agreement, the Parties will appoint a third preferred panelist from the "Indicative List of Panelists from States not Party", within 10 days from the date on which the last of the 2 panelists was appointed. mentioned in subsection (b). The third panelist will chair the Arbitration Panel and may not be a national of the Parties;

(d) if a Party has not designated its panelist within the 10-day period established in subparagraph (b), such designation shall be made by the other disputing Party(ies), between the panelists that make up the "Indicative List". The Party(ies) that appoints the panelist in accordance with this subsection, shall ensure that the panelist that is appointed is a national of the Party that has not appointed its panelist on time;

(e) if within the 10 days following the term established in subsection (c) there is no agreement between the Parties to designate the third panelist, this will be selected by the disputing Parties through a draw among the members of the "List Indicative List of Panelists from Non-Party States", or in the event that this is not feasible, from the Tentative List of the WTO. The non-attendance of a Party contesting said lottery will not prevent it from being held;

(f) each Party may designate a panelist who is not on the "Indicative List", provided that they meet the requirements established in Article 17.9; and

(g) The Parties may by mutual agreement designate a panelist who is not on the "Indicative List of Panelists from States not Party", provided that they meet the requirements established in Article 17.9.

2. In cases where two or more Parties act jointly as claimant or defendant, and there is no agreement between them regarding the appointments, one of them, chosen by lot, will assume the representation of the others regarding the procedure established in paragraph 1.

3. When an Arbitration Panel is established in accordance with paragraph 1, the designated office will notify the panelists of their appointment. The date of integration of the Arbitration Panel will be the date on which the last of the panelists has notified the disputing Parties and the designated office of the acceptance of their selection.

4. When a disputing Party considers that a panelist has committed a violation of the Code of Conduct, the disputing Parties shall hold consultations and, if agreed, remove that panelist and elect a new one in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

5. When there is a need to appoint a new panelist, the proceedings before the Arbitration Panel will be suspended until the new panelist has accepted his appointment.

Article 17.11: Third Party Participation

1. A Party that considers to have a substantial interest in the matter, may be a third party in the procedure before the Arbitration Panel, prior written notification to the disputing Parties, through the designated office, within 5 days following the establishment of the Panel. Arbitral.

2. A third Party shall have the right to attend the hearings, to submit written and oral communications to the Arbitration Panel, and to receive written communications from the disputing Parties, in accordance with the provisions of the Model Rules of Procedure. Said communications will be reflected in the final report of the Arbitration Panel.

Article 17.12: Model Rules of Procedure

1. The Administrative Commission will adopt, no later than 90 days after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Model Rules of Procedure that will guarantee:

(a) the right of the disputing Parties to at least one hearing before the Arbitration Panel;

(b) an opportunity for each disputing Party to present initial and rebuttal submissions in writing;

(c) the possibility of using technological means to conduct the procedures, provided that compliance with the principle of due process and the rules of this Chapter is guaranteed; and

(d) the protection of confidential information.

2. Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, the proceedings before the arbitration panels shall be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure.

3. The Administrative Commission may modify the Model Rules of Procedure.

4. Unless the disputing Parties agree otherwise, within 20 days following the date of delivery of the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel, the mandate of the Arbitration Panel shall be:

"To examine, in light of the applicable provisions of the Treaty, the dispute submitted for its consideration under the terms of the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel and issue conclusions, determinations and recommendations, as established in articles 17.15 and 17.16".

5. If the disputing Parties have agreed to a different mandate, they must notify the Arbitration Panel within 2 days of joining.

6. If the complaining Party alleges in the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel that a matter has been cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 17.3, the mandate shall indicate so.

7. When a disputing Party requests that the Arbitration Panel formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse trade effects that a measure that is judged inconsistent with this Agreement or has caused nullification or impairment in the sense of Annex 17.3 has generated for any Party, the mandate shall indicate so.

Article 17.13: Information and Technical Advice

Ex officio or at the request of a disputing Party, the Arbitration Panel may request the information and technical advice of the persons or institutions it deems pertinent, provided that the disputing Parties so agree, and in accordance with the terms and conditions that those Parties agree. in accordance with the provisions of the Model Rules of Procedure.

Article 17.14: Suspension or Termination of the Procedure

1. After the period of 12 months of inactivity from the date on which the last consultation meeting was held, without any additional steps having been submitted and, in the event that the situation that gave rise to the consultations persists and the consulting Party wishes to continue , you must request new consultations.

2. In the event that the procedure is in the arbitration stage, at the request of the complaining Party, the Arbitration Panel may suspend said procedure for a period not to exceed 12 months from the date on which the request for suspension.

3. If the procedure before the Arbitration Panel has been suspended for more than 12 months, the mandate of the Arbitration Panel will expire. The foregoing, without prejudice to the right of the complaining Party to request consultations again on the same matter.

4. At any time, prior to the notification of the preliminary report of the Arbitration Panel, the disputing Parties may agree to the termination of the procedure through a mutually satisfactory solution of the controversy, having to jointly notify this agreement to the Arbitration Panel, which will end the procedure. before the Arbitration Panel.

Article 17.15: Preliminary report

1. The Arbitration Panel shall issue a preliminary report based on the applicable provisions of this Agreement, the arguments and communications presented by the disputing Parties, and any information it has received pursuant to Article 17.13.

2. Unless the disputing Parties decide another term, the Arbitration Panel will notify the disputing Parties, within 90 days following the integration of the Panel, a preliminary report that will contain:

(a) findings of fact, including any resulting from a request under Article 17.12;

(b) the determination as to whether the measure in question is inconsistent with the obligations under this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 17.3 or in any other determination requested in the mandate; and

(c) the draft final report and its recommendations, when any, for the solution of the controversy.

3. The Arbitration Panel shall not disclose any confidential information in its report, but may state conclusions derived from that information.

4. When the Arbitration Panel considers that it cannot issue its preliminary report within a period of 90 days, it will inform the disputing Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay and will provide at the same time and at the earliest possible stage of the procedure, an estimate of the period in which it will issue its report. In this case and unless exceptional circumstances apply, the term to issue the report shall not exceed 120 days from the date of establishment of the Arbitration Panel.

5. The Arbitration Panel will endeavor to make all its decisions by consensus. However, when a decision cannot be reached by consensus, the matter will be decided by majority vote.

6. The disputing Parties may make written observations to the Arbitration Panel on the preliminary report within 15 days following its presentation or within the period agreed upon by the disputing Parties.

7. In this case, and after examining the written observations, the Arbitration Panel may, ex officio or at the request of any disputing Party:

(a) request the observations of any disputing Party;

(b) carry out any due diligence it deems appropriate; either

(c) reconsider the preliminary report.

Article 17.16: Final report

1. The Arbitration Panel will notify the disputing Parties of its final report and, where appropriate, the written opinions on the issues for which there has been no unanimity, within 30 days from the presentation of the preliminary report. .

2. The panelists may issue written opinions on issues for which there is no unanimity. However, neither the preliminary nor the final report will reveal the identity of the panelists who have voted with the majority or with the minority.

3. The disputing Parties shall communicate the final report to the Administrative Commission within 5 days following that in which they were notified and shall make it available to the public within 15 days following its communication to the Administrative Commission, all subject to the protection of confidential information contained in the report.

Article 17.17: Compliance with the Final Report

1. The final report shall be binding on the disputing Parties.

2. Once the final report of the Arbitration Panel has been received, the disputing Parties will agree on the solution of the controversy, which, normally, will conform to the determinations of said Panel, and its recommendations when there are any.

3. If in its final report the Arbitration Panel determines that the Party complained against has not complied with its obligations under this Agreement, or that the measure causes nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 17.3, whenever possible, the remedy shall consist of in the non-execution or in the repeal of the non-conforming measure with this Agreement or that is cause of annulment or impairment in the sense of Annex 17.3. In the absence of a solution, the defendant Party may submit offers of compensation, which will be considered by the complaining Party and, unless otherwise agreed, will be equivalent to the benefits not received.

Article 17.18: Breach and Suspension of Benefits

1. When the Arbitration Panel finds that a measure is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 17.3, and the disputing Parties:

(a) they do not reach compensation in terms of the provisions of Article 17.17.3 or a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute, within 30 days of receipt of the final report; either

(b) have reached an agreement on the settlement of the dispute or on compensation in accordance with Article 17.17.3, and the complaining Party considers that the Party complained against has not complied with the terms of the agreement,

the complaining Party may, after notifying the Party complained against, suspend to said Party the application of benefits derived from this Agreement that have equivalent effect to the benefits not received.

2. The suspension of benefits will last until the Party complained against complies with the final report or until the disputing Parties reach a mutually satisfactory agreement on the controversy, as the case may be. However, if the Party complained against is made up of 2 or more Parties, and one of them complies with the final report, or reaches a mutually satisfactory agreement with the complaining Party, the latter must lift the suspension of benefits.

3. When examining the benefits to be suspended under this Article:

(a) the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the Arbitration Panel has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or that has been the cause of nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 17.3; and

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, it may suspend benefits in other sectors.

Article 17.19: Review of Suspension of Benefits or Compliance

1. A disputing Party may, by written communication to the other disputing Party, request that the original Arbitration Panel established pursuant to Article 17.8 be reconstituted to determine:

(a) if the level of suspension of benefits applied by the complaining Party in accordance with Article 17.18.1 is manifestly excessive; either

(b) about any disagreement between the disputing Parties regarding compliance with the final report of the Arbitration Panel, or with an agreement reached between them, or regarding the compatibility of any measure adopted to comply.

2. If the Arbitration Panel hearing a matter pursuant to paragraph 1(a) decides that the level of benefits suspended is manifestly excessive, it shall set the level of benefits applied that it considers to be of equivalent effect. In this case, the complaining Party will adjust the suspension that is being applied to said level. If the Arbitration Panel hearing a matter under paragraph 1(b) decides that the Party complained against has complied, the complaining Party shall immediately terminate the suspension of benefits. If the defendant Party is made up of 2 or more Parties and the Arbitration Panel decides that one of them has complied, the complaining Party will immediately terminate the suspension of benefits with respect to it.

3. The procedure before the Integrated Arbitration Panel for the purposes of paragraph 1 shall be processed in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure. The Arbitration Panel will present its final decision within 60 days following the election of the last panelist, or in any other term that the disputing Parties agree.

4. The provisions of Article 17.10 will be applicable when the original Arbitration Panel or any of its members cannot rejoin to hear the matters provided for in this Article.

Article 17.20: Judicial and Administrative Instances

1. The Administrative Commission will try to agree, as soon as possible, on an appropriate interpretation or response when:

(a) a Party considers that a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement, arising or to arise in a judicial or administrative proceeding of another Party, merits the interpretation of the Administrative Commission; either

(b) a Party receives a request for an opinion on a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement by a court or administrative organ of that Party.

The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall submit to them the appropriate response or any interpretation agreed upon by the Administrative Commission, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.

2. When the Administrative Commission fails to agree on an adequate response or interpretation, the Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located may submit its own opinion to the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.

Article 17.21: Rights of Individuals

Neither Party may grant right of action in its national legislation against the other Party, on the grounds that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this Agreement.

Article 17.22: Alternative Means for Dispute Resolution

1. Each Party, in accordance with its national legislation, shall promote and facilitate the use of arbitration and other alternative means for the solution of international commercial disputes between individuals.

2. To this end, each Party shall have adequate procedures to ensure compliance with arbitration agreements and the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards pronounced in those disputes.

3. The Parties shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of paragraph 2, if they are party to and comply with the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards of 1958, or of the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration of 1975.

4. The Administrative Commission may establish a Consultative Committee on Private Commercial Disputes made up of persons who have specialized knowledge or experience in the resolution of private international commercial disputes. The Committee will present reports and recommendations of a general nature to the Administrative Commission on the existence, use and effectiveness of arbitration and other procedures for the solution of these controversies.

 

 

Chapter XVIII

Transparency

 

Article 18.1: Definition

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

administrative resolution of general application: an administrative resolution or interpretation that applies to all persons and factual situations that generally fall within its scope, and that establishes a rule of conduct, but does not include:

(a) resolutions or rulings in an administrative or quasi-judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good or service of the other Party in a specific case; either

(b) a decision that resolves with respect to a particular act or practice.

Article 18.2: Contact points

1. Each Party shall notify, within 60 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the designation of a contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. When requested by a Party, the point of contact of the other Party will indicate the unit or official responsible for the matter and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.

Article 18.3: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement, are promptly published or made available for the knowledge of the Parties and any interested party. .

2. To the extent possible, each Party:

(a) publish in advance any measure that it proposes to take; and

(b) provide interested persons and Parties with a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures.

Article 18.4: Notification and Provision of Information

1. To the extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Party(ies) of any current or proposed measure that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the operation of this Agreement or the interests of another Party under the terms of this Agreement.

2. Each Party, at the request of the other Party, shall provide information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any current or proposed measure, regardless of whether or not that other Party has been previously notified of that measure.

3. The notification or provision of information referred to in this Article shall be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

4. Notwithstanding anything else provided in this Agreement, the Parties shall treat confidential information supplied by a Party as such.

Article 18.5: Administrative Procedures

In order to administer in a compatible, impartial and reasonable manner all the measures of general application that affect the aspects covered by this Agreement, each Party shall ensure that, in its administrative procedures in which the measures mentioned in Article 18.3 are applied with respect to to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party in specific cases:

(a) whenever possible, persons of the other Party who are directly affected by a proceeding receive, in accordance with national law, reasonable notice of the commencement of the proceeding, including a description of its nature, a statement by the authority authority that is legally responsible for initiating it, the indication of the legal basis and a general description of all the controversial issues;

(b) when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest permit, such persons are given a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their claims, prior to any final administrative action; and

(c) its procedures conform to its national law.

Article 18.6: Review and Challenge

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial, or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of prompt review and, where warranted, correction of final administrative actions related to matters covered by this Agreement. These courts will be impartial and will not be linked to the agency or authority in charge of the administrative application of the law, and will not have a substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, before such courts or in such proceedings, the parties have the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a decision based on evidence and arguments or, in cases where required by national law, on the file compiled by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with the means of challenge or subsequent review that could be resorted to in accordance with its national legislation, said resolutions are implemented by the agencies or authorities and govern their practice with regard to to the administrative action in question.

 

 

Chapter XIX

Treaty Administration

 

Article 19.1: Administrative Commission

1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission, made up of the officials of each Party at the ministerial level referred to in Annex 19.1, or by the persons they designate.

2. The Administrative Commission will have the following functions:

(a) ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Agreement;

(b) evaluate the results achieved in the application of the Agreement, monitor its development and analyze any proposed amendment and, where appropriate, recommend its adoption to the Parties;

(c) propose measures aimed at the administration and development of the Treaty;

(d) contribute to the solution of disputes that arise regarding its interpretation and application;

(e) set the amounts of remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the panelists, their assistants and the experts;

(f) supervising the work of all committees and working groups established under this Agreement; and

(g) know about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, or that is entrusted to it by the Parties.

3. The Administrative Commission may:

(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to committees and working groups;

(b) adopt, in compliance with the objectives of this Agreement, the necessary decisions to:

(i) accelerate the tariff reduction of the lists of the sections of Annex 3.4 (Tariff Treatment Program), as appropriate;

(ii) incorporate merchandise into the Tariff Treatment Program established in the lists of the sections of Annex 3.4 (Tariff Treatment Program), as appropriate, and improve the conditions of access to the merchandise contained in said Annex;

(iii) establish and adapt the CIRI Operating Regulations of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin), Annex 4.20 (Scope of Work of the Regional Inputs Integration Committee), the Uniform Regulations of Chapter V (Customs Procedures Related to Origin Goods), the Model Rules of Procedure and the Code of Conduct of Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement); and

(iv) adapt or add Annex 3.16 (Preferential Tariff Treatment for Goods Classified in Chapter 62 of the Harmonized System that Incorporate Materials from the United States of America); the rules of origin established in Annex 4.3 (Specific Rules of Origin); Annex 11.31 (Delivery of Documents); adapt Annexes I (Non-conforming Measures), II (Future Measures) and III (Activities Reserved to the State); and Annex 10.2 (Coverage);

(c) issue interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement;

(d) request the advice of persons or groups without governmental ties; and

(e) adopt measures or any other action that contributes to the better implementation of this Agreement and for the exercise of its functions.

4. Each Party shall implement, in accordance with its internal legal procedures, any decision made pursuant to paragraph 3(b) within the period agreed by the Parties.

5. When the Administrative Commission adopts a decision in accordance with paragraph 3(b) and deals with bilateral matters in accordance with paragraphs 8 and 9, the adoption, approval and implementation of that decision by the other Parties shall not be required.

6. The Administrative Commission shall meet at least once a year in ordinary session and, at the request of any Party, in extraordinary session. These meetings may be held in person or through any technological means. The sessions will be chaired successively by each Party.

7. The Administrative Commission will establish its rules and procedures. All its decisions will be made by consensus, without prejudice to what is established in paragraphs 8 and 9.

8. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, to deal with bilateral matters of interest to Mexico and one or more Central American States, the Administrative Commission may meet and make decisions when the officials of those Parties attend, provided that sufficient notice is given. to the other Parties so that they can participate in the meeting.

9. A decision adopted by the Administrative Commission by virtue of what is established in paragraph 8, will take effect with respect to the Parties that have adopted the decision.

Article 19.2: Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement

1. Each Party shall designate a Free Trade Agreement Coordinator, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 19.2 (Free Trade Agreement Coordinators).

2. The Coordinators will give the appropriate follow-up to the decisions of the Administrative Commission and will work jointly in the development of agendas, as well as other preparations for the meetings of the Administrative Commission.

3. The Coordinators will meet when necessary, in person or through any technological means, by instruction of the Administrative Commission or at the request of any of the Parties.

Article 19.3: Administration of Dispute Resolution Procedures

1. Each Party shall:

(a) designate a permanent office to provide administrative support to the arbitration panels contemplated in Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement) and perform other functions under instruction of the Administrative Commission; and

(b) Notify the Administrative Commission of the address of its designated office and the official in charge of its administration.

2. Each Party shall be responsible for:

(a) the operation and costs of its designated office; and

(b) the remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the panelists, their assistants and appointed experts, in accordance with Chapter XVII (Dispute Resolution) and as established in Annex 19.3.

3. Designated offices:

(a) if required, they will provide assistance to the Administrative Commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII (Dispute Resolution);

(b) by instructions of the Administrative Commission, they will support the work of the working groups or of experts established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII (Dispute Resolution); and

(c) will carry out the other functions entrusted to them by the Administrative Commission.

 

 

Chapter XX

exceptions

 

Article 20.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

tax agreement: an agreement to avoid double taxation or another international agreement or arrangement in tax matters;

tax measures do not include:

(a) a "customs duty" as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application); either

(b) the measures listed in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of the definition of "customs duty".

Article 20.2: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of chapters III (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods); IV (Rules of Origin); V (Customs Procedures related to the Origin of Goods); VI (Trade Facilitation); VIII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures); and IX (Technical Barriers to Trade), Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX(b) of the GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, and that Article XX(g) of the GATT of 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of exhaustible living or non-living natural resources.

2. For the purposes of chapters XII (Cross-Border Trade in Services); XIII (Telecommunications Services); and XV (Electronic Commerce)1 , GATS Article XIV (including footnotes) is incorporated into and forms an integral part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in GATS Article XIV(b) include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

Article 20.3: National security

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; either

(b) prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:

(i) relating to the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on merchandise, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other establishment of defending;

(ii) taken in time of war or other emergencies in international relations; either

(iii) regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; either

(c) prevent a Party from taking measures in accordance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.

Article 20.4: Information divulgation

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to oblige a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which may impede compliance, or be contrary to its Political Constitution or its laws, or which is contrary to the public interest, or which could harm the legitimate commercial interest of particular companies, whether public or private.

Article 20.5: Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, no provision of this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing established in this Agreement will affect the rights and obligations of any of the Parties that derive from any tax agreement. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such agreement, the agreement shall control to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax agreement between 2 Parties, the competent authorities under that agreement will have the exclusive responsibility to determine if there is any inconsistency between this Agreement and that agreement.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 3.3 (National Treatment) and those other provisions in this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same extent as Article III of the GATT 1994; and

(b) Article 3.14 (Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. Articles 11.11 (Expropriation and Compensation) and 11.20 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) shall apply to tax measures that are alleged to be expropriating, except that no investor may invoke Article 11.11 (Expropriation and Compensation) as grounds for a claim, when it has been determined in accordance with this paragraph that the measure does not constitute an expropriation. The investor, who intends to invoke Article 11.11 (Expropriation and Compensation) with respect to a tax measure, must first submit the matter at the time of delivering the written notification referred to in Article 11.20 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), to the competent authorities of the plaintiff and defendant indicated in Annex 20.5, for said authorities to determine if the measure does not constitute an expropriation. If the competent authorities do not agree to examine the matter or if, having agreed to examine it, they do not agree that the measure does not constitute an expropriation, within a period of 6 months after the matter has been submitted to them, the investor may submit a claim to arbitration, in accordance with Article 11.20 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).

Article 20.6: Balance of Payments

1. A Party may adopt or maintain temporary and non-discriminatory restrictions to protect the balance of payments when:

(a) there are serious economic and financial disturbances or the threat thereof in the territory of the Party, which cannot be adequately resolved by some other alternative measure; either

(b) the balance of payments, including the state of its monetary reserves, is seriously threatened or faces serious difficulties.

The measures adopted will be for the time that the events described in the previous paragraphs persist.

2. The measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall be taken in accordance with the GATT 1994, including the Declaration on Trade Measures Taken for Balance-of-Payments Purposes of 1979, the Understanding Concerning the Provisions of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 in terms of balance of payments, the GATS and the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund.

3. Without prejudice to the obligations set forth in the legal instruments referred to in paragraph 2, the Party that adopts or maintains measures in accordance with paragraph 1 shall notify the other Party as soon as possible, through the Administrative Commission:

(a) what is the nature and extent of the serious threats to its balance of payments or the serious difficulties it faces;

(b) the situation of the Party's economy and foreign trade;

(c) any alternative measures available to you to correct the problem;

(d) the economic policies that it adopts to face the problems mentioned in paragraph 1, as well as the direct relationship that exists between them and their solution; and

(e) the evolution of the events that gave rise to the adoption of the measure.


 

Chapter XXI

Final Provisions

 

Article 21.1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

The annexes, appendices and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.

Article 21.2: Entry into force

1. This Agreement will be of indefinite duration and will enter into force between Mexico and each Central American State, 30 days after the date on which, respectively, they are notified in writing that their respective internal legal procedures have been completed for the entry into force of this instrument, unless the Parties agree on a different term.

2. The Parties agree that the treaties indicated in Article 21.7 will continue to be applicable between Mexico and those States for which this Agreement has not entered into force.

3. The Administrative Commission established in Article 19.1 (Administrative Commission) shall begin its functions and may adopt decisions at the moment in which this Agreement has entered into force for Mexico and another Party.1

Article 21.3: Reservations and Interpretive Declarations

This Treaty may not be the subject of reservations or interpretative declarations.

Article 21.4: Amendments

1. The Parties may agree to any amendment to this Agreement.

2. The amendment will enter into force and will constitute an integral part of this Agreement, 30 days after the date on which the Parties have notified each other in writing that their respective internal legal procedures for its entry into force have been completed or in any other date agreed by the Parties.

Article 21.5: Accession

1. Any State may adhere to this Treaty subject to the terms and conditions agreed between that State and the Administrative Commission.

2. The accession will enter into force 30 days after the date on which all the Parties and the acceding State have notified each other in writing that their respective internal legal procedures for its entry into force have been completed or on any other date that the Parties agree.

Article 21.6: Complaint

1. Any Party may denounce this Agreement. However, this Agreement shall remain in force for the other Parties.

2. The denunciation will take effect 180 days after it is communicated in writing to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that they may agree on a different term. The denouncing Party shall communicate said denunciation to the other Parties.

Article 21.7: Termination of Free Trade Agreements

1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement between Mexico and Costa Rica, the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republic of Costa Rica, signed on April 5, 1994, as well as the annexes, appendices, , protocols and decisions that have been signed in accordance with that Treaty.

2. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement between Mexico and El Salvador, the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, signed on June 29, 2000, shall be without effect between them. , as well as the annexes, appendices, protocols and decisions that have been signed in accordance with that Treaty.

3. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement between Mexico and Guatemala, the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, signed on June 29, 2000, shall be null and void between them, as well as the annexes, appendices, protocols and decisions that have been signed in accordance with that Treaty.

4. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement between Mexico and Honduras, the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, signed on June 29, 2000, shall be null and void between them, as well as the annexes, appendices, protocols and decisions that have been signed in accordance with that Treaty.

5. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement between Mexico and Nicaragua, the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua, signed on December 18, 1997, will be without effect between them. , as well as the annexes, appendices, protocols and decisions that have been signed in accordance with that Treaty.

Article 21.8: Transitory dispositions

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 21.7:

(a) Chapter XI (Financial Services) of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras , and Chapter XIII (Financial Services) of the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the United States United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua will continue in force until it is agreed to negotiate common disciplines on financial services under this Agreement.

For greater certainty, Annex 11-15 (Reservations and Specific Commitments) of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras will continue in force for Guatemala and Mexico until the reservations are negotiated and established. and specific commitments referred to in Article 11-15.1 of that treaty.

The provisions of the other chapters of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, and the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua, including, among others, those relating to the settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party2 and those related to the settlement of controversies of those treaties3 , will continue to be applied only to the extent that Chapter XI (Financial Services) and Chapter XIII (Financial Services) mentioned, thus mention them and only for the purposes of the aforementioned chapters;4

(b) the preferential tariff treatment granted in accordance with the treaties mentioned in said Article will remain in force during the 45 days following the date of entry into force of this Agreement, for those importers who so request and who use the certificates of origin issued in accordance with the treaty cited in the corresponding Article 21.7, provided that they were issued prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement and are valid;

(c) the Parties may use the lists adopted in accordance with Article 17-08 of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republic of Costa Rica ; Article 20-08 of the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua , and Article 19-08 of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras , even if said lists have not been modified. For this, the Parties will take into account the existing decisions at the entry into force of this Agreement; and

(d) Article 8-03 of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras , as well as those other provisions of that agreement necessary for the purpose of its application, shall remain in force until the expiration of within the period established in paragraph 1(a) of that Article.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorized by their respective governments, sign this Treaty in San Salvador, El Salvador, on November twenty-second, two thousand and eleven, in six original copies, these being equally authentic.

 

For the United Mexican States
For the Republic of Costa Rica
Bruno Francisco Ferrari García de Alba
Secretary of Economy
Anabel González Campabadal
Minister of Foreign Trade
 

For the Republic of El Salvador
For the Republic of Guatemala
Héctor Miguel Antonio Dada Hirezi
Minister of Economy

Raúl Trejo Esquivel
Vice Minister of Integration and Foreign Trade
 

For the Republic of Honduras
For the Republic of Nicaragua
José Francisco Zelaya
Secretary of State in the Offices
of Industry and Commerce
Orlando Solórzano Delgadillo
Minister of Development, Industry and
Commerce

 

 

 

FOOTNOTES

 

Chapter III

1Paragraph 2 applies without prejudice to a Party creating a new tariff breakdown, as long as the customs tariff applicable to the corresponding originating goods is not greater than that applicable to the tariff item broken down.

 

Chapter IV

1Includes slag and ash.

2The simple term describes an activity that does not require special skills, machines, apparatus, or equipment specially made or installed to perform the activity.

 

Chapter VII

1The Parties confirm that bilateral safeguards can only take the form of customs duties and cannot take the form of quantitative restrictions of any other type.

 

Chapter 9

1For greater certainty, the Parties understand that any reference made in this Chapter to standards, technical regulations, or conformity assessment procedures includes those related to metrology.

 

Chapter X

1A Party may request cooperation from the other Party through the competent authority, to provide, subject to Article 20.4 (Disclosure of Information), specific information related to the commercial operations that the company has in that Party.

2For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of ownership and control shall be interpreted mutatis mutandis by the provisions of paragraph n) of Article XXVIII of the GATS.

 

Chapter XI

1 For greater certainty, investment does not include loans granted by a Party to the other Party.

2It is understood that an investor "intends" to make an investment when it has carried out the specific, essential and necessary actions to carry out the aforementioned investment, such as the provision of resources to constitute the company's capital, obtaining permits and licenses, among others.

3It is understood that an investor "intends" to make an investment when it has carried out the specific, essential and necessary actions to carry out the aforementioned investment, such as the provision of resources to constitute the company's capital, obtaining permits and licenses, among others.

3See footnote 2.

4The Parties acknowledge that a patent does not necessarily confer market power.

5For greater certainty, the reference to the TRIPS Agreement in this paragraph includes the provisions of the Protocol amending the TRIPS Agreement, signed in Geneva on December 6, 2005.

6For greater certainty, a claim may only be submitted under this paragraph with respect to loss or damage incurred by the claimant in its capacity as an investor in the territory of the Party complained against.

 

Chapter XII

1The Parties understand that for the purposes of this Chapter, "service provider" has the same meaning as "services" and "service suppliers" as used in the GATS.

2The mere fact of requiring a visa to persons of the other Party shall not be considered as nullification or impairment of benefits under this Agreement.

3The Parties understand that no provision of this Chapter, including this paragraph, is subject to Section C (Dispute Settlement between a Party and an Investor of the other Party) of Chapter XI (Investment).

4This clause does not cover measures by a Party that limit inputs for the provision of services.

 

Chapter XIII

1For greater certainty, this Chapter does not create market access rights or obligations.

2In accordance with the applicable national legislation and when it so requires, an important supplier must be declared with substantial power in the relevant market by means of a final resolution of the competent authority.

3Broadcasting is defined as the uninterrupted transmission chain necessary for the distribution of television and radio program signals to the general public, excluding contribution links between operators.

4For the purposes of this Chapter, the term authorization shall be understood to include the licences, concessions, permits, registrations or other types of authorizations that a Party may require to supply telecommunications services.

5Such information will be made available in accordance with applicable national law.

6Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 do not apply with respect to commercial mobile service providers or rural telecommunications service providers. For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent a Party from imposing the requirements set forth in this Article on providers of commercial mobile services.

7In the case of Costa Rica and Guatemala, the term to be used will be "cost-oriented".

 

Chapter XV

1 For greater certainty, digital products do not include digitized representations of financial instruments.

2 For greater certainty, this paragraph does not grant any rights to a non-Party State.

3 For greater certainty, this paragraph does not grant any rights to a person from a non-Party State.

 

Chapter XVI

1Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Mexico will maintain their rights and obligations established in the Lisbon Agreement.

2 For the purposes of this Article, "protection" shall include aspects related to the existence, acquisition, scope, maintenance and observance of intellectual property rights as well as aspects related to the exercise of intellectual property rights that are specifically dealt with in this Chapter. .

3For the purposes of this paragraph, it is considered that a Party grants protection to geographical indications and appellations of origin through the Lisbon Agreement when all the procedures provided for in the Lisbon Agreement Regulations regarding Protection have been satisfied. of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration (January 1, 2010) and, consequently, protection has been granted in the corresponding Party.

 

Chapter XVII

1For the purposes of this paragraph, the Administrative Commission shall be made up solely of the officials of the consulting Parties referred to in Annex 19.1 (Officials of the Administrative Commission), or by the persons designated by them.

2The establishment of the Arbitration Panel does not imply the holding of a meeting or the adoption of a decision by the Administrative Commission.

 

Chapter XX

1This Article applies without prejudice to whether digital products are classified as either goods or services.

 

Chapter XXI

1What is established in this paragraph will be applicable to the Working Groups and Committees of this Agreement.

2These provisions are established in:

(a) Section B (Dispute Settlement between a Party and an Investor of another Party), of Chapter XIV (Investment) of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras; and

(b) Section B (Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of the other Party), of Chapter XVI (Investment) of the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua.

3These provisions are established in:

(a) Chapter XIX (Dispute Settlement) of the Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras; and

(b) Chapter XX (Dispute Settlement) of the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua.

4For greater certainty, Section C (Dispute Settlement between a Party and an Investor of the other Party) of Chapter XI (Investment) and Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement shall not apply to Chapter XIII (Financial Services ) and Chapter XI (Financial Services) of the treaties mentioned in the first sentence of paragraph 1(d).

