REVISED TREATY OF CHAGUARAMAS REVISED TREATY OF CHAGUARAMAS
ESTABLISHING ESTABLISHING
THE CARIBBEAN COMMUNITY THE CARIBBEAN COMMUNITY
INCLUDING THE CARICOM INCLUDING THE CARICOM
SINGLE MARKET AND ECONOMY SINGLE MARKET AND ECONOMY
1
© 2001 Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Secretariat
REVISED TREATY OF CHAGUARAMAS ESTABLISHING THE CARIBBEAN REVISED TREATY OF CHAGUARAMAS ESTABLISHING THE CARIBBEAN
COMMUNITY INCLUDING THE CARICO COMMUNITY INCLUDING THE CARICOM SINGLE MARKET AND ECONOMY M SINGLE MARKET AND ECONOMY
PREAMBLE
The States Parties to the Treaty Establishing the Caribbean Community and Common
Market signed at Chaguaramas on 4 July 1973,
Recalling the Declaration of Grand Anse and other decisions of the Conference of
Heads of Government, in particular the commitment to deepening regional economic integration
through the establishment of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME) in order to achieve
sustained economic development based on international competitiveness, co-ordinated economic and
foreign policies, functional co-operation and enhanced trade and economic relations with third States;
Recognising that globalisation and liberalisation have important implications for
international competitiveness;
Determined to enhance the effectiveness of the decision-making and implementation
processes of the Community;
Desirous of restructuring the Organs and Institutions of the Caribbean Community
and Common Market and redefining their functional relationships so as to enhance the participation
of their peoples, and in particular the social partners, in the integration movement;
Conscious of the need to promote in the Community the highest level of efficiency
in the production of goods and services especially with a view to maximising foreign exchange
earnings on the basis of international competitiveness, attaining food security, achieving structural
diversification and improving the standard of living of their peoples;
Aware that optimal production by economic enterprises in the Community requires
the structured integration of production in the Region, and particularly, the unrestricted movement of
capital, labour and technology;
Resolved to establish conditions which would facilitate access by their nationals to
the collective resources of the Region on a non-discriminatory basis;
Convinced that market-driven industrial development in the production of goods and
services is essential for the economic and social development of the peoples of the Community;
Cognisant that a fully integrated and liberalised internal market will create favourable
conditions for sustained, market-led production of goods and services on an internationally competitive
basis;
Desirous further of establishing and maintaining a sound and stable macro-economic
environment that is conducive to investment, including cross-border investments, and the competitive
production of goods and services in the Community;
Believing that differences in resource endowment and in the levels of economic
development of Member States, may affect the implementation of the Community Industrial Policy;
Recognising also the potential of micro, small, and medium enterprise development
to contribute to the expansion and viability of national economies of the Community and the importance
of large enterprises for achieving economies of scale in the production process;
2
Mindful that co-operation and joint action in developing trade relations with third
States and in establishing appropriate regulatory and administrative procedures and services are
essential for the development of the international and intraregional trade of Member States;
Determined further to effect a fundamental transformation of the agricultural sector
of the Community by diversifying agricultural production, intensifying agro-industrial development,
expanding agri-business, strengthening the linkages between the agricultural sector and other sectors
of the CSME and generally conducting agricultural production on a market-oriented, internationally
competitive and environmentally sound basis;
Acknowledging the vital importance of land, air and maritime transportation for
maintaining economic, social and cultural linkages as well as facilitating emergency assistance among
the Member States of the Community;
Recognising further the importance of the establishment and structured development
of transport links with third States for the accelerated and sustained development of the CSME;
Conscious also of the importance of promoting adequate air and maritime transport
services for the continued viability of the tourism industry and of reducing the vulnerability of the
CARICOM Region resulting from its reliance on extra-regional carriers;
Convinced also that a viable transport policy for the Community will make a
significant contribution in satisfying the demands for the intra-regional movement of people and
products in the CSME;
Acknowledging further that some Member States, particularly the Less Developed
Countries, are entering the CSME at a disadvantage by reason of the size, structure and vulnerability
of their economies; and
Believing further that the persistence of disadvantage, however arising, may impact
adversely on the economic and social cohesion in the Community;
Conscious further that disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors will require a
transitional period to facilitate adjustment to competition in the CSME;
Committed to establish effective measures, programmes and mechanisms to assist
disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors of the Community;
Mindful further that the benefits expected from the establishment of the CSME are
not frustrated by anti-competitive business conduct whose object or effect is to prevent, restrict, or
distort competition;
Convinced further that the application and convergence of national competition
policies and the cooperation of competition authorities in the Community will promote the objectives
of the CSME;
Affirming that the employment of internationally accepted modes of disputes
settlement in the Community will facilitate achievement of the objectives of the Treaty;
Considering that an efficient, transparent, and authoritative system of disputes
settlement in the Community will enhance the economic, social and other forms of activity in the CSME
leading to confidence in the investment climate and further economic growth and development in the
CSME;
3
Affirming also that the original jurisdiction of the Caribbean Court of Justice is
essential for the successful operation of the CSME;
Recalling further the Charter of Civil Society adopted by the Conference of Heads
of Government on 19 February 1997 reaffirming the human rights of their peoples,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
Use of Terms
In this Treaty, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Agreement” means the Agreement Establishing the Caribbean Court of Justice;
“anti-competitive business conduct” has the meaning assigned to it in Article 173;
“Budget Committee” means the Body of the Community established by paragraph
1 of Article 18;
“business” means any activity carried on for gain or reward or in the course of which
goods or services are produced, manufactured or supplied as the case may be;
“Commission” means the Competition Commission established by Article 167;
"Committee of Central Bank Governors" means the Body of the Community
referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 18;
“Community” means the Caribbean Community established by Article 2 and includes
the CSME established by the provisions of this Treaty;
“Community Council of Ministers” or “the Community Council” means the
Organ of the Community so named in paragraph 1(b) of Article 10;
“Community origin” means origin which complies with the Rules of Origin set out
in Article 78;
“Community treatment” means the access accorded to goods which are of
Community origin to the markets of Member States without the application of import
duties or quantitative restrictions;
“competent authority” means the authority legally authorised to perform a function
and for the purpose of Chapter Five means the Minister of Government so designated
by a Member State;
“Conference of Heads of Government” or “the Conference” means the Organ
so named in paragraph 1(a) of Article 10;
“Contracting Party” means a party to the Agreement;
"Council for Human and Social Development" or “COHSOD” means the Organ
of the Community so named in paragraph 2 of Article 10;
“Council for Finance and Planning” or “COFAP” means the Organ of the
Community so named in paragraph 2(a) of Article 10;
"Council for Foreign and Community Relations" or “COFCOR” means the Organ
4
so named in paragraph 2(c) of Article 10;
"Council for Trade and Economic Development" or “COTED” means the Organ
of the Community so named in paragraph 2(b) of Article 10;
“Court” means the Caribbean Court of Justice established by the Agreement;
“the CSME” means the regime established by the provisions of this Treaty replacing
Chapters Three through Seven of the Annex to the Treaty Establishing the Caribbean
Community and Common Market signed at Chaguaramas on 4 July 1973;
 “disadvantaged countries” means:
(a) the Less Developed Countries within the meaning of Article 4; or
(b) Member States that may require special support measures of a transitional
or temporary nature by reason of:
(i) impairment of resources resulting from natural disasters; or
(ii) the adverse impact of the operation of the CSME on their
economies; or
(iii) temporary low levels of economic development; or
(iv) being a Highly-Indebted Poor Country designated as such by the
competent inter-governmental organisation;
“disadvantaged regions” means:
(a) regions within Member States experiencing economic dislocation from the
operation of the CSME; or
(b) regions that may require special support measures of a transitional or
temporary nature by reason of:
(i) impairment of resources resulting from natural disasters; or
(ii) temporary low levels of economic development;
“disadvantaged sectors” means:
(a) sectors of the economies of Member States in which economic enterprises
experience dislocation from the operation of the CSME; or
(b) sectors that may require special support measures of a transitional or
temporary nature by reason of natural disasters, whereby the loss in the
sector causes social and economic disorder;
“dispute” means a dispute within the meaning of Article 183;
"economic enterprises" means economic enterprises within the meaning of
paragraph 5(b) of Article 32;
“enterprise” means any person or type of organisation, other than a non-profit
5
organisation, involved in the production of or the trade in goods, or the provision of
services;
“goods” means all kinds of property other than real property, money, securities or
choses in action;
“import duties” means any tax or surtax of customs and any other charges of
equivalent effect whether fiscal, monetary or exchange, which are levied on imports
except those notified under Article 85 and other charges which fall within that Article;
“Legal Affairs Committee” means the Body established by paragraph 1 of Article
18;
“Member State” means a Member State of the Community excluding an Associate
Member within the meaning of Article 231;
“Ministerial Councils” means COFAP, COFCOR, COHSOD and COTED;
“national” means a national within the meaning of paragraph 5(a) of Article 32;
“President” means the President of the Court;
“recommended practice” means any specification for physical characteristics,
configuration, material, performance, personnel or procedure, the uniform application
of which is regionally or generally recognised in the international community as
desirable for the efficient delivery of transport services;
“rules of competition” includes the rules set out in sub-paragraph (a)(i) of paragraph
1 of Article 166 and Articles 176, 177, 178 and 179;
“Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the Community referred to in Article 23;
“Secretary-General” means the Secretary-General of the Community;
“services” means services provided against remuneration other than wages in an
approved sector and “the provision of services” means the supply of services:
(a) from the territory of one Member State into the territory of another Member
State;
(b) in the territory of one Member State to a service consumer of another
Member State;
(c) by a service supplier of one Member State through commercial presence in
the territory of another Member State; and
(d) by a service supplier of one Member State through the presence of natural
persons of a Member State in the territory of another Member State;
“standard” means any specification for physical characteristics, configuration,
material, performance, personnel or procedure, the uniform application of which is
regionally or generally recognised in the international community as necessary for the
efficient delivery of transport services;
6.
“subsidies” includes the subsidies set out in Schedule V and shall apply only in
relation to goods;
“trade” includes any business, industry, profession or occupation relating to the
supply or acquisition of goods or services;
“WTO Agreement” means the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.
CHAPTER ONE
PRINCIPLES
ARTICLE 2
Establishment of the Community
The Community is hereby established and recognised in the Protocol hereto as
successor to the Caribbean Community and Common Market.
ARTICLE 3
Membership
1. Members of the Community consist of:
(a) Antigua and Barbuda
 (b) The Bahamas
(c) Barbados
(d) Belize
(e) Dominica
(f) Grenada
(g) Guyana
(h) Jamaica
(i) Montserrat
(j) St. Kitts and Nevis
(k) Saint Lucia
(l) St. Vincent and the Grenadines
(m) Suriname
(n) Trinidad and Tobago.
2. Membership of the Community shall be open to any other State or Territory of the
Caribbean Region that is, in the opinion of the Conference, able and willing to exercise the rights and
assume the obligations of membership.
ARTICLE 4
Less Developed Countries and
More Developed Countries
For the purpose of this Treaty the States specified in sub-paragraphs 1(b), (c), (g), (h),
(m) and (n) of Article 3 shall be more developed countries and the remainder listed in the said
paragraph shall be less developed countries.
ARTICLE 5
7.
Modification of the Status of Member States
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 4 and paragraph 1 of Article 28, the
Conference may, by majority decision, modify the status of a Member State.
ARTICLE 6
Objectives of the Community
The Community shall have the following objectives:
(a) improved standards of living and work;
(b) full employment of labour and other factors of production;
(c) accelerated, co-ordinated and sustained economic development and
convergence;
(d) expansion of trade and economic relations with third States;
(e) enhanced levels of international competitiveness;
(f) organisation for increased production and productivity;
(g) the achievement of a greater measure of economic leverage and
effectiveness of Member States in dealing with third States, groups of States
and entities of any description;
(h) enhanced co-ordination of Member States’ foreign and [foreign] economic
policies; and
(i) enhanced functional co-operation, including -
(i) more efficient operation of common services and activities for the
benefit of its peoples;
(ii) accelerated promotion of greater understanding among its peoples
and the advancement of their social, cultural and technological
development;
(iii) intensified activities in areas such as health, education,
transportation, telecommunications.
ARTICLE 7
Non-Discrimination
1. Within the scope of application of this Treaty and without prejudice to any special
provisions contained therein, any discrimination on grounds of nationality only shall be prohibited.
2. The Community Council shall, after consultation with the competent Organs, establish
rules to prohibit any such discrimination.
ARTICLE 8
Most Favoured Nation Treatment
8.
Subject to the provisions of this Treaty, each Member State shall, with respect to any
rights covered by this Treaty, accord to another Member State treatment no less favourable than that
accorded to:
(a) a third Member State; or
(b) third States.
ARTICLE 9
General Undertaking on Implementation
Member States shall take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to
ensure the carrying out of obligations arising out of this Treaty or resulting from decisions taken by the
Organs and Bodies of the Community. They shall facilitate the achievement of the objectives of the
Community. They shall abstain from any measures which could jeopardise the attainment of the
objectives of this Treaty.
CHAPTER TWO
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
ARTICLE 10
Organs of the Community
 1. The principal Organs of the Community are:
(a) the Conference of Heads of Government; and
(b) the Community Council of Ministers which shall be the second highest organ.
 2. In the performance of their functions, the principal Organs shall be assisted by the
following Organs:
(a) the Council for Finance and Planning;
(b) the Council for Trade and Economic Development;
(c) the Council for Foreign and Community Relations, and
(d) the Council for Human and Social Development.
ARTICLE 11
Composition of the Conference
 1. The Conference of Heads of Government shall consist of the Heads of Government
of the Member States.
 2. Any Head of Government may designate a Minister or other person to represent him
or her at any Meeting of the Conference.
ARTICLE 12
Functions and Powers of the Conference
 1. The Conference shall be the supreme Organ of the Community.
 2. The Conference shall determine and provide policy direction for the Community.
 3. Save as otherwise provided in this Treaty, the Conference shall be the final authority
for the conclusion of treaties on behalf of the Community and for entering into relationships between
9.
the Community and international organisations and States.
 4. The Conference may take decisions for the purpose of establishing the financial
arrangements necessary to defray the expenses of the Community and shall be the final authority on
questions arising in relation to the financial affairs of the Community.
 5. Subject to the relevant provisions of this Treaty, the Conference shall exercise such
powers as may be conferred on it by or under any instrument elaborated by or under the auspices of
the Community.
 6. The Conference may establish such Organs or Bodies as it considers necessary for
the achievement of the objectives of the Community.
 7. The Conference may issue policy directives of a general or special character to other
Organs and Bodies of the Community concerning the policies to be pursued for the achievement of
the objectives of the Community and effect shall be given to such directives.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Treaty, the Conference may consider and
resolve disputes between Member States.
 9. The Conference may consult with entities within the Caribbean Region or with other
organisations and for this purpose may establish such machinery as it considers necessary.
10. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Conference shall regulate its own
procedure and may decide to admit at its deliberations as observers representatives of non-Member
States of the Community and other entities.
11. The Bureau, consisting of the current Chairman and the immediately outgoing and
incoming Chairmen of the Conference, shall perform the following functions:
(a) initiating proposals for development and approval by the Ministerial Councils
as it considers necessary;
(b) updating the consensus of the Member States on issues falling to be
determined by the Conference;
(c) facilitating implementation of Community decisions, both at the regional and
local levels, in an expeditious and informed manner;
(d) providing guidance to the Secretariat on policy issues.
ARTICLE 13
The Community Council of Ministers
 1. The Community Council shall consist of Ministers responsible for Community Affairs
and any other Minister designated by the Member States in their absolute discretion.
 2. The Community Council shall, in accordance with the policy directions established by
the Conference, have primary responsibility for the development of Community strategic planning and
co-ordination in the areas of economic integration, functional co-operation and external relations.
 3. In pursuance of paragraph 2, the Community Council shall:
(a) approve the programmes of the Community on the basis, inter alia, of
10.
proposals emanating from other Community Organs;
(b) subject to paragraph 5 of Article 20, amend proposals developed by the
Ministerial Councils or request them to develop proposals for the
achievement of Community objectives,
and have responsibility for promoting and monitoring the implementation of Community decisions in
the Member States.
 4. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Community Council
shall:
(a) subject to paragraph 4 of Article 12, examine and approve the Community
budget;
(b) mobilise and allocate resources for the implementation of Community plans
and programmes;
(c) establish, subject to the provisions of Article 26, a system of regional and
national consultations in order to enhance the decision-making and
implementation processes of the Community;
(d) promote, enhance, monitor and evaluate regional and national
implementation processes and, to this end, establish a regional technical
assistance service;
(e) function as a preparatory body for meetings of the Conference;
(f) ensure the efficient operation and orderly development of the CSME,
particularly by seeking to resolve problems arising out of its functioning,
taking into account the work and decisions of COTED;
(g) receive and consider allegations of breaches of obligations arising under this
Treaty, including disputes between Organs of the Community;
(h) on the instructions of the Conference, issue directives to Organs and to the
Secretariat aimed at ensuring the timely implementation of Community
decisions;
(i) undertake any additional functions remitted to it by the Conference, arising
under this Treaty.
ARTICLE 14
The Council for Finance and Planning
 1. The Council for Finance and Planning shall consist of Ministers designated by the
Member States. Each Member State shall be entitled to designate alternates to represent it on
COFAP.
 2. Subject to the relevant provisions of Article 12, COFAP shall have primary
responsibility for economic policy co-ordination and financial and monetary integration of Member
11.
States and, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, shall:
(a) establish and promote measures for the co-ordination and convergence of
national macro-economic policies of the Member States and for the execution
of a harmonised policy on foreign investment;
(b) promote and facilitate the adoption of measures for fiscal and monetary cooperation among the Member States, including the establishment of
mechanisms for payment arrangements;
(c) recommend measures to achieve and maintain fiscal discipline by the
Governments of the Member States;
(d) pending the establishment of a monetary union in the Community,
recommend arrangements for the free convertibility of the currencies of the
Member States on a reciprocal basis;
(e) promote the establishment and integration of capital markets in the
Community, and
(f) undertake any additional functions remitted to it by the Conference arising
under this Treaty.
3. Under the direction of COFAP, the Committee of Central Bank Governors shall assist
in the performance of the functions mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article.
ARTICLE 15
The Council for Trade and
Economic Development
1. The Council for Trade and Economic Development shall consist of Ministers
designated by the Member States. Each Member State shall be entitled to designate alternates to
represent it on COTED.
2. Subject to the provisions of Article 12, COTED shall be responsible for the promotion
of trade and economic development of the Community. In particular, COTED shall:
(a) promote the development and oversee the operation of the CSME;
(b) evaluate, promote and establish measures to enhance production, quality
control and marketing of industrial and agricultural commodities so as to
ensure their international competitiveness;
(c) establish and promote measures to accelerate structural diversification of
industrial and agricultural production on a sustainable and regionallyintegrated basis;
(d) determine and promote measures for the accelerated development and
marketing of services;
(e) promote and develop policies and programmes to facilitate the transportation
of people and goods;
(f) promote measures for the development of energy and natural resources on
12.
a sustainable basis;
(g) establish and promote measures for the accelerated development of science
and technology;
(h) promote and develop policies for the protection of and preservation of the
environment and for sustainable development;
(i) promote and develop, in collaboration with the Council for Foreign and
Community Relations, co-ordinated policies for the enhancement of external
economic and trade relations of the Community, and
(j) undertake any additional functions remitted to it by the Conference, arising
under this Treaty.
ARTICLE 16
The Council for Foreign and Community Relations
 1. The Council for Foreign and Community Relations shall consist of Ministers
Responsible for the Foreign Affairs of Member States. Each Member State shall be entitled to
designate an alternate to represent it on COFCOR.
 2. Subject to the provisions of Article 12, COFCOR shall be responsible for determining
relations between the Community and international organisations and Third States.
 3. Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph 2, COFCOR shall:
(a) promote the development of friendly and mutually beneficial relations among
the Member States;
(b) establish measures to co-ordinate the foreign policies of the Member States
of the Community, including proposals for joint representation, and seek to
ensure, as far as practicable, the adoption of Community positions on major
hemispheric and international issues;
(c) co-ordinate the positions of the Member States in inter-governmental
organisations in whose activities such States participate;
(d) collaborate with COTED in promoting and developing co-ordinated policies
for the enhancement of external economic and trade relations of the
Community;
(e) co-ordinate, in close consultation with the Member States, Community policy
on international issues with the policies of States in the wider Caribbean
Region in order to arrive at common positions in relation to Third States,
groups of States and relevant inter-governmental organisations, and
(f) undertake any additional functions remitted to it by the Conference, arising
under this Treaty.
4. Only Member States possessing the necessary competence with respect to the
matters under consideration from time to time may take part in the deliberations of COFCOR.
ARTICLE 17
The Council for Human and Social Development
13.
 1. The Council for Human and Social Development shall consist of Ministers designated
by the Member States. Each Member State shall be entitled to designate alternates to represent it
on COHSOD.
 2. Subject to the provisions of Article 12, COHSOD shall be responsible for the promotion
of human and social development in the Community. In particular, COHSOD shall:
 (a) promote the improvement of health, including the development and
organisation of efficient and affordable health services in the Community;
(b) promote the development of education through the efficient organisation of
educational and training facilities in the Community, including elementary and
advanced vocational training and technical facilities;
(c) promote and develop co-ordinated policies and programmes to improve the
living and working conditions of workers and take appropriate measures to
facilitate the organisation and development of harmonious labour and
industrial relations in the Community;
(d) establish policies and programmes to promote the development of youth and
women in the Community with a view to encouraging and enhancing their
participation in social, cultural, political and economic activities;
(e) promote and establish programmes for the development of culture and sports
in the Community;
(f) promote the development of special focus programmes supportive of the
establishment and maintenance of a healthy human environment in the
Community, and
(g) undertake any additional functions remitted to it by the Conference, arising
under this Treaty.
 3. Without prejudice to the requirements of any other provision of this Treaty, COHSOD
shall promote co-operation among the Member States in the areas set out in the schedule hereto in
furtherance of the objectives set out in Article 5.
ARTICLE 18
Bodies of the Community
 1. There are hereby established as Bodies of the Community:
(a) the Legal Affairs Committee; and
(b) the Budget Committee.
 2. The Council of Central Bank Governors shall be redesignated the "Committee of
Central Bank Governors" and recognised as a Body of the Community.
 3. The Organs of the Community may establish, as they deem necessary, other Bodies
of the Community.
ARTICLE 19
Composition and Functions of
14.
Bodies of the Community
 1. The Legal Affairs Committee shall consist of the Ministers responsible for Legal Affairs
or Attorneys-General of the Member States, or both, and shall be responsible for providing the Organs
and Bodies, either on request or on its own initiative, with advice on treaties, international legal issues,
the harmonisation of laws of the Community and other legal matters.
 2. The Budget Committee shall consist of senior officials of the Member States who shall
perform their functions in a professional capacity . It shall examine the draft budget and work
programme of the Community prepared by the Secretariat and submit recommendations to the
Community Council.
 3. The Committee of Central Bank Governors shall consist of the Governors or Heads
of the Central Banks of the Member States or their nominees. The Committee shall make
recommendations to COFAP on matters relating to monetary co-operation, payments arrangements,
free movement of capital, integration of capital markets, monetary union and any other related matters
referred to it by the Organs of the Community.
 4. The procedures of Bodies shall be regulated, mutatis mutandis, by the relevant
provisions of Articles 27 and 29.
ARTICLE 20
Co-operation by Community Organs
 1. Community Organs shall co-operate with each other for the achievement of
Community objectives.
 2. The Bureau and the Community Council may initiate proposals for development by
the Ministerial Councils within their respective areas of competence.
 3. Where a Community Organ proposes to develop a proposal which is likely to impact
importantly on activities within the sphere of competence of another Community Organ, the firstmentioned Community Organ shall transmit such proposal to other interested Community Organs for
their consideration and reaction before reaching a final decision on the proposal.
 4. Proposals approved by the Ministerial Councils shall be transmitted to the Community
Council for prioritisation and resource allocation for their implementation.
 5. Proposals approved by the Ministerial Councils and transmitted to the Community
Council for prioritisation and resource allocation for implementation may be returned by the Community
Council to the originating Organ for modification. The Community Council may modify the proposal
to the extent and in the manner agreed with the originating Organ.
 6. The Secretariat shall monitor the development and implementation of proposals for
the achievement of Community objectives and keep the Community Council informed accordingly.
ARTICLE 21
Institutions of the Community
The following entities established by or under the auspices of the Community shall
be recognised as Institutions of the Community:
15.
! Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency (CDERA);
! Caribbean Meteorological Institute (CMI);
! Caribbean Meteorological Organisation (CMO);
! Caribbean Environmental Health Institute (CEHI);
! Caribbean Agricultural Research and Development Institute (CARDI);
! Caribbean Regional Centre for the Education and Training of Animal Health
and Veterinary Public Health Assistants (REPAHA);
! Assembly of Caribbean Community Parliamentarians (ACCP);
! Caribbean Centre For Developmental Administration (CARICAD);
! Caribbean Food and Nutrition Institute (CFNI),
and such other entities as may be designated by the Conference.
ARTICLE 22
Associate Institutions of the
Community
The following entities with which the Community enjoys important functional
relationships which contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the Community shall be
recognised as Associate Institutions of the Community:
! Caribbean Development Bank (CDB);
! University of Guyana (UG);
! University of the West Indies (UWI);
! Caribbean Law Institute / Caribbean Law Institute Centre (CLI/CLIC);
! the Secretariat of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States;
and such other entities as may be designated by the Conference.
ARTICLE 23
The Secretariat
 1. The Secretariat shall be the principal administrative organ of the Community. The
headquarters of the Community shall be located in Georgetown, Guyana.
 2. The Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary-General and such other staff as the
Community may require. In the recruitment of such staff, consideration shall be given to securing the
highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, bearing in mind the principle of equitable
geographical distribution.
 3. The Secretary-General shall, in addition to the powers conferred by or under the
Treaty, be the Chief Executive Officer of the Community and shall act in that capacity at all meetings
of Community Organs and Bodies. He shall make an annual report to the Conference on the work of
16.
the Community.
 4. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and staff shall neither seek
nor receive instructions from any Government of the Member States or from any other authority
external to the Community. They shall refrain from any action which might reflect adversely on their
position as officials of the Community and shall be responsible only to the Community.
 5. Member States undertake to respect the exclusively international character of the
responsibilities of the Secretary-General and staff and shall not seek to influence them in the discharge
of their responsibilities.
 6. The Conference shall approve the Staff Regulations governing the operations of the
Secretariat.
 7. The Community Council shall approve the financial regulations governing the
operations of the Secretariat.
 8. The Secretary-General shall establish Staff Rules for the operation of the Secretariat.
ARTICLE 24
The Secretary-General
 1. The Secretary-General shall be appointed by the Conference, on the recommendation
of the Community Council, for a term not exceeding five years and may be reappointed by the
Conference.
 2. The Secretary-General shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Community and
shall, subject to the determinations of competent Organs of the Community and in accordance with
the financial and other regulations, perform the following functions:
(a) represent the Community;
(b) develop, as mandated, decisions of competent Organs of the Community into
implementable proposals;
(c) identify and mobilise, as required, external resources to implement decisions
at the regional level and undertake studies and develop decisions on relevant
issues into implementable proposals;
(d) implement, as mandated, decisions at the regional level for the achievement
of Community objectives;
(e) implement, with the consent of the Member State concerned, Community
decisions which do not require legislative or administrative action by national
authorities;
(f) monitor and report on, as mandated, implementation of Community
decisions;
(g) initiate or develop proposals for consideration and decision by competent
Organs in order to achieve Community objectives, and
(h) such other functions assigned by the Conference or other competent Organs.
ARTICLE 25
Functions of the Secretariat
17.
In addition to any functions which may be assigned to it by Organs of the Community,
the Secretariat shall:
(a) service meetings of the Organs and Bodies of the Community and take
appropriate follow up action on determinations issuing from such meetings;
(b) initiate, organise and conduct studies on issues for the achievement of the
objectives of the Community;
(c) provide, on request, services to the Member States of the Community on
matters relating to the achievement of its objectives;
(d) collect, store and disseminate to the Member States of the Community
information relevant for the achievement of its objectives;
(e) assist Community Organs in the development and implementation of
proposals and programmes for the achievement of objectives of the
Community;
(f) co-ordinate in relation to the Community the activities of donor agencies,
international, regional and national institutions for the achievement of
objectives of the Community;
(g) prepare the draft budget of the Community for examination by the Budget
Committee;
(h) provide, on request, technical assistance to national authorities to facilitate
implementation of Community decisions;
(i) conduct, as mandated, fact-finding assignments in the Member States, and
(j) initiate or develop proposals for consideration and decision by competent
Organs in order to achieve Community objectives.
ARTICLE 26
The Consultative Process
1. In order to enhance the decision-making process in the Community, the Community
Council, assisted by the Secretary-General, shall, in collaboration with competent authorities of the
Member States, establish and maintain an efficient system of consultations at the national and regional
levels.
 2. The system of consultations shall be structured to ensure that determinations of
Community Organs and the Legal Affairs Committee are adequately informed by relevant information
inputs and are reinforced by consultations undertaken at successively lower levels of the decisionmaking process.
ARTICLE 27
Common Voting Procedures
in Community Organs and Bodies
 1. Subject to paragraph 2 of this Article, each Member State represented on Community
Organs and Bodies shall have one vote. A simple majority of Member States shall constitute a
18.
quorum.
2. Member States, whose contributions to the regular budget of the Community are in
arrears for more than two years, shall not have the right to vote except on matters relating to the
CSME, but may otherwise participate in the deliberations of Community Organs and Bodies. The
Conference may, nevertheless, permit such Member States to vote if it is satisfied that the failure to
contribute is due to conditions beyond their control.
 3. Decisions on procedural issues in Community Organs shall be reached by a simple
majority of Member States.
4. Subject to the agreement of the Conference, a Member State may opt out of
obligations arising from the decisions of competent Organs provided that the fundamental objectives
of the Community, as laid down in the Treaty, are not prejudiced thereby.
 5. Prior to taking decisions on any issue falling to be determined by Community Organs,
the Secretariat shall bring to the attention of the meeting the financial implications of such decisions
and any other matters which may be relevant.
 6. Recommendations of Community Organs shall be made by a two-thirds majority of
Member States and shall not be legally binding. Member States omitting to comply with
recommendations shall inform the Secretariat in writing within six months stating the reasons for their
non-compliance.
 7. Subject to the relevant provisions of this Treaty, Community Organs and Bodies shall
establish their rules of procedure.
ARTICLE 28
Voting in the Conference
 1. Save as otherwise provided in this Treaty and subject to paragraph 2 of this Article
and the relevant provisions of Article 27, the Conference shall take decisions by an affirmative vote of
all its members and such decisions shall be binding.
 2. For the purpose of this Article abstentions shall not be construed as impairing the
validity of decisions of the Conference provided that the Member States constituting three-quarters of
the membership of the Community, vote in favour of such decisions.
 3. Omission by a Member State to participate in the vote shall be deemed an abstention
within the meaning of paragraph 2 of this Article.
 4. Parties to a dispute or against which sanctions are being considered shall not have
the right to vote on the issue falling to be determined.
ARTICLE 29
Voting in the Community Council
and Ministerial Councils
 1. Save as otherwise provided in this Treaty and subject to the provisions of this Article
and Article 27, the Ministerial Councils shall take decisions by a qualified majority vote and such
decisions shall be binding.
19.
 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this Article a qualified majority vote means an
affirmative vote of the Member States comprising no less than three-quarters of the membership of the
Community.
 3. Where issues have been determined to be of critical importance to the national wellbeing of a Member State, in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article, such decisions shall be
reached by an affirmative vote of all Member States.
 4. Decisions that an issue is of critical importance to the national well-being of a Member
State shall be reached by a two-thirds majority of the Member States.
 5. For the purposes of paragraph 3 of this Article abstentions shall not be construed as
impairing the validity of decisions required to be reached by unanimity provided that Member States
constituting not less than three-quarters of the membership of the Community vote in favour of such
decisions.
CHAPTER THREE
ESTABLISHMENT, SERVICES, CAPITAL AND
MOVEMENT OF COMMUNITY NATIONALS
ARTICLE 30
Scope of Application
1. Save as otherwise provided in this Article and Article 31, the provisions of this Chapter
shall apply to the right of establishment, the right to provide services and the right to move capital in
the Community.
2. Activities in a Member State involving the exercise of governmental authority shall,
in so far as that Member State is concerned, be excluded from the operation of this Chapter.
3. For the purposes of this Chapter, “activities involving the exercise of governmental
authority” means activities conducted neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or
more economic enterprises, and includes:
(a) activities conducted by a central bank or monetary authority or any other
public entity, in pursuit of monetary or exchange rate policies;
(b) activities forming part of a statutory system of social security or public
retirement plans;
(c) activities forming part of a system of national security or for the establishment
or maintenance of public order; and
(d) other activities conducted by a public entity for the account of or with the
guarantee or using financial resources of the government.
ARTICLE 31
Treatment of Monopolies
1. The Member States may determine that the public interest requires the exclusion or
restriction of the right of establishment in any industry or in a particular sector of an industry.
2. Where such a determination has been made:
20.
(a) if the determination results in the continuation or establishment of a
government monopoly, the Member State shall adopt appropriate measures
to ensure that the monopoly does not discriminate between nationals of
Member States, save as otherwise provided in this Treaty, and is subject to
the agreed rules of competition established for Community economic
enterprises;
(b) if the determination results in the continuation or establishment of a private
sector monopoly, the Member State shall, subject to the provisions of this
Treaty, adopt appropriate measures to ensure that national treatment is
accorded to nationals of other Member States in terms of participating in its
operations.
ARTICLE 32
Prohibition of New Restrictions on the Right of Establishment
1. The Member States shall not introduce in their territories any new restrictions relating
to the right of establishment of nationals of other Member States save as otherwise provided in this
Treaty.
2. The Member States shall notify COTED of existing restrictions on the right of
establishment in respect of nationals of other Member States.
3. (1) The right of establishment within the meaning of this Chapter shall include
the right to:
(a) engage in any non-wage-earning activities of a commercial,
industrial, agricultural, professional or artisanal nature;
(b) create and manage economic enterprises referred to in paragraph
5(b) of this Article.
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter "non-wage earning activities" means
activities undertaken by self-employed persons.
4. The Community Council may, with the approval of the Conference and upon the
recommendation of COTED or COFAP, as the case may be, enlarge the body of rights provided in
paragraph 3 of this Article. The competent Organ shall establish basic criteria for Member States in
order to safeguard against manipulation or abuse of such rights so as to gain an unfair advantage
against other Member States, for example, in the areas of nationality criteria and in the operation of
companies.
 5. For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) a person shall be regarded as a national of a Member State if such person -
 (i) is a citizen of that State;
 (ii) has a connection with that State of a kind which entitles him to be
regarded as belonging to or, if it be so expressed, as being a native
or resident of the State for the purposes of the laws thereof relating
to immigration; or
(iii) is a company or other legal entity constituted in the Member State in
21.
conformity with the laws thereof and which that State regards as
belonging to it, provided that such company or other legal entity has
been formed for gainful purposes and has its registered office and
central administration, and carries on substantial activity, within the
Community and which is substantially owned and effectively
controlled by persons mentioned in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this
paragraph;
(b) "economic enterprises" includes any type of organisation for the production
of or trade in goods or the provision of services (other than a non-profit
organisation) owned or controlled by any person or entity mentioned in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph;
(c) a company or other legal entity is:
(i) substantially owned if more than 50 per cent of the equity interest
therein is beneficially owned by nationals mentioned in subparagraph (a) (i) or (ii) of this paragraph;
(ii) effectively controlled if nationals mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) of
this paragraph have the power to name a majority of its directors or
otherwise legally to direct its actions.
ARTICLE 33
Removal of Restrictions on the Right of Establishment
1. Subject to the provisions of Article 221 and Article 222, the Member States shall
remove restrictions on the right of establishment of nationals of a Member State in the territory of
another Member State.
 2. The removal of restrictions on the right of establishment mentioned in paragraph
1 of this Article shall also apply to restrictions on the setting up of agencies, branches or subsidiaries
by nationals of a Member State in the territory of another Member State.
3. Subject to the approval of the Conference, COTED, in consultation with COHSOD and
COFAP, shall, within one year from the entry into force of this Treaty, establish a programme providing
for the removal of restrictions on the right of establishment of nationals of a Member State in the
territory of another Member State. The programme shall, inter alia:
(a) identify the activities in respect of which the right of establishment shall not
apply;
(b) establish the conditions under which the right of establishment is to be
achieved; and
(c) set out the conditions, stages and time-frames for the removal of restrictions
on the right of establishment.
 4. The Community Council may authorise a Member State whose nationals have been
aggrieved by the violation of obligations set out in this Article, Article 32, Article 36 and Article 37 to
take such measures as may be provided for in this Treaty.
ARTICLE 34
Management of Removal of Restrictions
22.
on the Right of Establishment
In performing its tasks set out in Article 33, COTED shall, inter alia:
(a) accord priority to the removal of restrictions on activities in respect of which
the right of establishment encourages the development of:
(i) the production of trade in goods;
(ii) the provision of services,
which generate foreign exchange earnings;
(b) require the Member States to remove administrative practices and
procedures, the maintenance of which impede the exercise of the right of
establishment;
(c) require the Member States to remove all restrictions on the movement of
managerial, technical and supervisory staff of economic enterprises and on
establishing agencies, branches and subsidiaries of companies and other
entities established in the Community;
(d) establish measures to ensure the removal of restrictions on the right of
establishment in respect of activities accorded priority treatment pursuant to
paragraph (a) of this Article as they relate to:
(i) the establishment, in the territories of the Member States, of
agencies, branches or subsidiaries belonging to an economic
enterprise; and
(ii) the conditions governing the entry of managerial, technical or
supervisory personnel employed in such agencies, branches and
subsidiaries, including the spouses and immediate dependent family
members of such personnel;
(e) take appropriate measures to ensure close collaboration among competent
national authorities in order to improve their knowledge of the particular
situation regarding the relevant activities within the Community;
(f) require the Member States to ensure that nationals of one Member State may
have access to land, buildings and other property situated in the territory of
another Member State, other than for speculative purposes or for a purpose
potentially destabilising to the economy, on a non-discriminatory basis,
bearing in mind the importance of agriculture for many national economies;
(g) ensure concordance in the Member States regarding the protection afforded
the interests of partners, members and other persons with financial interests
in companies and other entities.
ARTICLE 35
Acceptance of Diplomas, Certificates,
and other Evidence of Qualifications
23.
1. COHSOD, in consultation with the competent Organ, shall establish common
standards and measures for accreditation or when necessary for the mutual recognition of diplomas,
certificates and other evidence of qualifications of the nationals of the Member States in order to
facilitate access to, and engagement in, employment and non-wage-earning activities in the
Community.
2. The Member States shall establish or employ, as the case may be, appropriate
mechanisms to establish common standards to determine equivalency or accord accreditation to
diplomas, certificates and other evidence of qualifications secured by nationals of other Member
States.
 3. COHSOD shall also establish measures for the co-ordination of legislative and
administrative requirements of the Member States for the participation of Community nationals in
employment and for the conduct of non-wage-earning activities in the Community.
ARTICLE 36
Prohibition of New Restrictions on
the Provision of Services
1. The Member States shall not introduce any new restrictions on the provision of
services in the Community by nationals of other Member States except as otherwise provided in this
Treaty.
2. Without prejudice to the provisions relating to the right of establishment, persons
providing services may, in order to provide such services, temporarily engage in approved activities
in the Member State where the services are to be provided under the same conditions enjoyed by
nationals of that Member State.
3. The Member States shall notify COTED of existing restrictions on the provision of
services in respect of nationals of other Member States.
4. For the purposes of this Chapter, "services" means services provided against
remuneration other than wages in any approved sector and “the provision of services” means the
supply of services:
(a) from the territory of one Member State into the territory of another Member
State;
(b) in the territory of one Member State to the service consumer of another
Member State;
(c) by a service supplier of one Member State through commercial presence in
the territory of another Member State; and
(d) by a service supplier of one Member State through the presence of natural
persons of a Member State in the territory of another Member State.
ARTICLE 37
Removal of Restrictions on Provision of Services
1. Subject to the provisions of this Treaty, Member States shall abolish discriminatory
restrictions on the provision of services within the Community in respect of Community nationals.

 2. Subject to the approval of the Conference, COTED, in consultation with other
competent Organs, shall, within one year from the entry into force of this Treaty, establish a
24.
programme for the removal of restrictions on the provision of such services in the Community by
Community nationals.
3. In establishing the programme mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article, COTED shall:
(a) accord priority to services which directly affect production costs or facilitate
the trade in goods and services which generate foreign exchange earnings;
(b) require the Member States to remove administrative practices and
procedures, the maintenance of which impede the exercise of the right to
provide services;
(c) establish measures to ensure the abolition of restrictions on the right to
provide services in respect of activities accorded priority treatment in
accordance with sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph, both in terms of
conditions for the provision of services in the territories of Member States as
well as the conditions governing the entry of personnel, including their
spouses and immediate dependent family members, for the provision of
services;
(d) take appropriate measures to ensure close collaboration among competent
national authorities in order to improve their knowledge of the conditions
regarding relevant activities within the Community, and
(e) require the Member States to ensure that nationals of one Member State
have on a non-discriminatory basis, access to land, buildings and other
property situated in the territory of another Member State for purposes
directly related to the provision of services, bearing in mind the importance
of agriculture for many national economies.
ARTICLE 38
Removal of Restrictions on Banking, Insurance
and Other Financial Services
1. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Member States shall remove
discriminatory restrictions on banking, insurance and other financial services.
2. Subject to the approval of the Conference, COFAP, in consultation with other
competent Organs of the Community, may exclude certain financial services from the operation of the
provisions of this Article.
ARTICLE 39
Prohibition of New Restrictions on Movement of Capital
and Current Transactions
The Member States shall not introduce any new restrictions on the movement of
capital and payments connected with such movement and on current payments and transfers, nor
render more restrictive existing regulations except as provided in Article 43 and Article 46.
ARTICLE 40
Removal of Restrictions on Movement of Capital
and Current Transactions
25.
1. The Member States shall, in order to ensure the proper functioning of the CSME,
remove among themselves:
(a) restrictions on the movement of capital payments;
(b) restrictions on all current payments including payments for goods and
services and other current transfers.
2. COFAP, subject to the approval of the Conference, shall establish in collaboration with
the Committee of Central Bank Governors a programme for the removal of the restrictions mentioned
in paragraph 1 of this Article.
3. For the purpose of this Article, capital and related payments and transfers include:
(a) equity and portfolio investments;
(b) short-term bank and credit transactions;
(c) payment of interest on loans and amortization;
(d) dividends and other income on investments after taxes;
(e) repatriation of proceeds from the sale of assets; and
(f) other transfers and payments relating to investment flows.
ARTICLE 41
Authorisation to Facilitate Movement of Capital
1. The Member States shall, where necessary and subject to paragraph 2 of this Article,
grant the authorisations required for the movement of capital mentioned in Article 40 on a nondiscriminatory basis.
2. A loan intended for State purposes may require prior notification to the State in which
it is being issued or placed.
ARTICLE 42
Co-ordination of Foreign Exchange Policies
and Exchange of Information
1. The Member States shall take such measures as are necessary to coordinate their
foreign exchange policies in respect of the movement of capital between them and third States.
2. The Member States shall keep the competent authorities in other Member States
informed of significant unusual movements of capital within their knowledge to and from third States.
ARTICLE 43
Restrictions to Safeguard Balance-of-Payments
1. In the event of serious balance-of-payments and external financial difficulties or threat
thereof, a Member State may, consistently with its international obligations and subject to paragraph
5 of this Article, adopt or maintain restrictions to address such difficulties.
2. The restrictions which may be adopted or maintained pursuant to paragraph 1 of this
Article may include quantitative restrictions on imports, restrictions on the right of establishment,
restrictions on the right to provide services, restrictions on the right to move capital or on payments and
transfers for transactions connected therewith. However, such restrictions:
(a) shall, subject to the provisions of this Treaty, not discriminate among Member
26.
States or against Member States in favour of third States;
(b) shall at all times seek to minimise damage to the commercial, economic or
financial interests of any other Member State;
(c) shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described
in paragraph 1 of this Article; and
(d) shall be temporary but in any event not longer than a period of eighteen (18)
months and be phased out progressively as the situation described in
paragraph 1 improves.
3. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, the Member State concerned may
accord priority to activities which are essential to its economic stability. Such restrictions shall not be
adopted or maintained for the purpose of protecting a particular sector in contravention of the relevant
provisions of this Treaty, due regard being paid in either case to any special factors which may be
affecting the reserves of such Member State or its need for reserves.
4. Restrictions adopted or maintained pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, or any
changes therein, shall be promptly notified within three (3) working days to COFAP and to COTED,
and, in any event, the Member State concerned shall immediately consult with the competent Organ
if and when requested.
5. COFAP shall establish procedures for periodic consultations including, where possible
and desirable, prior consultations with the objective of making recommendations to the Member State
concerned for the removal of the restrictions.
6. The consultations referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article shall:
(a) be designed to assist the Member State concerned to overcome its balanceof-payments and external financial difficulties;
(b) assess the balance-of-payments situation of the Member State concerned
and the restrictions adopted or maintained under this Article, taking into
account, inter alia:
(i) the nature and extent of the balance-of-payments and the external
financial difficulties;
(ii) the external economic and trading environment of the Member State
applying the restrictions; and
(iii) alternative corrective measures which may be available.
7. The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictions with paragraph 2
of this Article and, in particular, the progressive phase-out of restrictions in accordance with paragraph
2(d).
8. In such consultations, all findings of statistical and other facts presented by the
Committee of Central Bank Governors relating to foreign exchange, monetary reserves and balance-ofpayments, shall be accepted and conclusions shall be based on the assessment by the Committee of
the balance-of-payments and the external financial situation of the Member State concerned. 
27.
ARTICLE 44
Measures to Facilitate Establishment, Provision
of Services and Movement of Capital
1. In order to facilitate the exercise of the rights provided for in this Chapter, COTED and
COFAP shall, subject to the approval of the Conference, adopt appropriate measures for:
(a) the establishment of market intelligence and information systems in the
Community;
(b) harmonised legal and administrative requirements for the operation of
partnerships, companies, or other entities;
(c) abolition of exchange controls in the Community, and free convertibility of the
currencies of the Member States;
(d) the establishment of an integrated capital market in the Community;
(e) convergence of macro-economic performance and policies through the coordination or harmonisation of monetary and fiscal policies, including, in
particular, policies relating to interest rates, exchange rates, tax structures
and national budgetary deficits;
 (f) the establishment of economical and efficient land, sea and air transport
services throughout the Community, and
 (g) the establishment of efficient communication services.
2. COFAP and COTED shall establish a comprehensive set of rules in respect of the
areas listed in paragraph 1 of this Article for approval by the Conference.
ARTICLE 45
Movement of Community Nationals
Member States commit themselves to the goal of free movement of their nationals
within the Community.
ARTICLE 46
Movement of Skilled Community Nationals
1. Without prejudice to the rights recognised and agreed to be accorded by Member
States in Articles 32, 33, 37, 38 and 40 among themselves and to Community nationals, Member
States have agreed, and undertake as a first step towards achieving the goal set out in Article 45, to
accord to the following categories of Community nationals the right to seek employment in their
jurisdictions:
(a) University graduates;
(b) media workers;
(c) sportspersons;
(d) artistes; and
(e) musicians,
recognised as such by the competent authorities of the receiving Member States. 
28.
2. Member States shall establish appropriate legislative, administrative and procedural
arrangements to:
(a) facilitate the movement of skills within the contemplation of this Article;
(b) provide for movement of Community nationals into and within their
jurisdictions without harassment or the imposition of impediments,
including:
(i) the elimination of the requirement for passports for Community
nationals travelling to their jurisdictions;
(ii) the elimination of the requirement for work permits for Community
nationals seeking approved employment in their jurisdictions;
(iii) establishment of mechanisms for certifying and establishing
equivalency of degrees and for accrediting institutions;
(iv) harmonisation and transferability of social security benefits.
3. Nothing in this Treaty shall be construed as inhibiting Member States from according
Community nationals unrestricted access to, and movement within, their jurisdictions subject to such
conditions as the public interest may require.
4. The Conference shall keep the provisions of this Article under review in order to:
(a) enlarge, as appropriate, the classes of persons entitled to move and work
freely in the Community; and
(b) monitor and secure compliance therewith.
29.
ARTICLE 47
Restrictions to Resolve Difficulties or Hardships
Arising from the Exercise of Rights
1. Where the exercise of rights granted under this Chapter creates serious difficulties in
any sector of the economy of a Member State or occasions economic hardships in a region of the
Community, a Member State adversely affected thereby may, subject to the provisions of this Article,
apply such restrictions on the exercise of the rights as it considers appropriate in order to resolve the
difficulties or alleviate the hardships.
2. Where a Member State:
(a) intends to apply restrictions in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, it
shall, prior to applying those restrictions, notify the competent Organ of that
intention and the nature of the restrictions;
(b) is unable to comply with sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph, it shall, upon
applying the restrictions in accordance with paragraph 1, immediately notify
the competent Organ of the application and nature of the restrictions.
 3. The Member State shall, at the time of application of the restrictions mentioned in
paragraph 1, submit to COTED or COFAP, as the case may require, a programme setting out the
measures to be taken by that Member State to resolve the difficulties or to alleviate the hardships.
 4. The competent Organ shall give its earliest consideration to the programme, and:
(a) make a determination in respect of the appropriateness of the restrictions and
whether they shall be continued; and
(b) where it decides that the restrictions shall be continued, determine:
(i) the adequacy of the programme; and
(ii) the period for which the restrictions should continue.
The competent Organ, in making a determination under sub-paragraph (b) of this paragraph, may
impose such conditions as it considers necessary.
5. Restrictions applied by a Member State pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall
be confined to those necessary:
(a) to resolve the difficulties in the affected sectors;
(b) to alleviate economic hardships in a particular region.
6. In applying restrictions mentioned in paragraph 5, Member States shall:
(a) minimise damage to the commercial or economic interests of any other
Member State; or
(b) prevent the unreasonable exercise of rights granted under this Chapter, the
exclusion of which could impair the development of the CSME.
7. The Member States, in applying restrictions pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article,
shall not discriminate and:
30.
(a) shall progressively relax them as relevant conditions improve;
(b) may maintain them only to the extent that conditions mentioned in paragraph
1 of this Article continue to justify their application.
8. If COTED or COFAP, as the case may require, is not satisfied that Member States
applying restrictions are acting in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 6 of this Article, it may
recommend to the Member States adversely affected thereby alternative arrangements to the same
end.
ARTICLE 48
Waiver of Obligations to Grant Rights
1. Notwithstanding any provision in this Chapter, a Member State may apply to the
Community Council for a waiver of the requirement to grant any of the rights mentioned in paragraph
1 of Article 30 in respect of any industry, sector or enterprise.
2. An application for a waiver within the meaning of paragraph 1 of this Article shall:
(a) be made prior to the establishment of the relevant programme for the removal
of restrictions on the rights mentioned in paragraph 1;
(b) identify the rights in respect of which the waiver is required;
(c) set out the circumstances justifying the grant of the waiver; and
(d) indicate the period for which the waiver is required.
3. The Community Council may require the applicant to furnish such additional
information as the Council may specify.
4. Where the Community Council is satisfied that the waiver should be granted, it shall
grant a waiver for a period not exceeding five years, subject to such terms and conditions as the
Community Council may determine.
5. A Member State which has been granted a waiver within the meaning of paragraph
1 of this Article:
(a) shall not, while the waiver is in force, be entitled to espouse a claim on behalf
of its nationals against another Member State in respect of the rights for
which the waiver was granted;
(b) shall:
(i) at the termination of the period of the waiver, remove the restrictions
and notify the Community Council; or
(ii) where the Member State removes the restrictions before the end of
the period of the waiver, notify the Community Council accordingly.
31.
ARTICLE 49
Special Provisions for Less Developed Countries
Where in this Chapter, the Member States or competent Organs are required to
remove restrictions on the exercise of the rights mentioned in paragraph 1 of Article 30 the special
needs and circumstances of the Less Developed Countries shall be taken into account.
ARTICLE 50
Accelerated Implementation
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as precluding the Member States from
adopting measures to remove restrictions on the right of establishment, the right to provide services
or the right to move capital within the Community earlier than is required by these provisions.
CHAPTER FOUR
POLICIES FOR SECTORAL DEVELOPMENT
PART ONE
INDUSTRIAL POLICY
ARTICLE 51
Objectives of the Community Industrial Policy
1. The goal of the Community Industrial Policy shall be market-led, internationally
competitive and sustainable production of goods and services for the promotion of the Region’s
economic and social development.
2. In fulfilment of the goal set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Community shall
pursue the following objectives:
(a) cross-border employment of natural resources, human resources, capital,
technology and management capabilities for the production of goods and
services on a sustainable basis;
(b) linkages among economic sectors and enterprises within and among the
Member States of the CSME;
(c) promotion of regional economic enterprises capable of achieving scales of
production to facilitate successful competition in domestic and extra-regional
markets;
(d) establishment of a viable micro and small economic enterprise sector;
(e) enhanced and diversified production of goods and services for both export
and domestic markets;
(f) sustained public and private sector collaboration in order to secure marketled production of goods and services;
32.
(g) enhanced industrial production on an environmentally sustainable basis;
(h) balanced economic and social development in the CSME bearing in mind
the special needs of disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors within the
meaning of Article I; and
(i) stable industrial relations.
ARTICLE 52
Implementation of Community Industrial Policy
1. In order to achieve the objectives of its industrial policy, the Community shall
promote, inter alia:
(a) the co-ordination of national industrial policies of the Member States;
(b) the establishment and maintenance of an investment-friendly environment,
including a facilitative administrative process;
(c) the diversification of the products and markets for goods and services with
a view to increasing the range and value of exports;
(d) the organisation and development of product and factor markets;
(e) the development of required institutional, legal, technical, financial,
administrative and other support for the establishment or development of
micro and small economic enterprises throughout the Community; and
(f) in collaboration with the social partners, the advancement of production
integration.
 2. The Community shall establish a special regime for disadvantaged countries, regions
and sectors.
3. COTED shall, in collaboration with competent organs and bodies of the Community
and the private sector, establish criteria for according special consideration to particular industries and
sectors. Such criteria shall include, in particular, arrangements relating to the prospects of the
industry for successful production integration.
4. COTED shall collaborate with competent agencies to assist the Member States in
designing appropriate policy instruments to support industries, which may include effective export
promotion policies, financing policies, incentives and technology policies.
5. In implementing the Community Industrial Policy, COTED shall have regard to the
provisions of this Treaty relating to environmental protection.
6. The Member States undertake to establish and maintain appropriate macro-economic
policies supportive of efficient production in the Community. In addition, they shall undertake to put
in place arrangements for, inter alia:
(a) effective payment mechanisms;
(b) the avoidance of double taxation;
(c) harmonised legislation in relevant areas; 
33.
(d) the elimination of bureaucratic impediments to deployment of investments
in industrial enterprises;
(e) the improvement of infrastructure and co-operation in the areas of air and
maritime transport;
(f) communications systems.
7. In order to facilitate the implementation of the Community Industrial Policy, COTED
shall, in collaboration with competent organs and agencies:
(a) develop strategies for the development and dissemination of market
information and appropriate mechanisms to facilitate acquisition, storage
and retrieval of such information;
(b) promote the establishment and development of capital markets in the
Member States; and
(c) encourage the Member States to establish and develop export markets,
especially in non-traditional sectors, through the development of sectorspecific incentives and appropriate policy instruments.
8. For the purpose of this Article, “production integration” includes:
(a) the direct organisation of production in more than one Member State by a
single economic enterprise;
(b) complementary production involving collaboration among several economic
enterprises operating in one or more Member States to produce and use
required inputs in the production chain; and
(c) co-operation among economic enterprises in areas such as purchasing,
marketing, and research and development.
ARTICLE 53
Micro and Small Economic Enterprise Development
1. The Community shall adopt appropriate policy measures to encourage the
development of competitive micro and small economic enterprises in the Member States.
2. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the competent Organ shall
encourage policy initiatives and the establishment of effective programmes to foster a facilitative legal,
economic, and administrative framework in the Member States to enhance micro and small economic
enterprise development, and shall promote:
(a) the development of the capacities of national and regional support agencies
for micro and small economic enterprises, including the creation of
entrepreneurial centres, by organising technical assistance inclusive of
planning, delivery and evaluation of support services to the sector;
(b) access to, improvement in the quality of, and opportunities for training and
education in areas such as technical skills, entrepreneurial competence and
business management for micro and small entrepreneurs;
(c) access by micro and small economic enterprises to the technical assistance
provided by the support agencies;
(d) the establishment, development or modernising, as the case may require,
34.
of financial institutions to provide, to micro and small economic enterprises,
services by way of appropriate and innovative instruments;
(e) innovation within the micro and small enterprise sector; and
(f) the creation of, and access to, trade and technology information networks.
3. For the purposes of this Article, micro and small economic enterprises shall be
economic enterprises within the meaning of Article 32 that satisfy such other criteria as may be
determined by the competent authorities.
ARTICLE 54
Development of the Services Sector
1. COTED shall, in collaboration with the appropriate Councils, promote the
development of the services sector in the Community in order to stimulate economic
complementarities among, and accelerate economic development in, the Member States. In
particular, COTED shall promote measures to achieve:
(a) increased investment in services;
(b) increased volume, value and range of trade in services within the
Community and with third States;
(c) competitiveness in the modes of delivering services; and
(d) enhanced enterprise and infrastructural development, including that of micro
and small service enterprises.
2. In order to achieve the objectives set out in paragraph 1, the Member States shall,
through the appropriate Councils, collaborate in:
(a) designing programmes for the development of human resources to achieve
competitiveness in the provision of services;
(b) establishing a regime of incentives for the development of and trade in
services; and
(c) adopting measures to promote the establishment of an appropriate
institutional and administrative framework and, in collaboration with the
Legal Affairs Committee, promote the establishment of the appropriate legal
framework to support the services sector in the Community.
3. In the establishment of programmes and policies of the Community for the
development of the services sector, the relevant Councils shall give priority to:
(a) the efficient provision of infrastructural services including
telecommunications, road, air, maritime and riverain transportation,
statistical data generation and financial services;
(b) the development of capacity-enhancing services including education
services, research and development services;
(c) the development of services which enhance cross-sector competitiveness;
(d) the facilitation of cross-border provision of services which enhance the
competitiveness of the services sector; and
35.
(e) the development of informatics and other knowledge-based services.
ARTICLE 55
Sustainable Tourism Development
1. The Community shall, in collaboration with competent international organisations,
formulate proposals for sustainable tourism development. These proposals shall recognise the
importance of the tourism sub-sector to the economic development of the Region, and the need to
conserve its cultural and natural resources and to maintain a balance between a healthy ecology and
economic development.
2. The programme for sustainable tourism development shall have the following
objectives:
(a) an enhanced image for the Region as a tourist destination;
(b) a diversified tourism product of a consistently high quality;
(c) an expanded market-base;
(d) education programmes designed to ensure that appropriate practices are
pursued by service-providers;
(e) linkages with other sectors in the economy;
(f) conservation of the natural and cultural resources of the Region through
proper management; and
(g) appropriate infrastructure and other services in support of tourism,
considering the natural and social carrying-capacity of the Member States.
PART TWO
AGRICULTURAL POLICY
ARTICLE 56
The Community Agricultural Policy
1. The goal of the Community Agricultural Policy shall be:
(a) the fundamental transformation of the agricultural sector towards marketoriented, internationally competitive and environmentally sound production
of agricultural products;
(b) improved income and employment opportunities, food and nutrition security,
and poverty alleviation in the Community;
(c) the efficient cultivation and production of traditional and non-traditional
primary agricultural products;
(d) increased production and diversification of processed agricultural products;
(e) an enlarged share of world markets for primary and processed agricultural
products; and
(f) the efficient management and sustainable exploitation of the Region’s
natural resources, including its forests and the living resources of the
exclusive economic zone,
bearing in mind the differences in resource endowment and economic development of the Member
36.
States.
ARTICLE 57
Implementation of the Community Agricultural Policy
1. For the achievement of the goal set out in Article 56, the Community shall, through
competent Community Organs and Bodies, promote and support:
(a) the production, diversification, processing and marketing of agricultural
products;
(b) the establishment of effective agricultural financing systems, including
insurance, bearing in mind the special needs of artisanal fishers, small
farmers, foresters and agro-processors;
(c) the establishment of linkages among the Member States with
complementary natural resources, industries, agricultural skills and technical
abilities;
(d) the development of human resources and delivery systems responsive to
the requirements of the agricultural sector;
(e) the development of appropriate policies for the use of land and marine
space with a view to increased agricultural production;
(f) appropriate land tenure systems to provide the farmer with security of
tenure;
(g) the establishment of effective information and market intelligence services;
(h) research and development with a view to the adaptation, dissemination and
application of appropriate technologies at all levels of the sector and all
stages of production;
(i) the adoption of effective measures for rural enterprise development;
(j) public education to enhance the economic and social profiles of agriculture,
particularly among the youth;
(k) the establishment of an effective regime of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures;
(l) the establishment of a policy environment designed to attract investment to
the agricultural sector; and
(m) technical co-operation and the dissemination of knowledge in agriculture.
2. For the purpose of assisting the Member States to implement the agricultural policy
set out in paragraph 1, COTED shall establish effective support measures including:
(a) strengthening the relevant administrative and institutional framework to
modernise and enhance the competitiveness of agriculture by:
(i) improving the capability of the Member States to undertake policy
analysis, formulation, planning, execution and resource mobilisation
for the development of the sector; 
37.
(ii) investigating and analysing developments in the agri-food sector;
and
(iii) improvement of the collection, analysis and dissemination of
empirical data and other relevant information;
(b) upgrading of national and regional capabilities in the areas of sustainable
natural resources management;
(c) enhancement of the capabilities of the Member States in the areas of
agricultural trade analysis and negotiations; and
(d) promotion of a mechanism for the collaboration of farmers, fishers, foresters
and the social partners in agricultural development.
3. The Community shall:
(a) promote collaboration among the Member States and competent regional
organisations in the areas of policy formulation and implementation of
regional agricultural policies; and
(b) establish an effective regime to protect regional agricultural production from
dumping, subsidisation and other unfair trading practices.
4. The Community shall, as a matter of priority, and in collaboration with national,
regional and international agencies and organisations, promote and adopt measures relating, inter
alia, to:
(a) the provision of appropriate inputs; and
(b) the development of infrastructure, such as port facilities, drainage, irrigation,
access roads, post-harvest handling and marketing facilities.
ARTICLE 58
Natural Resource Management
1. The Community shall adopt effective measures to assist the Member States in the
management of their natural resources in support of the transformation and sustainable development
of the agricultural sector.
2. Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph 1 and to obligations of Member
States under existing international agreements, the Community shall adopt measures for:
(a) the effective management of the soil, air and all water resources, the
exclusive economic zone and all other maritime areas under the national
jurisdiction of the Member States; and
(b) the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of biological
resources of the Member States, especially those of important medicinal
and traditional value.
ARTICLE 59
Marketing of Agricultural Products
38.
1. The Community shall, in collaboration with competent national, regional and
international organisations, promote the development of effective agricultural marketing systems in
order to respond to, influence and generate market demand for agricultural products of the Member
States.
2. In effecting the promotion referred to in paragraph 1, the Community shall pay
particular attention to:
(a) market information, intelligence and planning;
(b) improved post-harvest technology;
(c) risk insurance; and
(d) efficient distribution services.
3. In order to accomplish the objectives referred to in paragraph 1, the Community shall
adopt measures to promote:
(a) the establishment of a regional market information system;
(b) the improvement of production and market information systems of the
Member States in order to facilitate, inter alia, the efficient co-ordination of
marketing strategies and systems;
(c) institutional arrangements including producer associations and joint venture
marketing enterprises in order to respond to existing and changing market
conditions;
(d) niche marketing;
(e) linkages between agriculture and other sectors in particular, the tourism
sector;
(f) the identification and utilisation of sources of low cost alternative inputs;
(g) the establishment and adoption of regional standards and specifications
compatible with international standards for products being traded;
(h) enhanced productivity and food quality;
(i) insurance coverage for primary agricultural products; and
(j) the development of efficient distribution services to facilitate intra-regional
and extra-regional marketing.
4. In pursuance of the need to generate market demand for agricultural products of the
Member States and to promote the agricultural development of the Less Developed Countries, the
Member States shall agree to the arrangements for marketing oils and fats set out in Schedule III.
ARTICLE 60
Fisheries Management and Development
1. The Community, in collaboration with competent national, regional and international
agencies and organisations, shall promote the development, management and conservation of the
fisheries resources in and among the Member States on a sustainable basis.
2. The Community shall effect the promotion and facilitation referred to in paragraph 1
by:
39.
(a) enhancing the institutional capabilities of the Member States in areas such
as policy formulation, registration and management systems, resource
monitoring and assessment, and harvesting and post-harvesting
technologies;
(b) establishing mechanisms to provide assistance in:
(i) the development, management and conservation of the fisheries
resources;
(ii) the discharge of obligations relating to fisheries resources arising
under Articles 62, 63 and 64 of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (1982).
(c) effective regional representation at international fora;
(d) establishing development programmes for aquaculture;
(e) encouraging the establishment of protected aquatic habitats and associated
terrestrial areas and fish populations for the sustainable development of
fisheries resources of the Member States; and
(f) establishing, facilitating and strengthening research and human resource
development at the professional, technical and vocational levels.
3. The Community shall collaborate with the Member States in:
(a) the management of straddling and highly migratory fish stocks;
(b) ongoing surveillance of their exclusive economic zones;
(c) the delimitation of maritime boundaries; and
(d) safeguarding their marine environment from pollutants and hazardous
wastes.
4. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 56, COFCOR shall promote the
establishment of a regime for the effective management, conservation and utilisation of the living
resources of the exclusive economic zones of the Member States.
5. For the purpose of this Article, “fisheries resources” includes all the fishable
resources, natural and cultured, in the inland and internal waters, territorial seas and the exclusive
economic zones of the Member States.
ARTICLE 61
Forest Management and Development
1. The Community shall, in collaboration with competent national, regional and
international agencies and organisations, promote the development, management and conservation
of the forest resources in the Member States on a sustainable basis.
2. The Community shall effect the promotion and facilitation referred to in paragraph 1
by formulating policies and programmes for:
(a) the management of its forest resources;
(b) the integration of forest development in rural communities;
40.
(c) enhancing the institutional capabilities of the Member States to design and
implement forest management systems;
(d) establishing, facilitating and strengthening programmes for research and for
human resource development at the professional, technical and vocational
levels;
(e) encouraging public and private sector participation in the development and
application of technology;
(f) providing incentives for forestry development to stimulate domestic, regional
and foreign investment in the forestry sub-sector;
(g) harmonising standards for quality assurance, compatible with international
specifications;
(h) promoting commercialisation of natural forest products in a sustainable
manner; and
(i) undertaking national forest inventories.
3. For the purposes of this Article, “forest resources” are those natural assets of forest
lands, including timber and other forest products, biological diversity, recreation, fish and wildlife
habitat, wilderness, flora and fauna, air, water and soil.
ARTICLE 62
Saving
The provisions of this Chapter are without prejudice to obligations of the Member
States under existing international agreements.
PART THREE
COMMON SUPPORTIVE MEASURES
ARTICLE 63
Human Resources Development
1. Without prejudice to any other provision of this Treaty relating to human resources
development, the COTED shall, in collaboration with the COHSOD, adopt measures to develop the
Community’s human resources which shall, inter alia, support its thrust toward international
competitiveness in the development, production and delivery of goods and services.
2. The measures referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be designed to address
the economic, social and cultural aspects of human resources development, and shall include the
following:
(a) development of programmes that will assist Community nationals in
engendering the attitudes and acquiring the competence to function
effectively;
(b) development of the skills and attitudes required to foster a culture of
entrepreneurship;
41.
(c) establishing and strengthening educational and training institutions for
formal and informal modes of delivery and alternative modes for distance
education;
(d) development of industry-oriented curricula designed to improve the
competitiveness of regional industries; and
(e) promotion of multi-lingual skills at all levels for general education, with
particular emphasis on the needs of the services sector.
3. The Community shall, in particular and on a continuing basis, adopt effective
measures for the development of human resources to satisfy the requirements for cadres of skilled
agricultural personnel at all levels in the Member States.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, provision shall be made to:
(a) monitor and evaluate, on an on-going basis, the demand for, and
appropriateness of agricultural education and training;
(b) establish training programmes in the agricultural sector;
(c) develop effective delivery of in-field training for farmers, foresters and
fishers; and
(d) improve the facilities and strengthen the capabilities of regional training
institutions and national administrations in support of agricultural
development.
5. In performing the functions referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article, the Community
shall collaborate with education and training institutions and relevant regional and international
organisations in developing harmonised agricultural syllabuses, training materials and case studies
in key areas of farming, fisheries and forestry utilising distance education technology where
appropriate.
ARTICLE 64
Research and Development
1. COTED shall promote market-led research, technological development and
adaptation of technology in the Community in order to support the production, on a sustainable basis,
of goods and services in the Member States with a view to diversifying such production and
enhancing its international competitiveness.
2. In the discharge of its mandate set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, COTED shall
adopt measures to encourage, inter alia, inventions and innovation, and acquisition, transfer,
assimilation, adaptation and diffusion of technologies in the Community. Without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing, COTED shall:
(a) encourage public and private sector agencies, research establishments and
tertiary institutions in their research and technological development activities
and assist in identifying sources of funding for such activities;
(b) promote co-operation in research and technological development among the
Member States and with third States and competent international
organisations;
(c) facilitate co-operation:
(i) in training;
42.
(ii) in the exchange of scientific and technical information among
competent institutions;
(iii) in the free movement of researchers in the Community;
(iv) among private sector enterprises to integrate the results of research
and development in the production process;
(d) develop and implement technological policies and strategies, having due
regard for the importance of technology management and protection of
intellectual property rights;
(e) facilitate access by Community nationals to technological and research
facilities of Member States; and
(f) promote the development of technology extension services.
3. In particular, COTED shall promote and encourage research and development, and
the adaptation, diffusion and transfer of appropriate technologies in order to achieve increased
agricultural production and productivity, bearing in mind the need to protect the independence and
human rights of the farming community.
4. COTED shall, in collaboration with competent public and private sector research and
development institutions, encourage and assist Member States:
(a) to facilitate access to and use of new and appropriate technologies in the
agricultural sector;
(b) to develop:
(i) efficient systems for the generation and transfer of ppropriate
technologies; and
(ii) technological and institutional capabilities in the public and private
sectors,
compatible with competitive and sustainable agricultural production.
5. In the pursuit of its functions under this Article, COTED shall encourage the private
sector to play a vital role in:
(a) the development, adaptation and transfer of appropriate technologies in the
agricultural sector; and
(b) the development of producer associations as a basis for autonomous action
and intra-regional transfer of technologies and research findings.
6. COTED shall co-operate with the Member States and competent organisations to
devise means of protecting, developing and commercialising local knowledge about the value and use
of the Region’s biodiversity for the benefit of their populations, especially their indigenous peoples.
ARTICLE 65
Environmental Protection
1. The policies of the Community shall be implemented in a manner that ensures the
prudent and rational management of the resources of the Member States. In particular, the
43.
Community shall promote measures to ensure:
(a) the preservation, protection and improvement of the quality of the
environment;
(b) the protection of the life and health of humans, animals and plants; and
(c) the adoption of initiatives at the Community level to address regional
environmental problems.
2. In formulating measures in relation to the environment, the Community shall take
account of:
(a) available and accessible scientific and technical data;
(b) environmental conditions in the Member States;
(c) the potential costs and benefits of action or inaction;
(d) the economic and social development of the Community as a whole and the
balanced development of the Member States;
(e) the precautionary principle and those principles relating to preventive action,
rectification of environmental damage at source and the principle that the
polluter pays; and
(f) the need to protect the Region from the harmful effects of hazardous
materials transported, generated, disposed of or shipped through or within
the Community.
3. In performing its functions under this Treaty, COTED shall ensure a balance between
the requirements of industrial development and the protection and preservation of the environment.
4. In giving effect to this Article, the Community and the Member States shall, within
their respective spheres of competence, co-operate with third States and competent environmental
organisations.
ARTICLE 66
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights
COTED shall promote the protection of intellectual property rights within the
Community by, inter alia:
(a) the strengthening of regimes for the protection of intellectual property rights
and the simplification of registration procedures in the Member States;
(b) the establishment of a regional administration for intellectual property rights
except copyright;
(c) the identification and establishment, by the Member States of mechanisms
to ensure:
 (i) the use of protected works for the enhanced benefit of the Member
States;
 (ii) the preservation of indigenous Caribbean culture; and
(iii) the legal protection of the expressions of folklore, other traditional
44.
knowledge and national heritage, particularly of indigenous
populations in the Community;
(d) increased dissemination and use of patent documentation as a source of
technological information;
(e) public education;
(f) measures to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by rightsholders or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or
adversely affect the international transfer of technology; and
(g) participation by the Member States in international regimes for the protection
of intellectual property rights.
ARTICLE 67
Standards and Technical Regulations
1. COTED shall, in collaboration with competent agencies, develop a standardisation
programme in furtherance of the objectives of this Chapter and consistent with the international
obligations of the Member States.
2. In implementing the programme, the Member States shall not use standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures as barriers to trade.
3. The programme shall have the following objectives:
(a) trade facilitation;
(b) enhanced efficiency in the production and delivery of goods and services;
(c) improved quality of goods and services traded within the Community and
with third States; and
(d) consumer and environmental protection.
4. The programme shall include the following elements:
(a) harmonisation of standards and technical regulations, and transparency in
the development and promulgation of standards and technical regulations;
(b) recognition of conformity assessment procedures through mutual
recognition agreements or other means;
(c) facilitation of standards infrastructure development at the national and
regional levels;
(d) facilitation of metrology infrastructure development; and
(e) arrangements for the exchange of information with respect to development
and implementation of standards and technical regulations among the
parties to this Treaty.
5. The Community shall promote the establishment of a regional standards body which
shall, inter alia:
45.
(a) facilitate implementation of the standardisation programme;
(b) assist the Member States in understanding and fulfilling their obligations
under this Treaty and other international agreements;
(c) promote the development of national standards bodies in the Member
States; and
(d) facilitate access to technical assistance available in the Member States and
in third States.
6. For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions apply:
(a) “technical regulations” means regulations which lay down product
characteristics or their related processes and production methods, including
the applicable administrative provisions, with which compliance is
mandatory. The term may also include or deal exclusively with terminology,
symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements as they apply to a
product, process or production method.
(b) “standard” means a guideline approved by a recognised body, that provides,
for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for
products or related processes and production methods, with which
compliance is not mandatory. The term may also include or deal exclusively
with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements as
they apply to a product, process or production method.
(c) “conformity assessment procedures” includes any procedure used, directly
or indirectly, to determine that relevant requirements in technical regulations
or standards are fulfilled.
ARTICLE 68
Community Investment Policy
COTED in collaboration with COFAP and COHSOD shall establish a Community
Investment Policy which shall include sound national macro-economic policies, a harmonised system
of investment incentives, stable industrial relations, appropriate financial institutions and
arrangements, supportive legal and social infrastructure and modernisation of the role of public
authorities.
ARTICLE 69
Harmonisation of Investment Incentives
1. The Member States shall harmonise national incentives to investments in the
industrial, agricultural and services sectors.
2. COFAP shall, consistently with relevant international agreements, formulate
proposals for the establishment of regimes for the granting of incentives to enterprises in the sectors
mentioned in paragraph 1. In particular, such proposals shall accord support for industries considered
to be of strategic interest to the Community.
3. In formulating the proposals mentioned in paragraph 2, COFAP shall give due
consideration to the peculiarities of the industries concerned and, without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing, may provide for the following:
(a) national incentives to investment designed to promote sustainable, exportled industrial and service-oriented development;
46.
(b) investment facilitation through the removal of bureaucratic impediments; and
(c) non-discrimination in the granting of incentives among Community nationals.
ARTICLE 70
Macro-Economic Policies
1. COFAP shall formulate proposals and adopt appropriate measures to promote a
sound macro-economic environment in the Member States, consistent with their obligations under this
Treaty and applicable international agreements.
2. COFAP shall, in collaboration with other competent Organs, promote economic
development in the Member States through the development and application of convergent macroeconomic policies to ensure fiscal discipline, favourable balance-of-payments, stable currencies and
moderate prices without prejudice to securing high levels of employment.
3. COFAP shall collaborate with COFCOR and COTED in co-ordinating:
(a) the economic policies of the Member States; and
(b) the positions and presentations of the Member States in all international
economic, financial and trade meetings at which they are represented.
4. In support of the development of macro-economic policies, the Community shall
provide for harmonisation of the output of the statistical services of the Member States.
ARTICLE 71
Financial Infrastructure
COFAP shall adopt proposals for the establishment of financial infrastructure
supportive of investments in the Community. In particular, COFAP shall assist the Member States
in establishing capital markets, financial institutions and appropriate financial instruments to facilitate
capital investment on a sustainable basis.
 ARTICLE 72
Double Taxation Agreements
1. The Member States shall conclude among themselves an agreement for the
avoidance of double taxation in order to facilitate the free movement of capital in the Community.
2. The Member States shall conclude their double taxation agreements with third States
on the basis of mutually agreed principles which shall be determined by COFAP.
ARTICLE 73
Industrial Relations
COHSOD shall, in consultation with COTED, formulate proposals and adopt
appropriate measures for the promotion of harmonious, stable and enlightened industrial relations in
the Community. In formulating such measures and proposals, COHSOD shall, inter alia, promote:
(a) the objectives of full employment, improved living and working conditions;
adequate social security policies and programmes; tripartite consultations
among governments, workers’ and employers’ organisations; and crossborder mobility of labour;
47.
(b) recognition of the principle of non-discriminatory treatment among
Community workers in the pursuit of employment within the Community;
(c) the establishment and maintenance of effective mechanisms for the
enhancement of industrial relations, particularly that of collective bargaining;
and
(d) awareness among Community workers and employers that international
competitiveness is essential for social and economic development of
Member States and requires collaboration of employers and workers for
increased production and productivity in Community enterprises.
ARTICLE 74
Legal Infrastructure
1. The Legal Affairs Committee shall co-operate with competent Organs of the
Community to advise the Member States on the legal infrastructure required to promote investments
in the Member States, including cross-border investments, bearing in mind the provisions of Article
68.
2. The Member States shall harmonise their laws and administrative practices in respect
of, inter alia:
(a) companies or other legal entities;
(b) intellectual property rights;
(c) standards and technical regulations;
(d) labelling of food and drugs;
(e) sanitary and phytosanitary measures;
(f) competition policy;
(g) dumping;
(h) subsidies and countervailing measures; and
(i) commercial arbitration.
ARTICLE 75
Development of Social Infrastructure
1. In establishing its industrial policy, the Community shall promote appropriate
measures for the establishment of adequate social infrastructure, the alleviation of poverty, and
securing social stability in the Member States.
2. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Community shall promote in
the Member States:
(a) the establishment and improvement of health, education, sports and social
security institutions and facilities;
(b) conclusion of reciprocal social security agreements among Member States
in order to facilitate the movement of skills; and
48.
(c) training and retraining of workers, mobility of instructors and trainees, cooperation among educational and training institutions, and the development
of distance education.
3. The Member States shall engender an understanding and appreciation of the
Community through effective public relations, educational, cultural and youth exchange programmes.
ARTICLE 76
Role of Public Authorities
COTED shall promote the modernisation of government bureaucracies by, inter alia:
(a) encouraging the development of closer contacts between public sector
administrations, industry and other stakeholders to ensure that challenges
presented by the global environment are understood and co-operative
solutions developed;
(b) removing impediments and improving the regulatory framework for
economic enterprises at national and regional levels;
(c) encouraging cost-effectiveness in the delivery of services to the public; and
(d) proposing adequate arrangements to address the changes in the business
environment and future challenges to industry.
ARTICLE 77
Special Provisions for Less Developed Countries
Where in this Chapter Member States or competent Organs are required to adopt
measures for the achievement of the Community Industrial Policy, the special needs and
circumstances of the Less Developed Countries shall be taken into account.
CHAPTER FIVE
TRADE POLICY
PART ONE
PRELIMINARY
ARTICLE 78
Objectives of the Community Trade Policy
1. The goal of the Community Trade Policy shall be the sustained growth of intraCommunity and international trade and mutually beneficial exchange of goods and services among
the Member States and between the Community and third States.
2. In fulfilment of the goal set out in paragraph 1 of this Article the Community shall
pursue the following objectives:
(a) full integration of the national markets of all Member States of the
Community into a single unified and open market area;
(b) the widening of the market area of the Community;
(c) the active promotion of export of internationally competitive goods and
services originating within the Community;
49.
(d) the securing of the most favourable terms of trade for Community goods and
services exported to third States and groups of States.
3. In order to achieve the objectives of its Trade Policy, the Community shall:
(a) undertake:
(i) the establishment of common instruments, common services and
the joint regulation, operation and efficient administration of the
internal and external commerce of the CSME;
(ii) where possible, the employment of common negotiating strategies
in the development of mutually beneficial trade agreements with
third States and groups of States;
(iii) participation and joint representation as appropriate in international
and regional organisations which negotiate, establish and apply
disciplines governing international and regional trade;
(b) prohibit the imposition by the Member States of new restrictions on imports
and exports of products of Community origin.
4. Member States shall eliminate existing restrictions on imports and exports of goods
of Community origin, other than those authorised by this Treaty.
ARTICLE 79
General Provisions on Trade Liberalisation
1. The Member States shall establish and maintain a regime for the free movement of
goods and services within the CSME.
2. Each Member State shall refrain from trade policies and practices, the object or effect
of which is to distort competition, frustrate free movement of goods and services, or otherwise nullify
or impair benefits to which other Member States are entitled under this Treaty.
3. The Member States shall not introduce in their territories any new restrictions on
imports or exports of Community origin save as otherwise provided in this Treaty.
ARTICLE 80
Co-ordination of External Trade Policy
1. The Member States shall co-ordinate their trade policies with third States or groups
of third States.
2. The Community shall pursue the negotiation of external trade and economic
agreements on a joint basis in accordance with principles and mechanisms established by the
Conference.
3. Bilateral agreements to be negotiated by Member States in pursuance of their
national strategic interests shall:
(a) be without prejudice to their obligations under the Treaty; and
(b) prior to their conclusion, be subject to certification by the CARICOM
Secretariat that the agreements do not prejudice or place at a disadvantage
the position of other CARICOM States vis-a-vis the Treaty.
4. Where trade agreements involving tariff concessions are being negotiated, the prior
50.
approval of COTED shall be required.
 5. Nothing in this Treaty shall preclude Belize from concluding arrangements with
neighbouring economic groupings provided that treatment not less favourable than that accorded to
third States within such groupings shall be accorded to the Member States of the Community, and
that the arrangements make adequate provision to guard against the deflection of trade into the rest
of CARICOM from the countries of such groupings through Belize.
ARTICLE 81
Deposit of Agreements with Third Countries
The Member States shall deposit with the Secretariat, agreements relating to trade
or aid concluded by them with third countries.
PART TWO
TRADE LIBERALISATION
ARTICLE 82
Establishment of Common External Tariff
The Member States shall establish and maintain a common external tariff in respect
of all goods which do not qualify for Community treatment in accordance with plans and schedules
set out in relevant determinations of COTED.
ARTICLE 83
Operation of the Common External Tariff
1. Any alteration or suspension of the Common External Tariff on any item shall be
decided by COTED.
2. Where:
(a) a product is not being produced in the Community;
(b) the quantity of the product being produced in the Community does not
satisfy the demand of the Community; or
(c) the quality of the product being produced in the Community is below the
Community standard or a standard the use of which is authorised by
COTED,
COTED may decide to authorise the reduction or suspension of the Common External Tariff in
respect of imports of that product subject to such terms and conditions as it may decide, provided that
in no case shall the product imported from third States be accorded more favourable treatment than
similar products produced in the Member States.
3. The authority referred to in paragraph 2 to suspend the Common External Tariff may
be exercised by the Secretary-General on behalf of COTED during any period between meetings of
COTED. Any exercise of such authority by the Secretary-General shall be reported to the next
meeting of COTED.
4. Each Member State shall, for the purpose of administering the Common External
Tariff, appoint a competent authority which shall be notified to COTED.
5. COTED shall continuously review the Common External Tariff, in whole or in part,
to assess its impact on production and trade, as well as to secure its uniform implementation
throughout the Community, in particular, by reducing the need for discretionary application in the day
51.
to day administration of the Tariff.
ARTICLE 84
Community Rules of Origin
1. Subject to the provisions of this Article, goods that have been consigned from one
Member State to a consignee in another Member State shall be treated as being of Community origin,
where the goods:
(a) have been wholly produced within the Community; or
(b) have been produced within the Community wholly or partly from materials
imported from outside the Community or from materials of undetermined
origin by a process which effects a substantial transformation characterised:
(i) by the goods being classified in a tariff heading different from that
in which any of those materials is classified; or
(ii) in the case of the goods set out in the List in Schedule I to this
Treaty (hereinafter referred to as “the List”), only by satisfying the
conditions therefor specified.
2. Goods that have been consigned from one Member State to a consignee in another
Member State for repair, renovation or improvement shall, on their return to the Member State from
which they were exported, be treated for the purpose of re-importation only, in like manner as goods
which are of Community origin, provided that the goods are reconsigned directly to that Member State
from which they were exported and the value of materials imported from outside the Community or
of undetermined origin which have been used in the process of repair, renovation or improvement
does not exceed:
(a) in the case where the goods have undergone the process of repair,
renovation or improvement in a More Developed Country, 65 per cent of the
cost of repair, renovation or improvement;
(b) in the case where the goods have undergone the process of repair,
renovation or improvement in a Less Developed Country, 80 per cent of the
cost of repair, renovation or improvement.
3. Where there is an interruption or inadequacy of supplies of regional materials and
the manufacturer of goods, for which the qualifying condition for Community origin is that of “wholly
produced” or “produced from regional materials”, is unable by reason of circumstances beyond his
control to obtain supplies of the regional materials, he shall so inform the competent authority.
4. The competent authority shall:
(a) after receipt of information from the manufacturer, cause investigations to
be made into the matter, and if he is satisfied that the representation from
the manufacturer is justified, submit to the Secretary-General in the
prescribed instrument an application for a certificate provided for in this
Article;
(b) at the time of making the application, inform the other Member States of the
inability of the manufacturer to obtain the supplies of the required materials
from within the Community with respect to quantities and specifications of
the materials sought and the period during which the materials are required.
5. The Secretary-General shall, on receipt of the application from the competent
authority:
52.
(a) forthwith make the relevant enquiries by the quickest possible means from
the competent authorities in the other Member States as to their ability to
supply the materials required by the manufacturer; and
(b) request a reply to the enquiry from each competent authority within seven
calendar days of the despatch of his enquiry.
6. A competent authority shall reply to the enquiry referred to in paragraph 5 within the
time specified.
7. Where the Secretary-General, on the basis of his investigations, is satisfied that the
application received from the competent authority justifies favourable consideration, he shall,
notwithstanding that he may not have received a reply to his enquiry from one or more Member
States, within fourteen calendar days after the receipt of the application from the competent authority,
issue, on behalf of COTED, a certificate to the competent authority authorising the use of like
materials from outside the Community, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose.
8. The Secretary-General shall inform the Member States of the issue of his certificate,
including any conditions attaching thereto and that notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the
provisions of this Article, goods manufactured from like materials imported from outside the
Community shall be deemed to be of Community origin.
9. A Member State may treat as of Community origin any imports consigned from
another Member State, provided that the like imports consigned from any other Member State are
accorded the same treatment. Member States concerned shall promptly inform COTED of any
trading arrangements concluded pursuant to this paragraph and COTED may, as it thinks fit,
recommend to the Member States concerned the adoption of alternative trading arrangements.
10. The provisions of Schedule I shall apply to and have effect for the purposes of this
Article. COTED shall keep the Schedule and, in particular, the List under continuous review, and may
amend the Schedule in order to ensure the achievement of the objectives of the Community.
11. The issue of a certificate in accordance with paragraph 7 shall be reported by the
Secretary-General to COTED at the Meeting of COTED next following the date of issue thereof.
ARTICLE 85
Export Promotion
1. COTED shall adopt appropriate measures for the promotion and export of goods and
services.
2. In the implementation of measures to promote exports, COTED shall give
consideration to:
(a) the establishment and maintenance of effective trade information systems
and services;
(b) the design and implementation of trade facilitation programmes including the
conduct of market research and the organisation of trade missions;
(c) the co-ordination and support of the active participation of the Member
States in international trade promotion fora, including trade fairs and
exhibitions.
ARTICLE 86
Freedom of Transit 
53.
1. The Member States shall grant freedom of transit within the Community with respect
to goods and vessels and other vehicles transporting those goods.
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1 of this Article, transit means the passage of goods
and of vessels and aircraft and vehicles transporting those goods:
(a) through or across the frontier of a Member State;
(b) with or without transhipment, warehousing, breaking bulk or change of mode
of transport,
where the passage is only a portion of a journey beginning and terminating beyond its frontier.
3. In granting freedom of transit within the meaning of paragraph 2, the Member States:
(a) shall ensure that there are no unnecessary delays or restrictions and that
goods, vessels, aircraft and vehicles transporting those goods are subject
only to charges for transport, handling, and other services rendered;
(b) shall not discriminate based on the flag of vessels, place of origin,
departure, entry, exit or destination or any circumstance relating to the
ownership of goods, vessels, or aircraft or vehicles;
(c) shall, with respect to regulations, formalities, fees and other service charges
in connection with the transit, ensure that treatment extended to any
Member State is on terms no less favourable than those extended to all
other Member States.
ARTICLE 87
Import Duties
1. Save as otherwise provided in this Treaty, Member States shall not impose import
duties on goods of Community origin.
2. Nothing in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be construed to extend to the imposition
of non-discriminatory internal charges on any products or a substitute not produced in the importing
Member State.
3. This Article does not apply to fees and similar charges commensurate with the cost
of services rendered.
 4. Nothing in paragraph 3 of this Article shall be construed to exclude from the
application of paragraph 1 of this Article any tax or surtax of customs on any product or a substitute
not produced in the importing State.
ARTICLE 88
Prohibition of Export Duties
1. The Member States shall not apply any export duties on goods of Community origin
traded within the Community.
2. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Member State from taking such measures as
are necessary to prevent evasion of export duties which are applied to products destined for export
outside of the Community where such products are re-exported through another Member State.
54.
3. For the purposes of this Article, "export duties" means any duties or charges with
equivalent effect imposed on or in connection with the exportation of goods.
ARTICLE 89
Export Drawback
1. A Member State may refuse to treat as of Community origin goods which benefit from
export drawback allowed by other Member States. In applying this paragraph, a Member State shall
accord the same treatment to such goods consigned from all other Member States.
2. Whenever a Member State intends to apply an export drawback within the meaning
of paragraph 6, it shall notify COTED.
3. The Member State shall, at the time of notification, set out the circumstances which
justify the need to apply an export drawback, the products which will benefit therefrom, the nature and
proposed duration of the measures, and such other information as COTED may prescribe from time
to time.
4. COTED shall give its earliest consideration to the notification referred to in paragraph
3 and make a determination of the appropriateness of the measures and, if it is not satisfied, may
recommend that the Member State which intends to apply an export drawback, modify the
programme.
5. COTED shall review annually all export drawback programmes maintained by
Member States.
6. For the purposes of this Article -
(a) `export drawback’ means any arrangement for the refund or remission,
wholly or in part, of import duties applicable to imported materials: provided
that the arrangement, expressly or in effect, allows refund or remission if
certain goods or materials are exported, but not if they are retained for home
use;
(b) `remission’ includes exemption for materials brought into free ports and
other places which have similar customs privileges;
(c) `duties’ means:
(i) all charges on or in connection with importation, except fiscal
charges to which Article 80 applies; and
(ii) any protective element in such fiscal charges;
(d) `materials’ shall have the meaning assigned to it in Rule I of Schedule I to
this Treaty.
ARTICLE 90
Internal Taxes and Other Fiscal Charges
1. Save as otherwise provided in this Treaty, Member States shall not:
(a) apply directly or indirectly to imported goods of Community origin any fiscal
charges in excess of those applied directly or indirectly to like domestic
goods, or otherwise apply such charges so as to protect like domestic
goods; or
55.
(b) apply fiscal charges to imported goods of Community origin of a kind which
they do not produce, or which they do not produce in substantial quantities,
in such a way as to protect the domestic production of substitutes which
enter into direct competition with them and which do not bear, directly or
indirectly, in the country of importation, fiscal charges of equivalent
incidence.
2. A Member State shall notify COTED of all fiscal charges applied by it where,
although the rates of charge, or the conditions governing the imposition or collection of the charge,
are not identical in relation to the imported goods and to the like domestic goods, the Member State
applying the charge considers that the charge is, or has been made, consistently with sub-paragraph
(a) of paragraph 1 of this Article. A Member State shall, at the request of any other Member State,
supply information about the application of paragraph I of this Article.
3. For the purposes of this Article `fiscal charges’ means internal taxes and other
internal charges with equivalent effect on goods.
ARTICLE 91
Quantitative Restrictions
1. Save as otherwise provided in this Treaty, and in particular Articles 88, 89 and 90,
and in Schedules II, III and IV, a Member State shall not apply any quantitative restrictions on the
importation of goods which are of Community origin.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Treaty, and particularly in Articles 89 and 90,
and in Schedule III, a Member State shall not apply any quantitative restrictions on exports to any
other Member State.
3. This Article shall not prevent any Member State from taking such measures as are
necessary to prevent evasion of any prohibitions or restrictions which it applies to imports from or
exports to third States provided that less favourable treatment is not granted to Member States than
to countries outside the Community.
4. "Quantitative restrictions" means prohibitions or restrictions on imports into, or
exports from, any other Member State, as the case may be, whether made effective through quotas,
import licences or other measures with equivalent effect, including administrative measures and
requirements restricting imports or exports.
ARTICLE 92
Difficulties Occasioned by Particular Imports
1. Subject to Article 150, wherever imports of any product, including any primary
agricultural product, into a Member State cause serious injury or the threat of serious injury to
domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in any industry or specific sector of any
industry, the importing Member State shall be free to impose restrictions in respect of such product
if:
(a) the import of the product in question results in a substantial decrease in
demand for the like or directly competitive product produced within its
jurisdiction; and
(b) the decrease in demand is directly linked to an increase in imports
consigned from another Member State.
2. Where a Member State decides to exercise its rights under paragraph I, it may
provisionally, until a determination by COTED is made:
56.
(a) limit imports of the product of Community origin by means of quantitative
restrictions at a rate not less than the rate of such imports during any period
of 12 months which ended 12 months before the date on which the
restrictions entered into force;
(b) take such other measures either instead of or in addition to quantitative
restrictions in accordance with sub-paragraph (a) as COTED may
authorise.
3. In applying the restrictions in accordance with paragraph 2, a Member State shall not
discriminate among the sources of supply or the nationality of suppliers, and shall give consideration
to the proportionate share of the market previously enjoyed by each Member State.
4. Where a Member State:
(a) intends to act in accordance with paragraph 2, it shall, prior to taking such
action, enter into consultations with affected Member States and notify
COTED of that intention and the nature of the action;
(b) is unable to comply with sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph, it shall, in
taking the action, immediately notify COTED of the application and the
nature of the action.
5. The Member State at the time of taking such action in accordance with paragraph
2 shall submit to COTED:
(a) such information as is reasonably available, including:
(i) the identity of the producers and the length of time during which the
producers of the like or directly competitive product have been in
production;
(ii) a complete description of the product and the annual volume of
production;
(iii) an estimate of the size by volume of the domestic market, the share
by volume in the domestic market of the domestic product, imports
from other Member States and from third States;
(iv) information on changes in the level of sales and employment for the
periods comparable to the periods during which imports have
increased; and
(v) any other information as COTED may from time to time prescribe;
(b) a programme setting out the measures to be taken to assist the domestic
producers to alleviate the difficulties they face and to restore their position
in the domestic market.
6. COTED shall give its earliest consideration to the submission made under paragraph
5, and:
(a) make a determination of the appropriateness of the restrictions and whether
they shall be continued;
(b) where it decides that the restrictions shall be continued, determine the
adequacy of the programme and the period for which the restrictions shall
continue.
7. Restrictions applied by a Member State pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be confined
to those necessary to forestall a threat of serious injury or otherwise eliminate injury.
57.
8. The Member States in applying restrictions pursuant to paragraph 2 shall not
discriminate and:
(a) shall progressively relax them as the relevant conditions improve;
(b) may maintain them only to the extent that the conditions mentioned in
paragraph 1 of this Article continue to justify their application.
9. If a Member State has demonstrated that the imposition of measures by another
Member State under paragraph 2 has caused injury or the threat of serious injury to domestic
producers in its jurisdiction, then the first mentioned Member State may request consultation with the
Member State maintaining the restrictions and notify COTED accordingly.
10. Where the consultations do not result in a mutually agreed solution, the matter may
be referred to COTED for a determination.
11. If COTED is not satisfied that the Member States applying restrictions are acting in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 7, it may recommend to the Member State adversely
affected thereby, alternative arrangements to the same end.
ARTICLE 93
Government Assistance to Economic Development
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Treaty, a Member State shall not maintain or
introduce:
(a) the forms of assistance to export of goods to any other part of the
Community which are described in Schedule V; or
(b) any other forms of assistance, the main purpose or effect of which is to
frustrate the benefits expected from such removal or absence of duties and
quantitative restrictions as is required by this Treaty.
2. If the application of any type of assistance by a Member State, although not contrary
to paragraph 1(b) of this Article, nevertheless frustrates the benefits expected from such removal or
absence of duties and quantitative restrictions as is required by this Treaty, COTED may authorise
any Member State to suspend, in relation to the Member State which is applying the assistance, the
application of such obligations under this Treaty as the COTED considers appropriate.
3. COTED may amend the provisions of Schedule V.
ARTICLE 94
Public Undertakings
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Treaty, Member States shall ensure the
elimination in the practices of public undertakings of :
(a) measures the effect of which is to afford protection to domestic production
and which would be inconsistent with this Treaty if achieved by means of a
duty or charge with equivalent effect or quantitative restrictions or
Government assistance; or
(b) trade discrimination on grounds of territorial origin in so far as it frustrates
the benefits expected from the removal or absence of such charges, duties
and quantitative restrictions as is required by this Treaty.
2. In so far as Article 92 is relevant to the activities of public undertakings, that Article
58.
shall apply to them in the same way as it applies to other enterprises.
3. Where a public undertaking has introduced a measure or practice which:
(a) is inconsistent with paragraph 1; or
(b) in law or in effect, results in limiting access to any market, distorts
competition or fair trade, or otherwise nullifies or impairs benefits expected
from the establishment of the CSME,
then, in such a case, the aggrieved Member State may request consultations with the offending
Member State and promptly notify COTED of the request.
4. The Member State alleged to have introduced a measure or practice within the
meaning of paragraph 3 shall give favourable consideration to a request for consultations by the
aggrieved Member State with a view to resolving their differences and arriving at a mutually
acceptable solution.
5. If no mutually acceptable solution is reached within 30 days of the date of request
for consultations, the aggrieved Member State may refer the matter to COTED, which shall cause an
investigation to be carried out into the circumstance giving rise to the complaint; the investigation is
to be completed within 60 days of the date of receipt of the complaint by COTED.
6. COTED shall, upon receipt of the report arising from the investigation, make available
the report to the Member States concerned to facilitate consultations and to permit them to reach a
mutually acceptable solution.
7. If no mutually acceptable solution is reached at the end of 15 days starting from the
date of submission of the report by COTED to the parties concerned and COTED is satisfied that the
rights of the aggrieved Member States under paragraph 1 have been unreasonably denied, then
COTED shall request the offending Member State to withdraw the measure or practice, as the case
may be.
8. If the offending Member State referred to in paragraph 7 fails to comply with the
request of COTED within 60 days of the date thereof, then COTED may authorise the Member States
to suspend, in relation to the Member State which is applying the measure or practice, the application
of such provisions of this Treaty as COTED may decide.
9. The Member States shall ensure that new practices of the kind described in
paragraph 3 of this Article are not introduced.
 10. For the purposes of this Article, ‘public undertakings’ means central, regional, or local
government authorities, public enterprises and any other organisation by means of which a Member
State by law or in practice controls or appreciably influences imports from, or exports to any other part
of the Community.
ARTICLE 95
Co-operation in Customs Administration
1. The Member States shall co-operate with each other to ensure that their
interpretation and application of Articles 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 93 and Schedule I are
effectively and harmoniously applied, particularly with respect to provisions relating to:
(a) effective customs systems and procedures governing the movement of
goods, people and conveyances across customs borders;
(b) maximising the effectiveness of co-operation among customs
administrations and with international agencies to combat customs and
59.
other cross-border offences.
2. The Member States undertake to establish harmonised customs legislation and
customs procedures in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
3. COTED shall establish procedures for co-operation in customs administration as
described in paragraph 1 of this Article.
PART THREE
SUBSIDIES
ARTICLE 96
Determination of a Subsidy
For the purpose of this Part, a subsidy shall be deemed to exist if there is a financial
contribution by a Government or any public body within the territory of a Member State (hereinafter
referred to as "government") where:
(a) a government practice involves direct transfer of funds (e.g., grants, loans
and equity infusion) or potential direct transfer of funds or liabilities (e.g.,
loan guarantees);
(b) government revenue that is otherwise due is foregone or not collected (e.g.,
fiscal incentives, such as tax credits);
(c) a government purchases goods or provides goods or services other than
general infrastructure;
(d) a government makes payments to a funding mechanism, or directs or
entrusts to a private body the conduct of activities mentioned in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) which are normally conducted by governments;
(e) there is any form of income or price support,
and a benefit is thereby conferred.
ARTICLE 97
Types of Subsidies
1. A subsidy within the meaning of Article 96 shall be categorised as follows:
(a) a prohibited subsidy;
(b) a subsidy which:
 (i) causes injury to a domestic industry; or
 (ii) results in nullification or impairment of benefits accruing directly or
indirectly to any Member State; or
 (iii) seriously prejudices the interests of any Member State; or
(c) a subsidy which causes serious adverse effects to a domestic industry of
any Member State such as to cause damage which would be difficult to
repair:
60.
Provided that the subsidy is specific to an enterprise or industry or group of enterprises or industries
within the jurisdiction of the granting Member State.
2. For the purpose of this Chapter a determination of whether a subsidy as defined in
Article 92 is specific shall be governed by the following:
(a) in order to determine whether a subsidy referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article is specific to an enterprise or industry or group of enterprises or
industries (referred to in this Part as “certain enterprises”) within the
jurisdiction of the granting authority, the following criteria shall apply:
(i) where the granting authority, or the legislation pursuant to which the
granting authority operates, explicitly limits access to a subsidy to
certain enterprises, such a subsidy shall be specific;
(ii) where the granting authority, or the legislation pursuant to which the
granting authority operates, establishes objective criteria or
conditions governing the eligibility for, and the amount of, a subsidy,
specificity shall not exist, provided that the eligibility is automatic
and that such criteria and conditions are strictly adhered to. The
criteria or conditions must be clearly spelled out in law, regulation,
or other official document, so as to be capable of verification;
(iii) if, notwithstanding any appearance of non-specificity resulting from
the application of the principles laid down in sub-sub-paragraphs (i)
and (ii), there are reasons to believe that the subsidy may in fact be
specific, other factors may be considered. Such factors are: use of
a subsidy programme by a limited number of certain enterprises,
predominant use of certain enterprises, the granting of
disproportionately large amounts of subsidy to certain enterprises,
and the manner in which discretion has been exercised by the
granting authority in the decision to grant a subsidy. In applying this
sub-paragraph, account shall be taken of the extent of
diversification of economic activities within the jurisdiction of the
granting authority, as well as of the length of time during which the
subsidy programme has been in operation;
(b) a subsidy which is limited to certain enterprises located within a designated
geographical region within the jurisdiction of the granting authority shall be
specific. It is understood that the setting or change of generally applicable
tax rates by all levels of government entitled to do so shall not be deemed
to be a specific subsidy for the purposes of this Part;
(c) any subsidy falling under the provisions of Article 99 shall be deemed to be
specific;
(d) any determination of specificity under the provisions of this Article shall be
clearly substantiated on the basis of positive evidence.
ARTICLE 98
Entitlement to Take Action
Against Subsidised Products
1. A Member State may take action against subsidised products where:
61.
(a) the products have benefited from a prohibited subsidy;
(b) the subsidy is specific and has caused any of the effects referred to in
Article 112; and
(c) the subsidy is specific and does not conform to the provisions of Article 108.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a Member State shall not take
definitive action against products which are believed to be benefitting from subsidies referred to in
Article 97 if the Member State aggrieved thereby has not:
(a) promulgated legislation to permit the introduction of counter measures or
countervailing duties against subsidised imports;
(b) consulted with the Member State which is alleged to have introduced or to
be maintaining subsidies identified in Article 97;
(c) notified COTED of the alleged subsidisation based on preliminary
investigations and failure of consultations; and
(d) received authorisation from COTED to introduce countervailing duties or
countermeasures as a result of a definitive determination of the existence
of prohibited subsidies which cause nullification, impairment, serious
prejudice or adverse effects caused by subsidisation.
3. Consultations for the purposes of this Part shall follow the procedures set out in
Annex II.
ARTICLE 99
Prohibited Subsidies
1. Subject to this Treaty, a Member State shall neither grant nor maintain subsidies
referred to in paragraph 2.
2. The following subsidies within the meaning of Article 96 shall be prohibited:
(a) subsidies contingent, in law or in fact, whether solely or as one of several
other conditions, upon export performance, including those listed in
Schedule V; and
(b) subsidies contingent, whether solely or as one of several other conditions,
upon the use of domestic over imported goods.
3. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as applying to agricultural commodities
produced in the Community.
ARTICLE 100
Preliminary Investigation of Prohibited Subsidies
1. An application for an investigation may be made in writing by or on behalf of a
domestic industry to the competent authority where the industry has reason to believe that a
prohibited subsidy referred to in Article 99 has been granted or maintained by another Member State.
The authority shall examine the application and determine, on the basis of the facts available, whether
to initiate an investigation.
2. An investigation initiated pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall be deemed to
be a preliminary investigation. The authority shall give public notice of the preliminary investigation
to inform the concerned Member State, other Member States and the interested parties all of whom
shall be afforded adequate time to submit information required and to make comments.
62.
3. The authority shall make a preliminary determination whether a prohibited subsidy
has been granted or maintained and, where the determination is affirmative, invite the concerned
Member States and interested parties to defend their interests.
4. A request for investigation by the domestic industry under this Article or under Article
106 or 112 shall be accompanied by information set out in the Illustrative List at Annex 111(a).
5. Wherever the term “domestic industry” is used in this Chapter, it shall mean domestic
industry as defined in Annex I.
ARTICLE 101
Request for Consultations Relating
to Prohibited Subsidies
1. Whenever a Member State has reason to believe, pursuant to Article 99 that a
prohibited subsidy has been granted or is maintained by a Member State, the aggrieved or any other
Member State may request consultations with the Member State believed to be granting or
maintaining the subsidy. The aggrieved Member State shall notify COTED of the request for
consultations. A request for consultations shall include a statement of the available evidence with
regard to the existence and nature of the alleged prohibited subsidy.
2. Upon receipt of a request for consultations under paragraph 1, the Member State
believed to be granting or maintaining the subsidy shall reply within 10 days and shall furnish the
relevant information requested and shall promptly enter into consultations which shall be concluded
within 30 days of the date of request for such consultations unless the parties agree to extend the
consultations to a mutually agreed date. The purpose of the consultations shall be to clarify the facts
relating to the existence and type of the alleged subsidy and to arrive at a mutually agreed solution.
ARTICLE 102
Reference to COTED to Investigate
Prohibited Subsidies
1. If no mutually agreed solution is reached at the completion of 30 days from the date
of the request for the consultations referred to in Article 101, or at such time as the parties agree, or
if the Member State believed to be granting or maintaining the subsidy refuses to co-operate, the
Member State requesting consultations or any other Member State interested in such consultations
may refer the matter to COTED which shall carry out an investigation to establish whether the subsidy
in question is a prohibited subsidy.
2. The referral of the matter to COTED for an investigation shall not prevent the
aggrieved Member State from taking, on a provisional basis, which shall not be sooner than 60 days
from the date of initiation of investigations under paragraph 1 of Article 103 counter-measures to
forestall injury or to prevent further injury to its domestic industry.
ARTICLE 103
Investigation by COTED of
Prohibited Subsidies
1. Whenever COTED decides to carry out an investigation pursuant to Article 102, such
an investigation by COTED shall proceed as expeditiously as possible. COTED may appoint
competent experts to advise whether the subsidy falls to be classified as a prohibited subsidy, in
which case COTED shall set a time limit for the examination of the evidence by the competent
experts. COTED shall make its determination and issue its report which shall, unless extenuating
circumstances arise, not exceed 90 days from the date of receipt of request for the investigation.
2. The results of an investigation carried out pursuant to Article 102 shall be made
available to all Member States for information and to afford the concerned Member States an
63.
opportunity to arrive at a mutually agreed solution within 30 days from the date of issue of the report
failing which COTED shall adopt the recommendations of the report.
3. If COTED is satisfied, based on the results of the investigation, that the subsidy in
question is a prohibited subsidy and that the concerned Member States cannot reach a mutually
agreed solution, it shall, subject to Article 104, require the offending Member State to withdraw the
subsidy within a specified time-frame. Where the offending Member State fails to comply, COTED
shall authorise the aggrieved Member State to take counter-measures on the products which benefit
from such a subsidy.
ARTICLE 104
Withdrawal of Prohibited Subsidies
1. Notwithstanding the investigation confirming the existence of a prohibited subsidy
in paragraph 3 of Article 103, COTED shall not impose a requirement for the Member States to
withdraw such a subsidy sooner than specified in this paragraph as follows:
(a) with respect to subsidies contingent upon export performance:
(i) the Member States with per capita GNP of less than one thousand
United States dollars shall be allowed to maintain such subsidies;
and
(ii) other Member States shall be allowed to maintain such subsidies
until 1 January 2003;
(b) with respect to subsidies contingent upon the use of domestic over imported
inputs, the Member States with per capita GNP of less than one thousand
United States dollars shall be allowed to maintain such subsidies until 2003.
2. Whenever the results of an investigation by COTED prove that the alleged subsidy
is not a prohibited subsidy, any provisional countervailing measures which might have been imposed
shall be promptly withdrawn and any bond or deposit which might have been effected, released or
refunded, as the case may be. If the provisional measures referred to in this paragraph have
materially retarded the exports of the Member State which was wrongfully alleged to have introduced
or maintained prohibited subsidies, COTED shall, upon application from such a Member State, assess
the effects of the provisionally applied measures and determine the nature and extent of
compensation which is warranted and recommend compensation in accordance with its assessment.
3. From the date of entry into force of this Treaty until the expiration of the dates
mentioned in paragraph 1, no provisional measures shall be imposed where it has been determined
by preliminary investigations that prohibited subsidies are maintained.
ARTICLE 105
Subsidies Causing Injury, Nullification,
Impairment or Serious Prejudice
A Member State may take action against subsidised imports from any other Member
State where it can be established, based on an investigation, that the effect of the subsidy has been:
(a) injury to its domestic industry;
(b) nullification or impairment of benefits which it expects under this Treaty; or
(c) serious prejudice to its interests.
2. Serious prejudice shall be deemed to exist in the case where:
64.
(a) the total ad valorem subsidisation of a product exceeds 5 per cent;
(b) subsidies cover operating losses sustained by an industry;
(c) subsidies cover operating losses sustained by an enterprise, other than onetime measures which are non-recurrent and cannot be repeated for that
enterprise and which are given merely to provide time for the development
of long-term solutions and to avoid acute social problems; or
(d) subsidies are granted in the form of forgiveness of government-held debt
and government grants to cover debt repayment.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, serious prejudice shall not be found if
the Member State granting the subsidy in question demonstrates that the effect of the subsidy has
not been:
(a) to displace or impede the imports of like products from the Member State
exporting to the Member State which has introduced or maintains the
subsidy;
(b) to displace or impede the exports of a like product from the affected
exporting Member State into the market of a third Member State;
(c) a significant price undercutting by the subsidised product as compared with
the price of a like product of another Member State in the same market or
a significant price suppression or price depression;
(d) lost sales of another Member State in the same market; or
(e) an increase in its market share within the CSME.
4. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to Part Three.
ARTICLE 106
Preliminary Investigation of Subsidies Causing Injury,
Nullification, Impairment or Serious Prejudice
1. An application for an investigation may be made in writing by or on behalf of a
domestic industry to the national authority where the industry has reason to believe that a subsidy
referred to in Article 105 has been granted or is maintained by another Member State and has caused
injury, or resulted in nullification, impairment or serious prejudice to its interests.
2. An application under paragraph 1 shall include sufficient information about the
existence of a subsidy and, if possible, its amount, injury and a causal link between the subsidised
products and the alleged injury.
65.
3. An application to initiate an investigation shall be considered to have been made by
or on behalf of a domestic industry if it is supported by those domestic producers whose collective
output constitutes more than 50 per cent of the total production of the like product by that proportion
of the domestic industry expressing support for or opposition to the application. The investigation
shall not be initiated where the domestic producers expressly supporting the application account for
less than 25 per cent of the total production of the like product produced by the domestic industry.
4. Upon receipt of a request for such an investigation, the authority shall examine the
application and determine, on the basis of the facts available, whether to initiate an investigation. If
the authority decides to initiate an investigation, it shall issue a public notice to that effect, invite the
concerned Member State, other interested Member States and interested parties to submit required
information and comments.
5. An investigation initiated pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be deemed to be a preliminary
investigation. The authority shall inform the concerned Member State and all interested parties of the
results of the investigation.
6. For the purpose of this Part, “like product” shall be interpreted to mean a product
which is identical, i.e., alike in all respects to the product under consideration, or in the absence of
such a product, another product, which, although not alike in all respects, has characteristics closely
resembling those of the product under consideration.
ARTICLE 107
Request for Consultations Relating to Subsidies Causing
Injury, Nullification, Impairment or Serious Prejudice
1. Whenever a Member State has reason to believe that a subsidy within the meaning
of Article 96 has been granted or is maintained by another Member State, and that imports from such
a Member State have resulted in any of the effects mentioned in paragraph 1(b) of Article 97, the firstmentioned Member State may approach the Member State believed to be granting a subsidy with a
request for consultations.
2. A request for consultations shall include a statement of available evidence with
regard to -
(a) the existence and nature of the subsidy; and
(b) the injury caused to the domestic industry; or
(c) the impairment or nullification of benefits of exporting to other Member
States in the Community; or
(d) serious prejudice to its interests.
3. Upon receipt of a request for consultations under paragraph 1, the Member State
believed to be granting or maintaining the subsidy shall reply within 10 days, and shall furnish relevant
information and enter into consultations within 30 days of the date of the request. The purpose of the
consultations shall be to clarify the facts relating to the existence, type and effect of the alleged
subsidy and to arrive at a mutually agreed solution.
ARTICLE 108
Reference to COTED to Investigate Subsidies Causing
Injury, Nullification, Impairment or Serious Prejudice
1. If no mutually agreed solution is reached at the completion of 60 days from the date
of request for consultations, or on a date mutually agreed, the Member State requesting consultations
may refer the matter to COTED which shall initiate an investigation, make a determination to resolve
the dispute and issue a report within 120 days of the date of the request for an investigation by the
aggrieved Member State.
66.
2. A decision by COTED to initiate an investigation shall not prevent the aggrieved
Member State from taking, on a provisional basis, countermeasures which shall not be sooner than
60 days from the date of initiation of a preliminary investigation by the national authority to forestall
or prevent further adverse effects.
ARTICLE 109
Investigation by COTED of Subsidies Causing Injury,
Nullification, Impairment or Serious Prejudice
1. In order to arrive at a determination of the existence, degree and effect of
subsidisation, and remedial action which may be taken pursuant to the referral of a complaint of
alleged subsidisation mentioned in Article 108, COTED shall -
(a) carry out an investigation into the circumstances relating to the alleged grant
or maintenance of the subsidy by the offending Member State; the
investigation is to be completed within 120 days of the date of receipt of a
complaint regarding alleged subsidisation by an offending Member State;
and
(b) upon receipt of the report arising from the investigation, promptly make
available the report to the concerned Member States to facilitate
consultation and to permit the Member states concerned to arrive at a
mutually acceptable solution.
ARTICLE 110
Consequences of Failure to Remove Subsidies Causing
Injury, Nullification, Impairment or Serious Prejudice
1. If no mutually acceptable solution is reached within 30 days of the date of issue of
the report by COTED, and COTED is satisfied:
(a) of the existence of a subsidy within the meaning of Article 105; and
(b) that the subsidy has caused injury to the enterprise in the aggrieved
Member State; or
(c) that the subsidy has impaired or nullified benefits expected of the aggrieved
Member State with respect to its exports to the Community; or
(d) that the effect of the subsidy was to seriously prejudice the interests of the
Member State,
then in such a case, COTED shall request the Member State which has granted or maintained the
subsidy to take appropriate steps to remedy the effects of the subsidy within six months of the date
of the issue of the report by COTED.
2. If, at the end of the period of six months allowed by COTED to the Member State
granting or maintaining the subsidy to remedy the effects of the subsidy, the Member State fails to
comply and in the absence of agreement on compensation COTED shall authorise the aggrieved
Member State to impose countervailing duties at a rate equivalent to the amount of subsidisation for
such time and under such conditions as COTED may prescribe.
ARTICLE 111
Types of Subsidies Causing Serious Adverse Effects
1. The Member States shall not ordinarily impose or introduce countervailing duties or
take countermeasures on products which benefit from:
67.
(a) subsidies which are not specific within the meaning of Article 97; or
(b) subsidies which are specific within the meaning of Article 97 but which
satisfy all of the conditions set out in this sub-paragraph hereunder:
(i) subsidies granted for research activities conducted by enterprises
or by higher education or research establishments on a contract
basis with firms if the assistance covers not more than 75 per cent
of the costs of industrial research or 50 per cent of the costs of precompetitive development activity and provided that such assistance
is limited exclusively to:
(aa) costs of personnel (researchers, technicians and other
supporting staff employed exclusively in the research
activity);
(bb) costs of instruments, equipment, land and buildings used
exclusively and permanently (except when disposed of on
a commercial basis) for the research activity;
(cc) costs of consultancy and equivalent services used
exclusively for the research activity, including bought-in
research, technical knowledge, patents, etc.;
(dd) additional overhead costs incurred directly as a result of the
research activity;
(ee) other running costs (such as those of materials, supplies
and the like), incurred directly as a result of the research
activity.
(c) subsidies granted to assist disadvantaged regions within the territory of a
Member State given pursuant to a general framework of regional
development and that are non-specific within eligible regions provided that:
(i) each disadvantaged region must be a clearly designated
contiguous geographical area with a definable economic and
administrative identify;
(ii) the Region is considered as disadvantaged on the basis of neutral
and objective criteria, indicating that the region's difficulties arise out
of more than temporary circumstances; such criteria must be
clearly spelled out in law, regulation, or other official document, so
as to be capable of verification;
(iii) the criteria shall include a measurement of economic development
which shall be based on at least one of the following factors:
(aa) one of either income per capita or household income per
capita, or GDP per capita, which must not be above 85 per
cent of the average for the territory concerned;
(bb) unemployment rate, which must be at least 110 per cent of
the average for the territory concerned;
(d) subsidies granted to assist entities in the adaptation of existing facilities to
new environmental requirements imposed by law and/or regulations which
68.
result in greater constraints and financial burden on enterprises provided
that the subsidies -
(i) are a one-time non-recurring measure; and
(ii) are limited to 20 per cent of the cost of adaptation; and
(iii) do not cover the cost of replacing and operating the assisted
investment, which must be fully borne by firms; and
(iv) are directly linked to and proportionate to a firm's planned reduction
of nuisances and pollution, and do not cover any manufacturing
cost savings which may be achieved; and
(v) are available to all firms which can adopt the new equipment and/or
production processes.
(e) subsidies granted to assist enterprises to undertake training or retraining of
employees, whether or not the enterprise is new, and the upgrading of
existing facilities to facilitate transition to competitive status within the
Community, provided that such subsidies are not specific.
2. The Member States shall notify COTED of any subsidy mentioned in paragraph 1.
Any Member State may request further information regarding a notified subsidy programme and
COTED shall review annually all notified subsidies referred to in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 112
Preliminary Investigation of Subsidies
Causing Serious Adverse Effects
1. A domestic industry may submit to the competent authority an application for an
investigation to verify that serious adverse effects have been caused by imports which benefit from
subsidies referred to in Article 111.
2. Upon receipt of an application for an investigation to verify adverse effects, the
authority shall examine the application, and, on the basis of the available facts, determine whether
to initiate an investigation.
3. The investigation referred to in paragraph 2 shall be deemed a preliminary
investigation. The authority shall give public notice of its decision to initiate a preliminary investigation
and the concerned Member State, other interested Member States, and the interested persons shall
all be invited to provide relevant information and make comments.
4. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be made available to the concerned
Member State, other interested Member States and the interested persons to enable them to defend
their interests.
ARTICLE 113
Request for Consultations Relating to Subsidies
Causing Serious Adverse Effects
1. Whenever a Member State has reason to believe that imports from another Member
State benefited from subsidies within the meaning of Article 111 and such imports have resulted in
serious adverse effects to a domestic industry so as to cause damage which would be difficult to
repair, the Member State aggrieved may request consultations with the Member State granting or
maintaining the subsidy.
69.
2. The Member State alleged to be granting the subsidy which caused adverse effects
shall reply within 10 days of the date of the request for consultations and shall enter into the
consultations requested by the aggrieved Member State. If there is no mutual agreement within 60
days of the date of the request for such consultations or on a later date which was mutually agreed
or if the Member State refuses to co-operate, the aggrieved Member State may refer the matter to
COTED and request COTED to carry out an investigation.
ARTICLE 114
Investigation by COTED of Subsidies
Causing Serious Adverse Effects
1. The referral of the matter to COTED for an investigation shall not prevent the
aggrieved Member State from imposing on a provisional basis not sooner than 60 days from the date
of initiation of the preliminary investigation referred to in Article 106, countermeasures to forestall or
prevent further adverse effects.
2. If COTED is satisfied that the investigation requested is justified, COTED shall carry
out the investigation, make a determination and issue a report within 120 days from the date when
the request was referred.
3. Where the results of the investigation carried out by COTED demonstrate that the
subsidised imports caused serious adverse effects to the domestic industry of the aggrieved Member
State requesting the investigation, COTED shall recommend that the offending Member State modify
the programme of subsidies in such a way as to remove the adverse effects complained of.
ARTICLE 115
Consequences of Failure to Eliminate or
Establish Adverse Effects of Subsidies
1. If the offending Member State fails to implement the recommendations of COTED
within 6 months of the date of issue of the report referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 114, COTED
shall authorise the aggrieved Member State to impose appropriate countervailing duties
commensurate with the nature and degree of serious adverse effects determined to exist.
2. Whenever the results of an investigation by COTED prove that serious adverse
effects have not been caused by subsidised imports referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 111, the
Member State alleging that its domestic industry has suffered serious adverse effects shall promptly
refund any duties which might have been provisionally imposed and where such provisional duties
had materially retarded the exports of the Member State complained against, COTED shall, upon
application from such State, assess the effects of the provisionally applied duties and determine the
nature and extent of compensation which is warranted and require compensation in accordance with
its assessment.
ARTICLE 116
Imposition of Provisional Measures
and Countervailing Duties
1. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Chapter, a Member State aggrieved
by the application or maintenance of prohibited subsidies or by subsidies which cause injury, or result
in nullification, impairment, or serious prejudice, or cause serious adverse effects, as the case may
be, shall introduce provisional measures only on the basis of the following rules:
(a) Provisional measures may be applied only if -
(i) a preliminary investigation has been initiated in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, a public notice has been given to that
effect and interested persons have been given adequate
70.
opportunities to submit information and make comments;
(ii) an affirmative preliminary determination has been made of the
existence of a prohibited subsidy, or a subsidy causing injury,
nullification, impairment, serious prejudice, or a subsidy causing
serious adverse effects, as the case may be;
(iii) consultations were requested and undertaken, COTED was
notified and requested to investigate and the authorities concerned
judge such measures necessary to prevent injury being caused
during the investigation;
(b) Provisional measures may take the form of provisional countervailing duties
guaranteed by cash deposits or bonds equal to the amount of the
subsidisation calculated on a provisional basis;
(c) Provisional measures shall not be applied sooner than 60 days from the
date of initiation of the preliminary investigation;
(d) The application of provisional measures shall be limited to as short a period
as possible, not exceeding 120 days.
2. Where investigations by COTED continue beyond the period allowed for the
maintenance of provisional measures under sub-paragraph 1(d), the Member State imposing the
measures may continue with such measures until a definitive determination is made by COTED.
3. The Member States which are parties to an investigation to verify the existence and
the effect of alleged subsidisation, may seek or accept, as the case may be, undertakings from the
Member State alleged to have granted or to be maintaining a subsidy. Undertakings may take the
form of: (a) withdrawal, or limiting the amount of, the subsidy to such an extent that
injury, nullification, impairment, serious prejudice or serious adverse effects,
as the case may be, are eliminated; or
(b) a guarantee from the exporter benefiting from the subsidy to raise his price
to such an extent that the injurious effect is eliminated.
4. If a Member State accepts a voluntary guarantee pursuant to sub-paragraph 3(b),
then the accepting Member State shall notify COTED and promptly suspend proceedings, and any
provisional measures which may have been imposed shall be withdrawn with immediate effect.
5. In the event that investigations to determine subsidisation have been concluded and
the evidence proves injury, nullification, impairment or serious prejudice, or serious adverse effects,
as the case may be, a Member State may impose countervailing duties retroactively to account for
the entire period during which provisional measures have been in force. Such retroactively applied
duties shall take into account the definitively assessed countervailing duties and the amount
guaranteed by cash deposit or bond and:
(a) where the definitive countervailing duties are higher than the provisional
duties, the difference shall not be collected;
(b) where the definitive countervailing duties are lower than the provisional
duties, the excess of the deposit shall be refunded or the bond released
promptly.
6. No Member State shall impose countervailing duties other than provisional
countervailing duties without prior authorisation from COTED and the determination and imposition
71.
of definitive countervailing duties shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the WTO Agreement
on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
7. COTED shall keep under review all counter-measures imposed by the Member
States and shall ensure that the Member States observe the conditions and timetable for review and
withdrawal of counter-measures that it may have authorised.
8. The Member States undertake to co-operate in establishing harmonised legislation
and procedures in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
PART FOUR
SUBSIDIES TO AGRICULTURE
ARTICLE 117
Definition
1. For the purpose of this Part, an agricultural subsidy means any form of domestic
support, financial or otherwise, including revenue foregone, provided by government or any public
agency in favour of the producers of a specific agricultural product or to the agricultural sector as a
whole. This includes:
(a) assistance provided by government or any public agency to foster
agricultural and rural development or to assist low income producers or
producers with deficient resources;
(b) financial concessions granted by government or a public agency to offset
the cost of agricultural inputs or to encourage investments in agriculture;
(c) any other financial concession which has the effect of providing price or
income support to producers of agricultural products which is administered
either through direct payments to the producers or processors of an
agricultural product or indirectly through government or other publicly funded
programmes;
(d) payments in kind to agricultural producers.
2. “Agricultural products” refers to the products listed in Annex IV.
ARTICLE 118
Rights
Having regard to the general use of subsidies in Member States to encourage
agricultural and rural development, to promote investments in agriculture generally and to assist lowincome or resource-poor producers, Member States may grant subsidies to meet those objectives,
consistently with their obligations under international agreements and subject to the provisions of this
Part.
ARTICLE 119
Obligations
1. Notwithstanding the right to grant subsidies indicated in Article 118, a Member State
shall not use such subsidies in a manner to distort the production of and intra-regional trade in the
product or products benefiting from such subsidies.
2. Accordingly, subsidies provided by a Member State to agriculture shall not involve
72.
transfers from consumers, or direct payments to producers or processors which would have the
effect of providing price support to producers.
3. Subsidies provided by a Member State to agriculture shall be made through publicly
funded programmes which benefit the agricultural sector generally, in areas such as research,
training, extension and advisory services, pest and disease control, inspection services, marketing
and promotion services and infrastructural services.
4. Where a Member State makes direct payments of a subsidy to agricultural producers
or processors through such schemes as crop insurance, disaster relief, income safety-net
programmes, regional assistance programmes and structural adjustment assistance programmes,
the Member State shall ensure that these payments, whether financial or otherwise, have no or
minimal production and trade distortion effect and do not constitute price support to producers of the
product or products benefitting from the use of such schemes.
ARTICLE 120
Regulation
1. Any subsidy provided by a Member State in favour of the production of an agricultural
product entering regional trade, except for the provision of general services programmes or direct
payments satisfying the conditions stated in Article 119, shall not exceed 10 per cent of the total value
of that Member State’s annual production of such tradeable agricultural product in any one year.
2. Any subsidy provided by a Member State in favour of agricultural producers or
processors in general, except for the provision of general services programmes or direct payments
satisfying the conditions stated in Article 119, shall not exceed 10 per cent of the total value of that
Member State’s annual total agricultural output, in any one year.
3. Where a Member State provides a subsidy, except for the provision of general
services programmes or direct payments satisfying the conditions stated in Article 119, in excess of
the levels prescribed in paragraphs 1 and 2, such a subsidy shall be considered as a subsidy causing
injury, nullification, impairment or serious prejudice.
ARTICLE 121
Discipline
1. Each Member State shall ensure that any subsidy in favour of agricultural producers
conforms with the provisions of Article 119 and Article 120.
2. Any subsidy in favour of agricultural producers that cannot be shown to satisfy the
provisions in Article 119 and Article 120, shall be subject to the provisions of Article 106 to Article 110
inclusive.
3. A subsidies programme undertaken in conformity with the provisions of this Part shall
be subject to action based on Article 106 to 110 inclusive where a determination of injury or threat
thereof is made in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
4. In the determination of a threat of injury, the investigating authorities shall consider,
inter alia, such factors as:
(i) the nature of the subsidy or subsidies in question and the trade effects likely
to arise therefrom;
(ii) a significant rate of increase of subsidised imports into the domestic market
indicating the likelihood of substantially increased importations;
(iii) sufficient freely disposable or an imminent, substantial increase in capacity
of the exporter indicating the likelihood of substantially increased subsidised
73.
exports to the importing country’s market, taking into account the availability
of other export markets to absorb any additional exports;
(iv) whether imports are entering at prices that will have a significant depressing
or suppressing effect on domestic prices, and are likely to increase demand
for further imports;
(v) inventories of the product being investigated.
ARTICLE 122
Due Restraint
Where it has been determined that a subsidy causes injury or threatens to cause
such injury, in accordance with the provisions of this Part, the aggrieved Member State shall exercise
due restraint in initiating any action in retaliation.
ARTICLE 123
Notification
1. The Member States shall notify COTED of any subsidy programme pursuant to
Article 117 prior to implementation.
2. In addition to the notification to be submitted under this Article, any new subsidy or
modification of an existing measure shall be notified promptly. This notification shall contain details
of the new or modified subsidy and its conformity with the agreed criteria as set out in Article 116 and
Article 120.
3. Any Member State may bring to the attention of COTED any measure which it
considers ought to have been notified by another Member State.
ARTICLE 124
Review
COTED shall undertake a review of the implementation of the provisions on subsidies
to agriculture on the basis of notifications of the subsidies programmes submitted by the Member
States, as well as on the basis of any other documentation which the COTED may request to be
prepared to facilitate its review.
PART FIVE
DUMPING
ARTICLE 125
Action Against Dumping
A Member State may take action against dumped imports if such imports cause injury
or pose a serious threat of injury to a domestic industry.
ARTICLE 126
Determination of Dumping
1. For the purpose of this Part, a product is to be considered to be a dumped import
where it is introduced into the commerce of another country at less than its normal value if the export
74.
price of the product exported from one Member state to another Member State is less than the
comparable price, in the ordinary course of trade, for the like product when destined for consumption
in the exporting Member State.
2. When there are no sales of the like product in the ordinary course of trade in the
domestic market of the exporting country or when, because of the particular market situation or the
low volume of the sales in the domestic market of the exporting country, such sales do not permit a
proper comparison, the margin of dumping shall be determined by comparison with a comparable
price of the like product when exported to an appropriate third country, provided that this price is
representative, or with the cost of production in the country of origin plus a reasonable amount for
administrative, selling and general costs and for profits.
3. In cases where there is no export price or where it appears to the authorities
concerned that the export price is unreliable because of association or a compensatory arrangement
between the exporter and importer or a third party, the export price may be constructed on the basis
of the price at which the imported products are first resold to an independent buyer, or if the products
are not resold to an independent buyer, or not resold in the condition as imported, on such
reasonable basis as the authorities may determine.
4. A fair comparison shall be made between the export price and the normal value. This
comparison shall be made at the same level of trade, normally at the ex-factory level, and in respect
of sales made at as nearly as possible the same time. Due allowance shall be made in each case,
on its merits, for differences which affect price comparability, including differences in conditions and
terms of sale, taxation, levels of trade, quantities, physical characteristics, and any other differences
which are also demonstrated to affect price comparability. In the cases referred to in paragraph 3,
allowances for costs, including duties and taxes incurred between importation and resale, and for
profits accruing, should also be made. If in these cases price comparability has been affected, the
authorities shall establish the normal value at a level of trade equivalent to the level of trade of the
constructed export price, or shall make due allowance as warranted under this paragraph. The
authorities shall indicate to the parties in question what information is necessary to ensure a fair
comparison and shall not impose an unreasonable burden of proof on those parties.
5. In the case where products are not imported directly from the country of origin but
are exported to the importing Member from an intermediate country, the price at which the products
are sold from the country of export to the importing Member shall normally be compared with the
comparable price in the country of export. However, comparison may be made with the price in the
country of origin, if, for example, the products are merely transshipped through the country of export,
or such products are not produced in the country of export, or there is no comparable price for them
in the country of export.
6. For the purpose of this Part , "like product" shall be interpreted to mean a product
which is identical, i.e., alike in all respects to the product under consideration, or in the absence of
such a product, another product, which, although not alike in all respects, has characteristics closely
resembling those of the product under consideration.
ARTICLE 127
Determination of Injury
1. For the purpose of this Part, injury shall, unless otherwise specified, be taken to mean
material injury to a domestic industry, threat of material injury to a domestic industry or material
retardation of the establishment of such an industry.
2. A determination of injury within the meaning of paragraph l shall be based on positive
evidence and involve an objective examination of:
(a) the volume of the dumped imports and the effect of such imports on prices
in the domestic market for like products; and
(b) the consequent impact of the dumped imports on domestic producers of
75.
such products.
3. In making a determination regarding the existence of a threat of material injury, the
competent authorities shall consider, inter alia:
(e) a significant rate of increase of dumped imports into the domestic market
indicating the likelihood of substantially increased importation;
(b) sufficient freely disposable, or an imminent, substantial increase in, capacity
of the exporter indicating the likelihood of substantially increased dumped
exports to the importing Member's market taking into account the availability
of other export markets to absorb any additional exports;
(c) whether imports are entering at prices that will have a significant depressing
or suppressing effect on domestic prices, and would likely increase demand
for further imports; and
(d) inventories of the product being investigated.
ARTICLE 128
Definition of Domestic Industry
For the purpose of this Part, the term "domestic industry" means “domestic industry”
as defined in Annex I.
ARTICLE 129
Initiation of Preliminary Investigations
1. If a domestic industry in a Member State has reason to believe that it is being injured
or faces the threat of injury as a result of dumped imports, an application may be submitted in writing
by the industry or on its behalf by an association representing the industry or by employees employed
by the producers of the like product to the competent authority to initiate an investigation in order to
verify the existence of dumped imports and injury caused or the existence of a serious threat of injury
as the case may be.
2. The application shall be considered to have been made by or on behalf of the
domestic industry if it is supported by those domestic producers whose collective output constitutes
more than 50 per cent of the total production of the like product produced by that portion of the
domestic industry expressing either support for or opposition to the request. However, no
investigation shall be initiated when domestic producers expressly supporting the request account for
less than 25 per cent of total production of the like product produced by the domestic industry.
3. The authority shall examine the application and determine if an investigation is
justified and if it is satisfied, it shall issue a public notice to that effect and request the concerned
Member State, other interested Member States and the interested parties, all of which may be
requested to and shall be afforded an opportunity to provide required information and comments.
4. A decision by the authority to initiate an investigation shall be considered a decision
to initiate a preliminary investigation, the results of which shall be made available by a public notice.
5. Where a preliminary investigation provides sufficient evidence that dumped imports
have entered into the commerce of the Member State and such imports seriously threaten or have
injured a domestic industry, it may submit to the competent authority of the exporting Member State
a request for consultations which shall be notified to COTED.
6. The purpose of the request for consultations shall be to establish whether imports
have been dumped and injury has been caused or there is a serious threat of injury and if the injury
or the serious threat thereof is directly the result of dumped imports.
76.
7. Interested parties who have been requested to provide information shall be allowed
30 days from the date of submission of the application by or on behalf of a domestic industry under
paragraph 2 to reply unless the authorities concerned agree to a later date.
8. For the purpose of this Part, "interested parties" shall include:
(a) an exporter or foreign producer or the importer of a product subject to
investigation, or a trade or business association, a majority of the members
of which are producers, exporters or importers of such product;
(b) the government of the exporting Member State; and
(c) a producer of the like product in the importing Member State or a trade and
business association, a majority of the members of which produce the like
product in the territory of the importing Member State.
9. A request for investigations to be undertaken by the competent authority of a Member
State or by COTED shall include but shall not necessarily be limited to the information indicated in
the Illustrative List set out in Annex III(b). If, however, an aggrieved Member State is satisfied that
the offending party had not made satisfactory efforts to afford consultations, to provide requested
information or otherwise unreasonably impede an investigation which has been initiated , the
competent authority of the Member State aggrieved may impose on a provisional basis anti-dumping
measures and may refer the request for investigation to COTED. A public notice of the imposition of
provisional anti-dumping measures shall be issued by the Member State which has imposed such
measures.
ARTICLE 130
Provisional Measures
1. Provisional measures may be applied only if -
(a) an investigation has been initiated in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 4 of Article 129, a public notice has been given to that effect and
interested parties have been given adequate opportunities to submit
information and make comments;
(b) a preliminary affirmative determination has been made of dumping and
consequent injury to a domestic industry; and
(c) the authorities concerned judge such measures necessary to prevent injury
being caused during the investigation.
2. Provisional measures may take the form of a provisional duty or preferably, a security
- by cash deposit or bond - equal to the amount of the anti-dumping duty provisionally estimated,
being not greater than the provisionally estimated margin of dumping. Withholding of appraisement
is an appropriate provisional measure, provided that the normal duty and the estimated amount of the
anti-dumping duty be indicated and as long as the withholding of appraisement is subject to the same
conditions as other provisional measures.
3. Provisional measures shall not be applied sooner than 60 days from the date of
initiation of the investigation by a competent authority.
4. The application of provisional measures shall be limited to as short a period as
possible, not exceeding 120 days or, on decision of the authorities concerned, upon request by
exporters representing a significant percentage of the trade involved, to a period not exceeding 180
days. When authorities, in the course of an investigation, examine whether a duty lower than the
margin of dumping would be sufficient to remove injury, these periods may be 180 and 270 days,
respectively.
77.
ARTICLE 131
Conduct of Investigations leading to
Definitive Determination of Injury
1. Whenever COTED receives a request for investigation, referred to it under paragraph
9 of Article 126, COTED shall determine whether the information accompanying the request justifies
the continuation of investigations and if it is satisfied, cause an investigation to be completed within
12 months but not longer than 18 months after the date of receipt of the request. If COTED is not
satisfied that there is sufficient justification to initiate an investigation, it shall inform the applicant in
writing of its refusal to investigate.
2. Investigations initiated either by a competent authority of a Member State or
undertaken by COTED shall be terminated promptly whenever:
(a) the margin of dumping is determined to be less than two per cent; and
(b) the volume of dumped imports from a particular country is less than three
per cent of imports of the like product in the importing Member State, unless
countries which individually account for less than three per cent of the
imports of the like product into the importing Member State collectively
account for more than seven per cent of the imports of the like product in the
importing Member State,
and a public notice of the termination of investigations under this paragraph shall be made by the
Member State terminating investigations or by COTED, as the case may be.
3. The Member States recognise that an investigation into the circumstances of alleged
dumping based on a request by another Member State on behalf of a domestic industry will require
the full co-operation of the competent authority and the parties alleged to be responsible for dumped
imports, in the Member State from which such imports originated, all of whom shall provide relevant
information in the time specified in this Article.
4. In the conduct of an investigation to determine the existence and effect of dumped
imports, competent authorities of the Member States and the parties concerned shall observe the
rights of the parties providing information with regard to confidentiality of any information provided and
shall not disclose any such information without the prior written approval of the parties providing the
information.
5. Where an industry within the CSME has suffered injury or faces the threat of serious
injury based on evidence of dumped imports by third States, the competent authority for requesting
investigation on behalf of the affected industry shall be COTED.
6. Nothing in this Article shall be construed so as to prevent an injured party or a
Member State from initiating and proceeding with an investigation into alleged dumping having regard
to the rights of such parties under international agreements to which they are signatories.
ARTICLE 132
Co-operation by Competent Authorities
and Interested Parties
1. Where an applicant for an investigation who receives information pursuant to
dumping investigations requires verification of the information, the competent authority and the parties
alleged to be responsible for dumped imports shall co-operate in allowing the applicant to carry out
verifications in the offending Member State.
2. The results of any investigations carried out by a competent authority of a Member
State aggrieved or by COTED shall be disclosed promptly to the competent authority and the parties
alleged to be responsible for dumped imports in the offending Member State. A public notice of the
conclusions of the investigations shall be issued by the Member State or by COTED, as the case may
78.
be.
3. The purpose of the disclosure referred to in paragraph 2 shall be to present the facts
of the case and to allow the parties alleged to be responsible for the dumped imports to defend their
interests.
ARTICLE 133
Imposition of Anti-Dumping Measures
1. COTED shall, after consideration of the available evidence and having been satisfied
of the existence of dumped imports, injury caused by dumped imports or the threat of serious injury
from dumped imports, authorise the Member State aggrieved to take anti-dumping action:
79.
(a) if the parties alleged to be responsible for dumped imports refuse to cooperate within the time specified so as to frustrate or otherwise impede an
investigation;
(b) if there is a serious threat of injury or if injury has resulted.
2. In authorising the imposition of anti-dumping measures, COTED shall set the date,
duration and conditions for the imposition of the measures as the case may require.
3. Anti-dumping action taken pursuant to this Article, shall be based on the calculated
margin of dumping and may be applied as follows:
(a) if the evidence arising from definitive investigations of dumping proves the
existence of dumping and that injury was caused by dumping, a Member
State may impose anti-dumping duties sufficient to eliminate the margin of
dumping. COTED may authorise all affected Member States to impose
similar anti-dumping duties for such time and under such conditions as
COTED may prescribe;
(b) in the imposition of anti-dumping duties, the Member States imposing the
measure shall not discriminate among the sources of all dumped imports
based on country of origin or nationality of the exporters;
(c) an exporter whose exports are the subject of anti-dumping duties may
request at any time the Member State imposing the duties to review the
application of the duties against the relevant exports;
(d) if an applicant for review of anti-dumping duties applied to exports
mentioned in sub-paragraph (c) is not satisfied that the competent
authorities in the importing Member States have given adequate
consideration to the request for review within 30 days of the receipt of the
request, the applicant may refer the request to COTED which shall
recommend to the Member State maintaining the anti-dumping duty to take
the appropriate action if it is satisfied that the application for review is
justified;
(e) in the event that investigations have been concluded and the evidence
proves that injury has been caused, a Member State may impose antidumping duties retroactively to account for the entire period during which
provisional anti-dumping duties have been in force preceding the date of
imposition of definitive anti-dumping duties. If, however, the definitive antidumping duties are higher than the provisional duties paid or payable or the
amount estimated for the purpose of security, the difference shall not be
collected. If the definitive duties are lower than the provisional duties
payable, or the amount estimated for the purpose of security, the difference
shall be reimbursed or the duties recalculated as the case may require;
 (f) if however the investigations reveal that injury was not caused by dumped
imports as alleged, but the provisional measures have materially retarded
exports of the Member State complained against, COTED shall, upon
application by such State, assess the effects of the provisionally applied
duties and determine the nature and extent of compensation which is
warranted and require the Member State applying provisional measures to
withdraw the measure and pay compensation in accordance with its
assessment;
(g) a Member State may accept a voluntary price guarantee from an exporter
who is believed to be exporting dumped products, to raise the price of the
export sufficiently to forestall a serious threat of injury or to eliminate injury
80.
caused by dumped imports;
(h) if a Member State has initiated investigations based on evidence of dumped
imports and the Member State had imposed provisional measures, the
Member State may, upon the receipt of a voluntary guarantee from the
exporter referred to in sub-paragraph (g), promptly suspend the investigation
and withdraw any provisional measures it may have imposed as
appropriate.
4. COTED shall keep under review all anti-dumping measures imposed by the Member
States and shall ensure that the Member States observe the conditions and the timetable for review
and withdrawal of anti-dumping measures that it may have authorised.
5. The Member States undertake to co-operate in the establishment of harmonised antidumping legislation and procedures in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.
CHAPTER SIX
TRANSPORT POLICY
ARTICLE 134
Objectives of the Community Transport Policy
1. The goal of the Community Transport Policy shall be the provision of adequate, safe
and internationally competitive transport services for the development and consolidation of the CSME.
2. In fulfilment of the goal set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Community shall
pursue the following objectives:
(a) the organisation of efficient, reliable, affordable transport services
throughout the Community;
(b) the development and expansion of air and maritime transport capabilities in
the Community;
(c) the promotion of co-operative arrangements for the provision of transport
services;
(d) the development of efficient internationally competitive ancillary transport
services;
(e) the development of human resources for employment in all areas and at all
levels of the transport sector;
(f) the implementation of standards for the development of safe road, riverine,
sea and air transport services.
81.
ARTICLE 135
Implementation of Community Transport Policy
1. In order to achieve the objectives of the Community Transport Policy, COTED shall,
in collaboration with other Organs of the Community as appropriate, promote, inter alia:
(a) co-ordination of the national transport policies of the Member States;
(b) the implementation of uniform regulations and procedures, consistent with
standards and recommended practices, for the development of an efficient
multi-modal transport system, particularly in respect of operations, safety,
licensing and certification;
(c) the development of required institutional, legal, technical, financial and
administrative support for the balanced, sustainable development of the
transport sector;
(d) the establishment of measures:
(i) to ensure that the development of the transport sector does not
impact adversely on the environment of the Member States and, in
particular, the Caribbean Sea;
(ii) for the acquisition and transfer of technology in the transport sector;
and
(iii) for human resources development in accordance with Article 63;
(e) investment in the transport sector, including ancillary services supportive of
the sector through, for example, joint ventures;
(f) the removal of obstacles to the provision of transport services by nationals
of the Member States in accordance with the relevant provisions of Chapter
Three.
2. COTED shall develop programmes to facilitate the achievement of the objectives set
out in Article 134.
3. The Member States shall co-ordinate their actions in order to secure the best terms
and conditions for the provision of transport services by service providers.
ARTICLE 136
Search and Rescue
1. COTED shall promote co-operation in air and maritime search and rescue operations
in the Community, bearing in mind such machinery as may exist for the overall co-ordination of search
and rescue services.
2. The Member States shall notify COTED of air and maritime equipment and facilities
available for use in search and rescue operations.
3. The Member States shall collaborate with third States and competent international
organisations in search and rescue operations.
ARTICLE 137
82.
Intra-Community Transport Services
1. The Member States shall adopt uniform standards and recommended practices for
the provision of transport services.
2. The Member States shall notify COTED of legislative, regulatory or administrative
measures affecting the provision of transport services within their domestic jurisdictions where such
measures deviate from uniform standards and recommended practices.
3. The Member States adversely affected by such regulatory or administrative measures
may notify COTED of such adverse effects, and shall have recourse to the disputes settlement
procedures provided in the Treaty.
ARTICLE 138
Development of Air Transport Services
1. The Member States shall co-operate in:
(a) the development of air transport services in the Community and towards this
end may conclude among themselves air transport agreements designed to
facilitate the provision of such services;
(b) establishing measures to ensure that the provision of international air
transport services in the Community is undertaken by financially viable and
technically qualified carriers and operators, and that the Community interest
in safety, security and economy of air travel is not prejudiced.
2. COTED shall promote co-operation among the Member States in the registration of
aircraft and the enforcement of applicable standards in the air transport industry.
3. The Member States shall co-operate in ensuring uniformity in licensing and
certification procedures and equivalencies within the Community for aviation personnel in conformity
with international standards.
4. COTED shall promote co-operation among operators of air transport services of the
Member States particularly in purchasing of equipment and supplies, the management of inventories,
interline and inter-modal operations, code sharing, reservations, insurance, leasing and similar
operations.
ARTICLE 139
Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation
1. The Member States undertake to conduct effective and comprehensive investigations
into aircraft accidents and incidents with a view to enhancing the technical conditions for the safe
delivery of air transport services.
2. The Member States shall, to the extent practicable, make available appropriate
equipment, facilities and personnel to assist in the investigation of aircraft accidents or incidents
which occur within the Community and take effective measures to protect the property of victims,
relevant evidence and the crash site from interference and unauthorised entry.
83.
3. The Member States shall collaborate with third States and competent international
organisations in the conduct of aircraft accident investigations.
ARTICLE 140
Development of Maritime Transport Services
1. The Member States shall co-operate in the development of maritime transport
services in the Community. In particular, the Member States shall co-operate in:

(a) enhancing flag and port State control activities in the Region;
 (b) developing and providing expertise in the shipping industry, including the
necessary services and infrastructure necessary for the growth of the
shipping sector;
 (c) protecting the marine environment from the effects of vessel source pollution
and in combating the effects of such pollution; and
 (d) taking any other action necessary for the sustainable development of the
shipping sector.

2. The Community shall co-operate with competent national, regional and international
organisations in establishing conditions for the provision of efficient and affordable maritime transport
services among the Member States.
3. COTED shall promote co-operation among the Member States in the implementation
of relevant international maritime instruments relating to maritime safety, marine environmental
protection, maritime accident investigation and the facilitation of maritime traffic.
4. COTED shall promote and co-ordinate the development of maritime transport
services in the Community through, inter alia:
(a) the development of proposals for the establishment and upgrade of small
vessel enterprises in the Community;
(b) the establishment of a regime of incentives to encourage the development
of shipping enterprises in the Community;
(c) measures for the establishment, improvement and rationalisation of port
facilities in the Community, to respond to the demands of containerisation,
refrigeration and storage of agricultural commodities, nautical and cruise
tourism and other special and dedicated services;
(d) co-operation and regular interchange among administrations to promote a
harmonised system for the development of maritime transport in the
Community;
(e) promotion of joint ventures among Community nationals and with extraregional shipping enterprises to facilitate the transfer of appropriate
technology and increase the participation of the Member States in
international shipping;
(f) the organisation and harmonisation of training programmes within the
Community, the strengthening of the capabilities of training institutions and
the ease of access of Community nationals to all aspects of training and
development in the shipping industry; and
(g) measures for the development of ancillary services in the shipping industry,
including non-vessel operating common carriers, marine insurance, freight
forwarding, transshipment and other services.
84.
5. The Member States shall promote the development of maritime transport services
in the Community through, inter alia:
(a) the establishment and improvement of port facilities;
(b) the establishment of effective maritime administrations for the regulation of
shipping in the respective jurisdictions of maritime safety and marine
environmental protection;
(c) the implementation of relevant international maritime instruments related to
the safety of shipping and the prevention of vessel source pollution; and
(d) encouraging improved efficiency in ports and in related services to reduce
maritime transportation costs.
ARTICLE 141
Special Status of the Caribbean Sea
The Member States shall co-operate in achieving international recognition for the
Caribbean Sea as a Special Area requiring protection from the potentially harmful effects of the transit
of nuclear and other hazardous wastes, dumping, pollution by oil or by any other substance carried
by sea or wastes generated through the conduct of ship operations.
CHAPTER SEVEN
DISADVANTAGED COUNTRIES, REGIONS
AND SECTORS
PART ONE
PRELIMINARY
ARTICLE 142
Scope of Application
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of establishing a
regime for disadvantaged countries, regions or sectors within the framework of the Treaty as well as
a special regime for the Less Developed Countries in order to enhance their prospects for successful
competition within the Community, and redress, to the extent possible, any negative impact of the
establishment of the CSME.
2. As soon as practicable after the entry into force of this Treaty, the Conference shall,
on the recommendation of the Community Council and in accordance with Article 1, designate
disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors and may, from time to time, make such further
designations or terminate such designations as circumstances warrant.
 3. Wherever in this Treaty reference is made to disadvantaged countries, regions and
sectors or to the Less Developed Countries, the Organs of the Community shall take the measures
required to give effect to the spirit and intent of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 143
Objective of the Regimes
1. The objective of the regimes mentioned in Article 142 is to assist the disadvantaged
countries, regions and sectors towards becoming economically viable and competitive by appropriate
85.
interventions of a transitional or temporary nature.
2. The interventions referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may include:
(a) technical and financial assistance to address economic dislocation arising
from the operation of the CSME;
(b) special measures to attract investment and industries;
(c) transitional or temporary arrangements to ameliorate or arrest adverse
economic and social impact arising from the operation of the CSME;
(d) special measures to assist industries to become efficient and competitive;
(e) assistance intended to achieve structural diversification and infrastructural
development;
(f) assistance to economic enterprises disadvantaged by the removal of
intraregional barriers;
(g) the establishment of mechanisms to monitor, and assist in the discharge of,
obligations assumed under the Treaty and other international trade
agreements.
ARTICLE 144
Implementation of Measures
Subject to the authority of the Conference, COTED and COFAP, as appropriate,
shall establish, administer and monitor the measures identified in Article 143.
ARTICLE 145
Review of Measures
1. The Community Council shall review, as appropriate, the effectiveness of measures
taken pursuant to this Chapter and take such action as may be necessary to achieve the objective
set out in Article 143, and shall submit a report thereon to the Conference.
2. The review shall include an examination of relevant programmes and support
measures in order to determine their efficacy as a basis for their termination or modification as the
case may be. 
86.
PART TWO
REGIME FOR DISADVANTAGED COUNTRIES,
REGIONS AND SECTORS
ARTICLE 146
Measures to Redress Disadvantage Arising
from Economic Dislocation
1. The Member States agree that where economic dislocation arising from the operation
of the CSME occurs, and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this Treaty, COTED may,
as the case may require on a temporary basis and subject to Article 144, adopt effective measures
to arrest or mitigate adverse effects on economic activity. Such measures may include the grant of
incentives to address the dislocation and shall be without prejudice to any incentives provided for in
Articles 52 and 69.
2. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this Treaty, the measures
mentioned in this Article may, where necessary, provide for temporary derogations from rights and
obligations set out in the Treaty.
3. COTED shall periodically examine the impact of the measures mentioned in
paragraph 2 with a view to determining their adequacy and establishing a time-frame for their
discontinuance.
4. The Member States shall co-operate with the Community Organs in implementing
the measures mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article and shall take the action required to secure
compliance therewith.
ARTICLE 147
Promotion of Investment
COFAP shall promote investment in disadvantaged countries by, inter alia,
facilitating:
(a) the establishment of joint ventures among nationals of disadvantaged
countries as well as between nationals of disadvantaged countries and
nationals of other Member States;
(b) the establishment of joint ventures between nationals of disadvantaged
countries and nationals of third countries;
(c) investment for economic diversification including diversification of the
agricultural sector;
(d) research, development and the transfer of technology in the development
of disadvantaged countries; and
(e) capital flows from other Member States to disadvantaged countries through
the conclusion of double taxation agreements and appropriate policy
instruments.
ARTICLE 148
Measures Relating to the Services Sector
1. COTED, in establishing the programme for removal of restrictions by Member States
on the provision of services in the Community mentioned in paragraph 2 of Article 37 shall give due
87.
consideration to the peculiar economic vulnerability of disadvantaged countries, bearing in mind
Article 49.
2. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions set out in paragraph 1 of this
Article, COTED shall, in establishing the said programme, determine in respect of disadvantaged
countries:
(a) a list of services in respect of which national treatment may not be applied
for a specified period of time;
(b) the manner in which restrictions on services not mentioned in sub-paragraph
(a) of this paragraph shall be removed:
Provided that such disadvantaged countries shall accord the Member States rights no more restrictive
than those accorded to other parties of the WTO under the General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS).
ARTICLE 149
Measures Relating to the Right of Establishment
1. COTED shall take appropriate measures to ensure that, in establishing the
programme for the removal of restrictions by the Member States on the right of establishment in the
Community mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 33, the peculiar economic vulnerability of
disadvantaged countries in the Community is taken into account, bearing in mind Article 49.
2. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article,
COTED shall, in establishing the said programme, determine in respect of disadvantaged countries:
(a) a list of economic activities in respect of which national treatment may not
be accorded to persons exercising the right of establishment for a specified
period of time;
(b) the manner in which restrictions on the right of establishment in respect of
economic activities not mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph
shall be removed:
Provided that such disadvantaged countries shall accord to the Member States rights of establishment
no more restrictive than those accorded to third States.
ARTICLE 150
Safeguard Measures
1. Where, in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 92, a disadvantaged country
establishes an entitlement to limit imports of goods from other Member States, then, notwithstanding
any other provisions to the contrary in this Treaty, the disadvantaged country may limit such imports
for a period of up to three (3) years unless COTED authorises the limitation for a longer period and
take such other measures as COTED may authorise.
2. A disadvantaged country applying restrictions in accordance with paragraph 1 of this
Article shall notify them to COTED, if possible, before they come into force. COTED may, at any
time, consider those restrictions and shall, in light of such consideration, make recommendations
designed to moderate any damaging effect of such restrictions or to assist the disadvantaged country
to overcome its difficulties.
3. Nothing in this Treaty shall be construed as entitling any Member State to apply
safeguard measures against the products of Community origin of a disadvantaged country where
such products do not exceed 20 per cent of the market of the importing Member State.
88.
ARTICLE 151
Support for Sensitive Industries
1. COTED may authorise a Member State having a sensitive industry which can be
disadvantaged by the operation of the CSME to suspend Community treatment to products of other
Member States.
2. The suspension authorised in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be granted upon
application to COTED in that behalf where the applicant establishes that the product is from a
sensitive industry.
3. For the purpose of this Article, an industry may be considered to be sensitive by
reason of its vulnerable nature and:
(a) the significance of its contribution to, inter alia:
(i) Gross Domestic Product;
(ii) employment;
(iii) foreign exchange earnings; or
(b) its designation as vital within the national industrial policy.
4. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Treaty, a disadvantaged country may,
for the period of suspension decided upon by COTED, suspend Community treatment in respect of
imports of like description from the Member State granted the suspension.
5. COTED, in authorising the suspension mentioned in paragraph 1 of this Article may
impose terms and conditions for the grant of the suspension.
6. COTED shall monitor the progress of the industry concerned and undertake a
periodic review.
ARTICLE 152
Public Undertakings
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this Treaty, disadvantaged countries
may, with the prior approval of COTED, maintain, in respect of public undertakings, measures, the
effect of which is to afford support to domestic production where such measures are in the form of:
(a) a duty or charge having equivalent effect; or
(b) quantitative restrictions.
ARTICLE 153
Use of Technological and Research Facilities
in Member States
1. The Member States undertake to provide opportunities for access to their
technological and research facilities by nationals of disadvantaged countries.
. 2. COTED shall encourage close collaboration between research institutions and
facilities located in disadvantaged countries with others located in other Member States.
ARTICLE 154
Promotion of Development
1. COTED shall promote the establishment of infrastructure in a disadvantaged country,
89.
region or sector to encourage or stimulate economic activity.
2. COTED may also adopt measures for the establishment of new industries or for the
retooling or expansion of existing industries in a disadvantaged country, region or sector.
ARTICLE 155
Special Provisions for Guyana
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this Treaty, Guyana shall be
allowed, for as long as it continues to benefit from wheat imports under PL 480 Agreements with the
United States of America, to impose quantitative restrictions on the importation of wheat flour.
ARTICLE 156
Application of the Special Regime to HighlyIndebted Poor Countries
COTED shall to the extent necessary and for a a period to be determined, apply the
provisions of the Special Regime for the less developed countries to Highly-Indebted Poor Countries.
ARTICLE 157
Technical and Financial Assistance
1. As soon as practicable after the entry into force of this Treaty, the Community Council
shall, in collaboration with other competent Organs of the Community, make adequate arrangements
to extend to disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors such technical and financial assistance as
may be required to allow them to participate effectively in the CSME and to administer international
trade agreements.
2. Pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, COTED shall evaluate the need for technical
and financial assistance to disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors, and promote and facilitate
appropriate programmes and projects. Such assistance may include:
(a) grants or access to low-cost financing;
(b) preparation of project proposals for financing;
(c) performance guarantees and other guarantees to enterprises;
(d) accessing technology including information technology;
(e) product design or quality enhancement;
(f) factory design and market development.
3. Technical assistance within the meaning of this Article may also include:
(a) assistance to establish or upgrade national standardising bodies;
(b) assistance to countries to advance their diversification programmes;
(c) professional assistance in meeting obligations under trade-related
agreements;
(d) assistance to establish institutions or centres for the training or retraining of
employees as the case may require;
(e) provision of relevant expertise to formulate a legal policy framework
conducive to fair trading and fair competition;
(f) professional expertise in espousing and defending claims arising in
connection with the WTO Agreement and other trade-related agreements;
(g) professional assistance in preparing for disputes resolution arising in
connection with trade-related agreements;
90.
(h) professional assistance in preparing legislation.
4. The evaluation mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article may be undertaken by
COTED on its own initiative, or in response to an application for assistance issuing from a Member
State.
5. COTED shall, from time to time, examine the impact of the measures mentioned in
paragraph 2 with a view to determining their adequacy and establishing a time-frame for their
discontinuance.
ARTICLE 158
The Development Fund
1. There is hereby established a Development Fund for the purpose of providing
financial or technical assistance to disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors.
2. Subject to the provisions of this Article and relevant provisions of this Treaty, the
Community Council, in collaboration with COFAP, shall:
(a) determine the status, composition and functions of the Development Fund;
(b) determine the contributions of the Member States to the Development Fund.
3. The Development Fund may accept subventions from public or private sector entities
of the Member States or from other entities external to the Community. Subventions shall not be
accepted nor applied by the Development Fund on conditions which discriminate against Member
States, regions or sectors except in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty.
ARTICLE 159
Saving
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as disentitling a disadvantaged country,
region or sector, being the beneficiary of any other technical assistance programme, from
simultaneously benefiting from technical assistance pursuant to the provisions herein set forth.
PART THREE
SPECIAL REGIME FOR LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
ARTICLE 160
Import Duties
Where a less developed country has suffered or is likely to suffer loss of revenue as
a result of the importation of goods eligible for Community treatment, COTED may, on application
made in that behalf by the less developed country, authorise the imposition of import duties on such
goods for such time and on such terms and conditions as COTED may decide.
ARTICLE 161
Community Origin
The Member States agree that in the determination and operation of the criterion of
substantial transformation pursuant to Article 84, the special needs of the less developed countries
shall be taken into account.
ARTICLE 162
Incentive Regimes
91.
The Member States agree that in the establishment of any programme for incentives
in the Community provided for in Article 52 and Article 69, the special needs of the less developed
countries shall be taken into account.
ARTICLE 163
The Common External Tariff
The Member States agree that in the implementation of the Common External Tariff
provided for in Article 82, the special needs of the less developed countries shall be taken into
account.
ARTICLE 164
Promotion of Industrial Development
1. Upon application made in that behalf by the less developed countries, COTED may,
if necessary, as a temporary measure in order to promote the development of an industry in any of
these States, authorise such States to suspend Community origin treatment to any description of
imports eligible therefor on grounds of production in one or more less developed countries.
2. COTED may, in taking decisions pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, establish
terms and conditions including a phasing-out period during which Member States and the Community
shall provide support measures and the industry implement the necessary programmes for achieving
competitiveness.
3. The grant of authorisation pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall be by means
of a decision supported by the affirmative votes of all the less developed countries and at least two
of the more developed countries.
ARTICLE 165
Public Undertakings
Paragraph 1 of Article 94 hall not apply to the less developed countries.
ARTICLE 166
Use of Technological and Research Facilities
The more developed countries undertake to provide opportunities for the use of their
technological and research facilities by the less developed countries.
ARTICLE 167
Special Provisions for Belize
Belize shall be allowed to impose import duties or quantitative restrictions on beer
and cigarettes produced in the Community for a period ending 31 December 2000.
CHAPTER EIGHT
COMPETITION POLICY AND
CONSUMER PROTECTION
PART ONE
RULES OF COMPETITION
ARTICLE 168
Scope of Chapter
92.
The rules of competition shall not apply to -
(a) combinations or activities of employees for their own reasonable protection
as employees;
(b) arrangements for collective bargaining on behalf of employers or employees
for the purpose of fixing terms and conditions of employment;
(c) business conduct within the meaning of Article 177duly notified to COTED
in accordance with Article 170;
(d) negative clearance rulings within the meaning of Article 180 or exemptions
within the meaning of Articles 181 and 183;
(e) activities of professional associations designed to develop or enforce
professional standards of competence reasonably necessary for the
protection of the public and approved by the Commission.
ARTICLE 169
Objectives of Community Competition Policy
1.. The goal of the Community Competition Policy shall be to ensure that the benefits
expected from the establishment of the CSME are not frustrated by anti-competitive business
conduct.
2. In fulfilment of the goal set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Community shall
pursue the following objectives:
(a) the promotion and maintenance of competition and enhancement of
economic efficiency in production, trade and commerce;
(b) subject to this Treaty, the prohibition of anti-competitive business conduct
which prevents, restricts or distorts competition or which constitutes the
abuse of a dominant position in the market; and
(c) the promotion of consumer welfare and protection of consumer interests.
ARTICLE 170
Implementation of Community Competition Policy
1. In order to achieve the objectives of the Community Competition Policy,
(a) the Community shall:
(i) subject to Articles 164, 177, 178 and 179 of this Treaty, establish
appropriate norms and institutional arrangements to prohibit and
penalise anti-competitive business conduct; and
(ii) establish and maintain information systems to enable enterprises
and consumers to be kept informed about the operation of markets
within the CSME;
(b) the Member States shall:
 (i) take the necessary legislative measures to ensure consistency and
93.
compliance with the rules of competition and provide penalties for
anti-competitive business conduct;
(ii) provide for the dissemination of relevant information to facilitate
consumer choice;
(Iii) establish and maintain institutional arrangements and administrative
procedures to enforce competition laws; and
(iv) take effective measures to ensure access by nationals of other
Member States to competent enforcement authorities including the
courts on an equitable, transparent and non-discriminatory basis.
2. Every Member State shall establish and maintain a national competition authority for
the purpose of facilitating the implementation of the rules of competition.
3. Every Member State shall require its national competition authority to:
(a) co-operate with the Commission in achieving compliance with the rules of
competition;
(b) investigate any allegations of anti-competitive business conduct referred to
the authority by the Commission or another Member State; .
(c) co-operate with other national competition authorities in the detection and
prevention of anti-competitive business conduct, and the exchange of
information relating to such conduct.
 4. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as requiring a Member State to disclose
confidential information, the disclosure of which would be prejudicial to the public interest or to the
legitimate commercial interests of enterprises, public or private. Confidential or proprietary
information disclosed in the course of an investigation shall be treated on the same basis as that on
which it was provided.
5. Within 24 months of the entry into force of this Treaty, the Member States shall notify
COTED of existing legislation, agreements and administrative practices inconsistent with the
provisions of this Chapter. Within 36 months of entry into force of this Treaty, COTED shall establish
a programme providing for the repeal of such legislation, and termination of agreements and
administrative practices.
ARTICLE 171
Establishment of the Competition Commission
For the purposes of implementation of the Community Competition Policy, there is
hereby established a Competition Commission (hereinafter called “the Commission”) having the
composition, functions and powers hereinafter set forth.
ARTICLE 172
Composition of the Commission
1. The Commission shall comprise seven members appointed by the Regional Judicial
and Legal Services Commission to serve on the Commission. The Regional Judicial and Legal
Services Commission shall appoint a Chairman from among the members so appointed.
2. The Commission shall comprise persons, collectively having expertise or experience
in commerce, finance, economics, law, competition policy and practice, international trade and such
other areas of expertise or experience as may be necessary.
3. A Commissioner shall be appointed for a term of five years and such appointment
may be renewed for a further period of not more than five years as determined by the Regional
94.
Judicial and Legal Services Commission.
4. A Commissioner may be removed from office only for inability to perform the
functions of his office or for misbehaviour and shall otherwise be subject to the disciplinary procedures
of the Regional Judicial and Legal Services Commission.
5. A Commissioner shall be removed only on the vote of the Judicial and Legal Services
Commission that represents not less than three-quarters of all the Members of the Commission.
6. A Commissioner may at any time resign the office of Commissioner by writing under
his hand addressed to the Chairman of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission.
7. A Commissioner shall not enter upon the duties of the office unless he has taken and
subscribed before the Chairman of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission, the Oath of Office
set out in the Annex to this Treaty.
8. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, the Conference shall on the
recommendation of COTED execute the functions required to be carried out by the Regional Judicial
and Legal Services Commission where the Parties to the Agreement Establishing the Caribbean
Court of Justice are less than seven.
ARTICLE 173
Functions of the Commission
1. The Commission shall:
(a) apply the rules of competition in respect of anti-competitive cross-border
business conduct;
(b) promote and protect competition in the Community and co-ordinate the
implementation of the Community Competition Policy; and
(c) perform any other function conferred on it by any competent body of the
Community.
2. In discharging the functions set out in paragraph 1, the Commission shall:
(a) monitor anti-competitive practices of enterprises operating in the CSME, and
investigate and arbitrate cross-border disputes;
(b) keep the Community Competition Policy under review and advise and make
recommendations to COTED to enhance its effectiveness;
(c) promote the establishment of institutions and the development and
implementation of harmonised competition laws and practices by the
Member States to achieve uniformity in the administration of applicable
rules;
(d) review the progress made by the Member States in the implementation of
the legal and institutional framework for enforcement;
(e) co-operate with competent authorities in the Member States;
(f) provide support to the Member States in promoting and protecting consumer
welfare;
(g) facilitate the exchange of relevant information and expertise; and
(h) develop and disseminate information about competition policy, and
95.
consumer protection policy.
3. The Commission may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as it
thinks fit, delegate any of its functions to one or more of its members.
ARTICLE 174
Powers of the Commission
1. Subject to Articles 175 and 176, the Commission may, in respect of cross-border
transactions or transactions with cross-border effects, monitor, investigate, detect, make
determinations or take action to inhibit and penalise enterprises whose business conduct prejudices
trade or prevents, restricts or distorts competition within the CSME.
2. The Commission may, in accordance with applicable national laws, in the conduct
of its investigations:
(a) secure the attendance of any person before it to give evidence;
(b) require the discovery or production of any document or part thereof; and
(c) take such other action as may be necessary in furtherance of the
investigation.
3. The Commission may, on the basis of its investigations, make determinations
regarding the compatibility of business conduct with the rules of competition and other related
provisions of the Treaty.
4. The Commission shall, to the extent required to remedy or penalise anti-competitive
business conduct referred to in Article 177:
(b) order the termination or nullification as the case may require, of agreements,
conduct, activities or decisions prohibited by Article 170;
(c) direct the enterprise to cease and desist from anti-competitive business
conduct and to take such steps as are necessary to overcome the effects
of abuse of its dominant position in the market, or any other business
conduct inconsistent with the principles of fair competition set out in this
Chapter;
(i) order payment of compensation to persons affected; and
(j) impose fines for breaches of the rules of competition.
5. The Commission may enter into such arrangements for the provision of services as
may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
6. The Member States shall enact legislation to ensure that determinations of the
Commission are enforceable in their jurisdictions.
7. The Commission may establish its own rules of procedure.
ARTICLE 175
Determination of Anti-Competitive Business Conduct:
Procedure of Commission on Request
1. A Member State may request an investigation referred to in paragraph 1 of Article
174 where it has reason to believe that business conduct by an enterprise located in another Member
State prejudices trade and prevents, restricts or distorts competition in the territory of the requesting
96.
Member State.
2. Where COTED has reason to believe that business conduct by an enterprise in the
CSME prejudices trade and prevents, restricts or distorts competition within the CSME and has or
is likely to have cross-border effects, COTED may request an investigation referred to in paragraph
1 of Article 174.
3. Requests under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be in writing and shall disclose sufficient
information for the Commission to make a preliminary assessment whether it should proceed with the
investigation.
4. Upon receipt of a request mentioned in paragraph 3, the Commission shall consult
with the interested parties and shall determine on the basis of such consultations whether:
(a) the investigation is within the jurisdiction of the Commission; and
(b) the investigation is justified in all the circumstances of the case.
5. The consultations shall be concluded within 30 days of the date of receipt of the
request for the investigation, unless the parties agree to continue the consultations for a longer period.
6. Where the Commission decides to conduct the investigation, the Commission shall:
(a) notify the interested parties and COTED;
(b) complete the investigation within 120 days from the date of receipt of the
request for the investigation; and
(c) where the circumstances so warrant, extend the time period for completion
of the investigation and notify the interested parties.
7. Where the Commission decides to conduct an enquiry following an investigation, the
Commission shall afford any party complained of the opportunity to defend its interest.
8. At the conclusion of an enquiry, the Commission shall notify the interested parties
of its determination.
9. Where the Commission determines that a party has engaged in anti-competitive
business conduct, it shall also require the party to take the action necessary to remove the effects of
the anti-competitive business conduct.
10. Where a specific course of action is required under paragraph 9, the enterprise
concerned shall take the appropriate course of action within 30 days of the date of notification. If the
concerned enterprise cannot comply, it shall notify the Commission and request an extension.
11. If the enterprise cannot comply within the time period specified and fails to inform the
Commission, the Commission may apply to the Court for an order.
12. A party which is aggrieved by a determination of the Commission under paragraph
4 of Article 174 in any matter may apply to the Court for a review of that determination.
ARTICLE 176
Determination of Anti-Competitive Business Conduct:
Procedure of Commission Proprio Motu
1. Where the Commission has reason to believe that business conduct by an enterprise
in the CSME prejudices trade and prevents, restricts, or distorts competition within the CSME and
97.
has cross-border effects, the Commission shall request the national competition authority to
undertake a preliminary examination of the business conduct of the enterprise.
2. Where a request is made under paragraph 1, the national competition authority shall
examine the matter and report its findings to the Commission within such time as may be determined
by the Commission.
3. Where the Commission is not satisfied with the outcome of its request, the
Commission may initiate its own preliminary examination into the business conduct of the enterprise
referred to in paragraph 1.
4. Where the findings of the preliminary examination under paragraphs 2 and 3 require
investigation, the Commission and the Member State concerned shall hold consultations to determine
and agree on who should have jurisdiction to investigate.
5. If there is a difference of opinion between the Commission and the Member State
regarding the nature and effects of the business conduct or the jurisdiction of the investigating
authority, the Commission shall:
(a) cease any further examination of the matter; and
(b) refer the matter to COTED for its decision.
6. Nothing in this Article shall prejudice the right of the Member State to initiate
proceedings before the Court at any time.
7. Where there is a finding that the Commission has jurisdiction to investigate the
matter, the Commission shall follow the procedures set out in paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Article 175.
ARTICLE 177
Prohibition of Anti-Competitive Business Conduct
1. A Member State shall, within its jurisdiction, prohibit as being anti-competitive
business conduct, the following:
(a) agreements between enterprises, decisions by associations of enterprises,
and concerted practices by enterprises which have as their object or effect
the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the Community;
 (b) actions by which an enterprise abuses its dominant position within the
Community; or
(c) any other like conduct by enterprises whose object or effect is to frustrate
the benefits expected from the establishment of the CSME.
2. Anti-competitive business conduct within the meaning of paragraph 1 includes the
following:
(a) the direct or indirect fixing of purchase or selling prices,
(b) the limitation or control of production, markets, investment or technical
development;
(c) the artificial dividing up of markets or restriction of supply sources;
(d) the application of unequal conditions to parties undertaking equivalent
engagements in commercial transactions thereby causing a competitive
disadvantage;
98.
(e) making the conclusion of a contract subject to the acceptance by the other
party to the contract of additional obligations which, by their nature or
according to commercial practice, have no connection with the subject
matter of the contract;
(f) unauthorised denial of access to networks or essential infrastructure;
(g) predatory pricing;
(h) price discrimination;
(i) loyalty discounts or concessions;
(j) exclusionary vertical restrictions; and
(k) bid-rigging.
3. Subject to Article 168, a Member State shall ensure that all agreements and
decisions within the meaning of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be null and void within its jurisdiction.
 4. An enterprise shall not be treated as engaging in anti-competitive business conduct
if it establishes that the activity complained of:
(a) contributes to:
(i) the improvement of production or distribution of goods and services;
or
(ii) the promotion of technical or economic progress,
 while allowing consumers a fair share of the resulting benefit;
(b) imposes on the enterprises affected only such restrictions as are
indispensable to the attainment of the objectives mentioned in subparagraph (a); or
(c) does not afford the enterprise engaged in the activity the possibility of
eliminating competition in respect of a substantial part of the market for
goods or services concerned.
ARTICLE 178
Determination of Dominant Position
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) an enterprise holds a dominant position in a market if by itself or together
with an interconnected enterprise, it occupies such a position of economic
strength as will enable it to operate in the market without effective
constraints from its competitors or potential competitors;
(b) any two enterprises shall be treated as interconnected enterprises if one of
them is a subsidiary of the other or both of them are subsidiaries of the
same parent enterprise.
ARTICLE 179
Abuse of a Dominant Position
1. Subject to paragraph 2 of this Article, an enterprise abuses its dominant position in
a market if it prevents, restricts or distorts competition in the market and, in particular but without
99.
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, it:
(a) restricts the entry of any enterprise into a market;
(b) prevents or deters any enterprise from engaging in competition in a market;
(c) eliminates or removes any enterprise from a market;
(d) directly or indirectly imposes unfair purchase or selling prices or other
restrictive practices;
(e) limits the production of goods or services for a market to the prejudice of
consumers;
(f) as a party to an agreement, makes the conclusion of such agreement
subject to acceptance by another party of supplementary obligations which,
by their nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection with
the subject of the agreement;
(g) engages in any business conduct that results in the exploitation of its
customers or suppliers,
so as to frustrate the benefits expected from the establishment of the CSME.
2. In determining whether an enterprise has abused its dominant position,
consideration shall be given to:
(a) the relevant market defined in terms of the product and the geographic
context;
(b) the concentration level before and after the relevant activity of the enterprise
measured in terms of annual sales volume, the value of assets and the
value of the transaction;
(c) the level of competition among the participants in terms of number of
competitors, production capacity and product demand;
(d) the barriers to entry of competitors; and
(e) the history of competition and rivalry between participants in the sector of
activity.
3. An enterprise shall not be treated as abusing its dominant position if it establishes
that:
(a) its behaviour was directed exclusively to increasing efficiency in the
production, provision or distribution of goods or services or to promoting
technical or economic progress and that consumers were allowed a fair
share of the resulting benefit;
(b) it reasonably enforces or seeks to enforce a right under or existing by virtue
of a copyright, patent, registered trade mark or design; or
(c) the effect or likely effect of its behaviour on the market is the result of
superior competitive performance of the enterprise concerned.
ARTICLE 180
Negative Clearance Rulings
1. In any case where a Member State is uncertain whether business conduct is
100.
prohibited by paragraph 1 of Article 177, such a Member State may apply to the Commission for a
ruling on the matter. If the Commission determines that such conduct is not prohibited by paragraph
1 of Article 177, it shall issue a negative clearance ruling to this effect.
2. Subject to paragraph 3, a negative clearance ruling shall be conclusive of the matters
stated therein in any judicial proceedings in the Community.
3. The Court may, on an application of the Commission, review a decision of the
Commission where the decision was induced by deceit or improper means.
ARTICLE 181
De Minimis Rule
The Commission may exempt from the provisions of this Part any business conduct
referred to it if it considers that the impact of such conduct on competition and trade in the CSME is
minimal.
ARTICLE 182
Powers of the COTED Respecting Community
Competition Policy and Rules
Subject to this Treaty, COTED shall develop and establish appropriate policies and
rules of competition within the Community including special rules for particular sectors.
ARTICLE 183
Exemptions
1. Where COTED determines, pursuant to Article 182, that special rules shall apply to
specific sectors of the Community, it may suspend or exclude the application of Article 177 to such
sectors pending adoption of the relevant rules.
2. COTED may, on its own initiative or pursuant to an application by a Member State
in that behalf, exclude or suspend the application of Article 177 to any sector or any enterprise or
group of enterprises in the public interest.
PART TWO
CONSUMER PROTECTION
ARTICLE 184
Promotion of Consumer Interests
in the Community
1. The Member States shall promote the interests of consumers in the Community by
appropriate measures that:
(a) provide for the production and supply of goods and the provision of services
to ensure the protection of life, health and safety of consumers;
(b) ensure that goods supplied and services provided in the CSME satisfy
regulations, standards, codes and licensing requirements established or
approved by competent bodies in the Community;
(c) provide, where the regulations, standards, codes and licensing requirements
referred to in paragraph (b) do not exist, for their establishment and
101.
implementation;
(d) encourage high levels of ethical conduct for those engaged in the production
and distribution of goods and services to consumers;
(e) encourage fair and effective competition in order to provide consumers with
greater choice among goods and services at lowest cost;
(f) promote the provision of adequate information to consumers to enable the
making of informed choices;
(g) ensure the availability of adequate information and education programmes
for consumers and suppliers;
(h) protect consumers by prohibiting discrimination against producers and
suppliers of goods produced in the Community and against service
providers who are nationals of other Member States of the Community;
(i) encourage the development of independent consumer organisations;
(j) provide adequate and effective redress for consumers.
2. For the purpose of this Part,
“consumer” means any person:
(a) to whom goods or services are supplied or intended to be supplied in the
course of business carried on by a supplier or potential supplier; and
(b) who does not receive the goods or services in the course of a business
carried on by him.
ARTICLE 185
Protection of Consumer Interests
in the Community
The Member States shall enact harmonised legislation to provide, inter alia:
(a) for the fundamental terms of a contract and the implied obligations of parties
to a contract for the supply of goods or services;
(b) for the prohibition of the inclusion of unconscionable terms in contracts for
the sale and supply of goods or services to consumers;
(c) for the prohibition of unfair trading practices, particularly such practices
relating to misleading or deceptive or fraudulent conduct;
(d) for the prohibition of production and supply of harmful and defective goods
and for the adoption of measures to prevent the supply or sale of such
goods including measures requiring the removal of defective goods from
the market;
(e) that the provision of services is in compliance with the applicable
regulations, standards, codes and licensing requirements;
(f) that goods supplied to consumers are labelled in accordance with standards
and specifications prescribed by the competent authorities;
102.
(g) that hazardous or other goods whose distribution and consumption are
regulated by law are sold or supplied in accordance with applicable
regulations;
(h) that goods or materials, the production or use of which is likely to result in
potentially harmful environmental effects, are labelled and supplied in
accordance with applicable standards and regulations;
(i) that producers and suppliers are liable for defects in goods and for violation
of product standards and consumer safety standards which occasion loss
or damage to consumers;
(j) that violations of consumer safety standards by producers or suppliers are
appropriately sanctioned and relevant civil or criminal defences to such
violations are available to defendants.
ARTICLE 186
Action by the Commission to Provide Support in the
Promotion of Consumer Welfare and Protection of
Consumer Interests
1. The Commission shall, for the purpose of providing support to the Member States
in the enhancement of consumer education and consumer welfare:
(a) promote in the Community the elaboration, publication and adoption of fair
contract terms between suppliers and consumers of goods and services
produced or traded in the CSME;
(b) take such measures as it considers necessary to ensure that the Member
States discourage and eliminate unfair trading practices, including
misleading or deceptive conduct, false advertising, bait advertising, referral
selling and pyramid selling;
(c) promote in the Member States product safety standards as part of a
programme of consumer education in order to assist the consumer to make
informed choices concerning the purchase of consumer goods;
(d) keep under review the carrying on of commercial activities in the Member
States which relate to goods supplied to consumers in such States or
produced with a view to their being so supplied, or which relate to services
supplied for consumers with a view to identifying practices which may
adversely affect the interests of consumers;
(e) educate and guide consumers generally in the practical resolution of their
problems and in the best use of their income and credit, using such
techniques and means of communications as are available;
(f) confer, on request, with consumer organisations of the Member States and
offer such advice and information as may be appropriate for the resolution
of their consumer problems;
(g) establish the necessary co-ordination with government agencies and
departments for the effective education and guidance of consumers having
regard to the programmes, activities and resources of each agency or
department;
(h) conduct research and collect and collate information in respect of matters
affecting the interests of consumers;
103.
(i) compile, evaluate and publicise enactments for the protection of consumers
in such States and recommend to COTED the enactment of legislation
considered necessary or desirable for the protection of consumers;
(j) promote, after consultation with the competent standardising agency and
other public and private agencies or organisations, the establishment of
quality standards for consumer products;
(k) promote and monitor, after consultation with relevant agencies and
departments of Government, the enforcement of legislation affecting the
interests of consumers, including, but not limited to, legislation relating to
weights and measures, food and drugs adulteration, the control of standards
and price controls;
(l) make recommendations to COTED for the enactment of legislation by the
Member States for the effective enforcement of the rights of consumers.
2. The Commission shall:
(a) draw to the attention of COTED business conduct by enterprises which
impacts adversely on consumer welfare;
(b) collaborate with competent Organs of the Community to promote consumer
education and consumer welfare.
CHAPTER NINE
DISPUTES SETTLEMENT
ARTICLE 187
Scope of the Chapter
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the settlement of disputes concerning
the interpretation and application of the Treaty, including:
(a) allegations that an actual or proposed measure of another Member State is,
or would be, inconsistent with the objectives of the Community;
(b) allegations of injury, serious prejudice suffered or likely to be suffered,
nullification or impairment of benefits expected from the establishment and
operation of the CSME;
(c) allegations that an organ or body of the Community has acted ultra vires; or
(d) allegations that the purpose or object of the Treaty is being frustrated or
prejudiced.
104.
ARTICLE 188
Modes of Dispute Settlement
1. Subject to the provisions of this Treaty, the disputes mentioned in Article 187 shall
be settled only by recourse to any one of the following modes for the settlement of disputes, namely,
good offices, mediation, consultations, conciliation, arbitration and adjudication.
2. Where a dispute has not been settled following the adoption of one of the modes
referred to in paragraph 1 other than arbitration or adjudication, either party may have recourse to
another mode.
3. Subject to the procedural rules applicable in respect of arbitration or adjudication, the
parties may agree, pending a settlement, to have recourse to good offices, mediation or conciliation
in order to arrive at a settlement.
4. Without prejudice to the exclusive and compulsory jurisdiction of the Court in the
interpretation and application of this Treaty under Article 211, the parties may use any of the voluntary
modes of dispute settlement provided for in this Article in the settlement of a dispute.
ARTICLE 189
Expeditious Settlement of Disputes
Where a dispute arises between Member States, the parties shall proceed
expeditiously to an exchange of views for the purpose of agreeing on:
(a) a mode of settlement and where an agreed mode has been terminated, to
another mode of settlement; or
(b) a mutually satisfactory method of implementation where a settlement has
been reached and the circumstances require consultation regarding its
implementation.
ARTICLE 190
Notification of Existence and
Settlement of Disputes
1. Member States parties to a dispute shall notify the Secretary-General of:
(a) the existence and nature of the dispute; and
(b) any mode of dispute settlement agreed upon or initiated.
2. Where a settlement is reached the Member States concerned shall notify the
Secretary-General of the settlement and the mode used in arriving at the settlement.
3. The Secretary-General shall, as soon as practicable after receiving the information
pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2, notify other Member States of the information received.
ARTICLE 191
Good Offices
1. Member States parties to a dispute may agree to employ the good offices of a third
party, including those of the Secretary-General, to settle the dispute.
2. Good offices may begin or be terminated at any time. Subject to the procedural rules
applicable in respect of arbitration or adjudication, good offices may continue during the course of
arbitration or adjudication. 
105.
ARTICLE 192
Mediation
1. Where Member States parties to a dispute agree to settle the dispute by recourse
to mediation, the parties may agree on a mediator or may request the Secretary-General to appoint
a mediator from the list of conciliators mentioned in Article 196.
2. Mediation may begin or be terminated at any time. Subject to the procedural rules
applicable in respect of arbitration or adjudication, mediation may continue during the course of
arbitration or adjudication.
3. Proceedings involving mediation and, in particular, positions taken by parties during
the proceedings, shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the parties in any further
proceedings.
ARTICLE 193
Obligation to Enter Consultations
1. A Member State shall enter into consultations upon the request of another Member
State where the requesting Member State alleges that an action taken by the requested Member
State constitutes a breach of obligations arising from or under the provisions of this Treaty.
2. Where a request for consultations is made pursuant to paragraph 1, the requested
Member State shall enter into consultations within 14 days of the receipt of the request or a mutually
agreed period.
3. Where:
(a) consultations have not been entered into within the period referred to in
paragraph 2; or
(b) the consultations fail to settle the dispute within 45 days of the receipt of the
request for consultations or the dates mutually agreed,
the requesting Member State may resort to any mode of dispute settlement including arbitration and
adjudication.
4. Requests for consultations shall be in writing. The request shall state the reasons for
the consultations and identify the measure at issue and the legal basis for the complaint.
5. The Secretary-General shall be notified of any request for consultations.
6. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the Member
States in any further proceedings. However, before resorting to further proceedings, the Member
States shall employ their best endeavours to settle the dispute.
7. In cases of urgency including those concerning perishable goods, the requested
Member State shall enter into consultations within 3 days of the receipt of the request, and where
such consultations are not entered into, the requesting Member State may resort to arbitration and
adjudication.
8. Where consultations under paragraph 7 fail to settle the dispute within 7 days of the
receipt of the request for such consultations, the requesting Member State may resort to arbitration
and adjudication.
9. Whenever a Member State, other than the consulting Member States, considers that
it has a legitimate interest in consultations being held pursuant to this Article, such Member State may
notify the consulting Member States and the Secretary-General, within 10 days after the date of the
circulation of the request for consultations, of its desire to be joined in the consultations. Such
106.
Member State shall be joined in the consultations, provided that the requested Member State agrees
that the claim of legitimate interest is well-founded and based on similar facts and circumstances. In
that event, the Member States concerned shall notify the Secretary-General. If the request to be
joined in the consultations is not granted, the applicant Member State may request consultations
under paragraph 1 of this Article.
ARTICLE 194
Obligations of Consulting Parties
Where Member States parties to a dispute agree to settle the dispute by
consultations, they shall endeavour to arrive at a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute
through the consultations, and to this end shall:
(a) provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of how the action
complained of constitutes a breach of obligations arising from or under the
provisions of this Treaty referred to in Article 193; and
(b) treat any confidential or proprietary information exchanged in the course of
consultations on the same basis as it is treated by the Member State
providing the information.
ARTICLE 195
Initiation of Conciliation Proceedings
Where Member States parties to a dispute have agreed to submit the dispute to
conciliation under this Part, any such Member State may institute proceedings by notification
addressed to the other party or parties to the dispute.
ARTICLE 196
Establishment of a List of Conciliators
1. A List of Conciliators shall be established and maintained by the Secretary-General.
Every Member State shall be entitled to nominate two conciliators, each of whom shall be a person
enjoying the highest reputation for fairness, competence and integrity. The names of the persons so
nominated shall constitute the List. If at any time the number of conciliators nominated by a Member
State is less than two, the Member State concerned shall be entitled to make such nominations as
are necessary. The name of a conciliator shall remain on the List until withdrawn by the Member
State which made the nomination and where a conciliator has been appointed to serve on any
mediation or conciliation commission, the conciliator shall continue to serve on such commission until
the completion of the relevant proceedings.
2. The term of a conciliator, including that of a conciliator appointed to fill a vacancy,
shall be five (5) years and may be renewed.
ARTICLE 197
Constitution of Conciliation Commission
A conciliation commission shall be constituted from time to time as follows:
(a) subject to the provisions of this Article, a conciliation commission shall
consist of three members;
(b) unless the parties otherwise agree, the party instituting the proceedings
shall appoint one conciliator to be chosen from the List mentioned in Article
196. The conciliator appointed may be a national of the party making the
appointment. Such an appointment shall be included in the notification
107.
mentioned in Article 195;
(c) the other party to the dispute shall appoint a conciliator in the manner set
forth in sub-paragraph (b) within ten days of the notification referred to in
Article 195. If the appointment is not made within that period, the party
instituting the proceedings may, within one week of the expiration of that
period, either terminate the proceedings by notification addressed to the
other party or request the Secretary-General to make the appointment in
accordance with sub-paragraph (e);
(d) within ten days after both conciliators have been appointed, they shall
appoint a third conciliator chosen from the List referred to in Article 196, and
who shall be the Chairman. If the appointment is not made within that
period either party may, within the week of the expiration of that period,
request the Secretary-General to make the appointment in accordance with
sub-paragraph (e);
(e) within ten days of the receipt of a request under sub-paragraphs (c) and (d),
the Secretary-General shall make the necessary appointments from the List
referred to in Article 196 in consultation with the parties to the dispute;
(f) any vacancy on a conciliation commission shall be filled in the manner
prescribed for the initial appointment;
(g) two or more Member States parties to the dispute which determine by
agreement that they are of the same interest shall appoint one conciliator
jointly;
(h) in disputes involving more than two parties having separate interests, or
where there is disagreement as to whether they are of the same interest, the
parties shall apply sub-paragraphs (a) to (f) in so far as may be possible.
ARTICLE 198
Amicable Settlement
A conciliation commission may draw to the attention of the Member States parties
to the dispute any measures which might facilitate an amicable settlement of the dispute.
ARTICLE 199
Functions of Conciliation Commission
A conciliation commission shall hear the Member States parties to the dispute,
examine their claims and objections, and make proposals to the parties with a view to reaching an
amicable settlement.
ARTICLE 200
Procedure
1. A conciliation commission shall, unless the Member States parties to the dispute
otherwise agree, determine its own procedure. A conciliation commission may, with the consent of
the parties to the dispute, invite any Member State to submit its views to the commission, orally or in
writing. The report and recommendations and decisions of the commission regarding procedural
matters shall be made by a majority vote of its members.
2. The Member States parties to the dispute may, by agreement applicable solely to that
dispute, modify the procedure referred to in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 201
Report
1. A conciliation commission shall report within three months of its constitution. Its
108.
report shall record any agreements reached and, failing agreement, its conclusions on all questions
of fact or law relevant to the matter in dispute and such recommendations as a conciliation
commission may deem appropriate for an amicable settlement.
2. The conclusions or recommendations of a conciliation commission shall not be
binding upon the parties.
ARTICLE 202
Termination
The conciliation proceedings shall be deemed to be terminated when a settlement
has been reached, when the parties have accepted or one party has rejected the recommendations
of the report by notification addressed to the Secretary-General, or when a period of one month has
expired from the date of transmission of the report to the parties.
ARTICLE 203
Fees and Expenses
The fees and expenses of a conciliation commission shall be borne by the Member
States parties to the dispute.
ARTICLE 204
Arbitration
A Member State party to a dispute may, with the consent of the other party, refer the
matter to an arbitral tribunal constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 205
Constitution of the List of Arbitrators
1. For the purposes of constituting the arbitral tribunal referred to in Article 206, the
Secretary-General shall establish and maintain a List of Arbitrators comprising persons chosen strictly
on the basis of impartiality, reliability and sound judgment and who shall:
(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters
covered by this Treaty, or the settlement of disputes arising under
international trade agreements;
(b) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take instructions from any
Member State; and
(c) comply with the Code of Judicial Conduct governing the behaviour of judges
of the Court.
2. The term of an arbitrator, including that of any arbitrator nominated to fill a vacancy,
shall be five years and may be renewed.
ARTICLE 206
Constitution of Arbitral Tribunal
1. Each of the Member States parties to a dispute shall be entitled to appoint one
arbitrator from the List of Arbitrators. The two arbitrators chosen by the parties shall be appointed
within fifteen days following the decision to refer the matter to arbitration. The two arbitrators shall,
within fifteen days following the date of their appointments, appoint a third arbitrator from the List who
shall be the Chairman. As far as practicable, the arbitrators shall not be nationals of any of the parties
to the dispute.
2. Where either party to the dispute fails to appoint its arbitrator under paragraph 1, the
109.
Secretary-General shall appoint the arbitrator within ten days. Where the arbitrators fail to appoint
a Chairman within the time prescribed, the Secretary-General shall appoint a Chairman within ten
days.
3. Where more than two Member States are parties to a dispute, the parties concerned
shall agree among themselves on the two arbitrators to be appointed from the List of Arbitrators within
fifteen days following the decision to refer the matter to arbitration and the two arbitrators shall within
fifteen days of their appointment appoint a third arbitrator from the List who shall be the Chairman.
5. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4, Member States parties to a dispute may
refer the matter to arbitration and consent to the Secretary-General appointing a sole arbitrator from
the list who shall not be a national of a Party to the dispute.
 ARTICLE 207
Rules of Procedure of Arbitral Tribunal
1. Subject to the relevant provisions of this Chapter, the arbitral tribunal shall establish
its own rules of procedure.
2. The procedures shall assure a right to at least one hearing before the arbitral tribunal
as well as the opportunity to provide initial and rebuttal written submissions.
3. The arbitral tribunal’s hearings, deliberations and initial report, and all written
submissions to and communications with the arbitral tribunal, shall be confidential.
4. The arbitral tribunal may invite any Member State to submit views orally or in writing.
5 The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be confined to the subject matter of the dispute
and shall state the reasons on which it is based.
6. Where the parties cannot agree on the interpretation or implementation of the award,
either party may apply to the arbitral tribunal for a ruling within thirty days of the award. The term of
the arbitral tribunal shall come to an end unless an application for a ruling has been received, in which
case it shall continue for such reasonable time, not exceeding thirty days, as may be required to make
the ruling.
7. Decisions of the arbitral tribunal shall be taken by a majority vote of its members and
shall be final and binding on the Member States parties to the dispute.
ARTICLE 208
Third Party Intervention
A Member State which is not a party to a dispute, on delivery of a notification to the
parties to a dispute and to the Secretary-General, shall be entitled to attend all hearings and to
receive written submissions of the parties to a dispute and may be permitted to make oral or written
submissions to the arbitral tribunal.
ARTICLE 209
Additional Information from Experts
Where proceedings have commenced, the arbitral tribunal may, on its own initiative
or on the request of a party to the dispute, seek information and technical advice from any expert or
body that it considers appropriate, provided that the parties to the dispute so agree and subject to
110.
such terms and conditions as the parties may agree.
ARTICLE 210
Expenses of Arbitral Tribunal
1. The expenses of the arbitral tribunal, including the fees and subsistence allowances
of arbitrators and experts engaged for the purposes of a dispute, shall be borne equally by the
Member States parties to the dispute unless the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the
circumstances of the case, otherwise determines.
2. Where a third party intervenes in the proceedings, the party shall bear the costs
associated with the intervention.
ARTICLE 211
Jurisdiction of the Court in Contentious Proceedings
1. Subject to this Treaty, the Court shall have compulsory and exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and determine disputes concerning the interpretation and application of the Treaty, including:
(a) disputes between the Member States parties to the Agreement;
(b) disputes between the Member States parties to the Agreement and the
Community;
(c) referrals from national courts of the Member States parties to the
Agreement;
(d) applications by persons in accordance with Article 222,
concerning the interpretation and application of this Treaty.
2. For the purpose of this Chapter, “national courts” includes the Eastern Caribbean
Supreme Court.
ARTICLE 212
Advisory Opinions of the Court
1. The Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to deliver advisory opinions concerning
the interpretation and application of the Treaty.
2. Advisory opinions shall be delivered only at the request of the Member States parties
to a dispute or the Community.
ARTICLE 213
Institution of Proceedings
Any party to a dispute may institute proceedings in accordance with the Rules of
Court governing Original Jurisdiction.
ARTICLE 214
Referral to the Court
Where a national court or tribunal of a Member State is seised of an issue whose
resolution involves a question concerning the interpretation or application of this Treaty, the court or
tribunal concerned shall, if it considers that a decision on the question is necessary to enable it to
deliver judgment, refer the question to the Court for determination before delivering judgment.
111.
ARTICLE 215
Compliance with Judgments of the Court
The Member States, Organs, Bodies of the Community, entities or persons to whom
a judgment of the Court applies, shall comply with that judgment promptly.
ARTICLE 216
Compulsory Jurisdiction of the Court
1. The Member States agree that they recognise as compulsory, ipso facto and without
special agreement, the original jurisdiction of the Court referred to in Article 211.
2. In the event of a dispute as to whether the Court has jurisdiction, the matter shall be
determined by decision of the Court.
ARTICLE 217
Law to be Applied by the Court in the Exercise
of its Original Jurisdiction
1. The Court, in exercising its original jurisdiction under Article 211, shall apply such
rules of international law as may be applicable.
2. The Court may not bring in a finding of non liquet on the ground of silence or
obscurity of the law.
3. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not prejudice the power of the Court to
decide a dispute ex aequo et bono if the parties so agree.
ARTICLE 218
Application for Interim Measures
The Court shall have the power to prescribe, if it considers the circumstances so
require, any interim measures that ought to be taken to preserve the rights of either party.
ARTICLE 219
Revision of Judgments of the Court in the
Exercise of its Original Jurisdiction
1. The Court shall, in the exercise of its Original Jurisdiction, be competent to revise its
judgment on an application made in that behalf.
2. An application for the revision of a judgment of the Court in the exercise of its original
jurisdiction may be made only when it is based upon the discovery of some fact of such a nature as
to be a decisive factor, which fact was, when the judgment was given, unknown to the Court and to
the party claiming revision: provided always the ignorance of that fact was not due to negligence on
the part of the applicant.
3. Proceedings for a revision shall be opened by a judgment of the Court expressly
recording the existence of the new fact, recognising that it has such a character as to lay the case
open to revision, and declaring the application admissible on this ground.
4. The Court may require previous compliance with the terms of the judgment before
it admits proceedings for a revision.
5. The application for a revision shall be made within six months of the discovery of the
112.
new fact.
6. No application for a revision may be made after the lapse of five years from the date
of the judgment.
ARTICLE 220
Rules of Court Governing Original Jurisdiction
The Rules of Court established by the President of the Court in accordance with
Article XXI of the Agreement shall apply in the exercise of the original jurisdiction of the Court.
ARTICLE 221
Judgment of the Court to Constitute Stare Decisis
Judgments of the Court shall constitute legally binding precedents for parties in
proceedings before the Court unless such judgments have been revised in accordance with Article
219.
ARTICLE 222
Locus Standi of Private Entities
Persons, natural or juridical, of a Contracting Party may, with the special leave of the
Court, be allowed to appear as parties in proceedings before the Court where:
(a) the Court has determined in any particular case that this Treaty intended
that a right or benefit conferred by or under this Treaty on a Contracting
Party shall enure to the benefit of such persons directly; and
(b) the persons concerned have established that such persons have been
prejudiced in respect of the enjoyment of the right or benefit mentioned in
paragraph (a) of this Article; and
(c) the Contracting Party entitled to espouse the claim in proceedings before
the Court has:
(i) omitted or declined to espouse the claim, or
(ii) expressly agreed that the persons concerned may espouse the
claim instead of the Contracting Party so entitled; and
(d) the Court has found that the interest of justice requires that the persons be
allowed to espouse the claim.
ARTICLE 223
Alternative Disputes Settlement
1. The Member States shall, to the maximum extent possible, encourage and facilitate
the use of arbitration and other modes of alternative disputes settlement for the settlement of private
commercial disputes among Community nationals as well as among Community nationals and
nationals of third States.
2. Each Member State shall provide appropriate procedures in its legislation to ensure
observance of agreements to arbitrate and for the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards in
such disputes.
3. A Member State which has implemented the 1958 United Nations Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards or the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
113.
Commission on International Trade Law shall be deemed to be in compliance with the provisions of
paragraph 2 of this Article.
ARTICLE 224
General Undertaking
Each Member State undertakes to employ its best endeavours to complete the
constitutional and legislative procedures required for its participation in the regime establishing the
Court as soon as possible.
CHAPTER TEN
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 225
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Treaty shall be construed:
(a) as requiring any Member State to furnish information, the disclosure of
which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) as preventing any Member State from taking any action which it considers
necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:
(i) relating to the supply of services carried out directly or indirectly for
the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;
(ii) in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
(c) as preventing any Member State from taking any action in pursuance of its
obligations for the maintenance of international peace and security.
ARTICLE 226
General Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing the adoption or enforcement
by any Member State of measures:
(a) to protect public morals or to maintain public order and safety;
(b) to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations relating to customs
enforcement, or to the classification, grading or marketing of goods, or to the
operation of monopolies by means of state enterprises or enterprises given
exclusive or special privileges;
(d) necessary to protect intellectual property or to prevent deceptive practices;
(e) relating to gold or silver;
(f) relating to the products of prison labour;
(g) relating to child labour;
(h) imposed for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or
114.
archaeological value;
(i) necessary to prevent or relieve critical food shortages in any exporting
Member State;
(j) relating to the conservation of natural resources or the preservation of the
environment;
(k) to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Treaty including those relating to:
(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices, and the
effects of a default on contracts;
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection
of confidentiality of individual records and accounts; and
(l) to give effect to international obligations including treaties on the avoidance
of double taxation,
but only if such measures do not constitute arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between Member
States where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade within the Community.
2. Measures taken by the Member States pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be notified to
COTED.
3. The Community Council shall take appropriate measures to co-ordinate applicable
legislation, regulations and administrative practices established in accordance with Article 44.
ARTICLE 227
Notification
Where in this Treaty provision is made for notification to an Organ of the Community,
such notification shall be effected through the Secretariat.
ARTICLE 228
Legal Capacity of the Community
1. The Community shall have full juridical personality.
2. Every Member State shall in its territory accord to the Community the most extensive
legal capacity accorded to legal persons under its laws including the capacity to acquire and dispose
of movable and immovable property and to sue and be sued in its own name. In any legal
proceedings, the Community shall be represented by the Secretariat.
3. The Community may also conclude agreements with States and International
Organisations.
4. The Member States agree to take such action as is necessary to give effect in their
territories to the provisions of this Article and shall promptly inform the Secretariat of such action.
ARTICLE 229
Privileges and Immunities of the Community
1. The Headquarters Agreement concluded between the Caribbean Community and
Common Market and the Government of Guyana on 23 January 1976 shall continue to govern
relations between the Community and the host country.
115.
2. The Protocol on Privileges and Immunities concluded by the Member States in
connection with the Caribbean Community and Common Market shall govern relations between the
Community and such Member States.
ARTICLE 230
Negotiation and Conclusion of Agreements
1. Conference may designate any Organ or Body of the Community to negotiate
agreements for the achievement of the objectives of the Community.
2. Conference may delegate to the Secretary-General the conclusion of agreements,
particularly technical assistance agreements, on behalf of the Community. ARTICLE 231
Associate Membership
Conference may admit any Caribbean State or Territory to associate membership
of the Community on such terms and conditions as Conference thinks fit.
ARTICLE 232
Signature
This Treaty shall be open for signature on the 5th day of
 July 2001 by the States mentioned in paragraph 1 of Article 3.
ARTICLE 233
Ratification
This Treaty and any amendments thereto shall be subject to ratification by signatory
States in accordance with their respective constitutional procedures. Instruments of ratification shall
be deposited with the Secretariat which shall transmit certified copies to the signatory States.
ARTICLE 234
Entry Into Force
This Treaty shall enter into force on the deposit of the last instrument of ratification
by the States mentioned in paragraph 1 of Article 3
ARTICLE 235
Registration
This Treaty and any amendments thereto shall be registered with the Secretariat of
the United Nations in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations
ARTICLE 236
Amendments
1. This Treaty may be amended by the unanimous decision of the Parties.
2. An amendment shall enter into force one month after the date on which the last
instrument of ratification is deposited with the Secretariat.
ARTICLE 237
Reservations
Reservations may be entered to this Treaty with the consent of the signatory States.
ARTICLE 238
Accession
1. After the entry into force of this Treaty a State or Territory of the Caribbean may, if
Conference so determines, accede to this Treaty.
2. Accession shall be on such terms and conditions as Conference decides and shall
take effect one month following the deposit of the instrument of accession with the Secretariat.
117.
ARTICLE 239
Undertaking
The Member States undertake to elaborate a Protocol relating, inter alia, to:
(a) electronic commerce;
(b) government procurement
(c) treatment of goods produced in free zones and similar jurisdictions;
(d) free circulation of goods in the CSME, and
(e) rights contingent on establishment, provision of services and movement of
capital in the Community.
ARTICLE 240
Saving
1. Decisions of competent Organs taken under this Treaty shall be subject to the
relevant constitutional procedures of the Member States before creating legally binding rights and
obligations for nationals of such States.
2. The Member States undertake to act expeditiously to give effect to decisions of
competent Organs and Bodies in their municipal law.
3. COTED shall monitor and keep under review the implementation of the provisions
of this Article and shall convene a review conference of Member States within five years from the
entry into force of this Treaty.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned Heads of Government have appended
their signatures to this Treaty.
DONE at
this day of 2001 in a single copy which shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the Community by whom certified copies will be communicated to all the
signatories.

ANNEX TEXT: 

ANNEX I
(Paragraph 5 of Article 100)
DEFINITION OF DOMESTIC INDUSTRY DEFINITION OF DOMESTIC INDUSTRY
1. For the purposes of this Protocol, the term "domestic industry" shall, except as
provided in paragraph 4, be interpreted as referring to the domestic producers as a whole f the like
products or to those of them whose collective output of the products constitutes a major proportion
of the total domestic production of those products, except that when producers are related to the
exporters or importers or are themselves importers of the allegedly subsidised or dumped product or
a like product from other countries, the term “domestic industry” may be interpreted as referring to the
rest of the producers.
2. In exceptional circumstances, the territory of a Member State may, for the production
in question, be divided into two or more competitive markets and the producers within each market
may be regarded as a separate industry if (a) the producers within such market sell all or almost all
of their production of the product in question in that market, and (b) the demand in that market is not
to any substantial degree supplied by producers of the product in question located elsewhere in the
territory. In such circumstances, injury may be found to exist even where a major portion of the total
domestic industry is not injured, provided there is a concentration of subsidised for dumped imports
into such an isolated market and provided further that the subsidised imports are causing injury to the
producers of all or almost all of the production within such market.
3. When the domestic industry has been interpreted as referring to the producers in a
certain area, i.e., a market as defined in paragraph 2, countervailing duties shall be levied only on the
products in question consigned for final consumption to that area. When the constitutional law of the
importing Member State does not permit the levying of countervailing or anti-dumping duties on such
a basis, the importing Member State may levy the relevant duties without limitation only of (a) the
exporters shall have been given an opportunity to cease exporting at subsidised or dumped prices
to the area concerned or otherwise give assurances pursuant to Article 116 or 133 and adequate
assurances in this regard have not been promptly given, and (b) such duties cannot be levied only
on products of specific producers which supply the area in question.
4. Whenever an investigation is being undertaken by the Community on behalf of the
domestic industry which has alleged injury from extra-regional imports, the domestic industry in the
CSME shall be taken to be the industry referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 consistent with the
provisions of paragraph 8(a) of Article XXIV of GATT 1994.
121.
ANNEX II
(Paragraph 3 of Article 98)
CONSULTATIONS CONSULTATIONS
1. As soon as possible after an application for an investigation is accepted and in any
event before the initiation of any investigation, a Member State whose products may be subject to
such investigation, shall be invited for consultations with the aim of clarifying the situation and arriving
at a mutually agreed solution.
2. Furthermore, throughout the period of investigation, a Member State whose products
are the subject of the investigation shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to continue
consultations, with a view to clarifying the factual situation and to arriving at a mutually agreed
solution.
3. Without prejudice to the obligation to afford reasonable opportunity for consultations,
these provisions regarding consultations are not intended to prevent the authorities of a Member State
from proceeding expeditiously with regard to initiating the investigation, reaching preliminary or final
determinations, whether affirmative or negative, or from applying provisional or final measures, in
accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.
4. The Member State which intends to initiate any investigation or is conducting such
an investigation shall permit, upon request, the Member State whose products are subject to such
investigation access to non-confidential evidence, including any non-confidential summary of
confidential data being used for initiating or conducting the investigation.
122.
ANNEX III(a)
ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF INFORMATION ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF INFORMATION
REQUIRED BY ARTICLES 100, 106 and 112 REQUIRED BY ARTICLES 100, 106 and 112
(i) The identity of the applicant and a description of the volume and value of the domestic
production of the like product by the applicant. Where a written application is made on behalf
of the domestic industry, the application shall identify the industry on behalf of which the
application is made by a list of all known domestic producers of the like product (or
associations of domestic producers of the like product) and, to the extent possible, a
description of the volume and value of domestic production of the like product accounted for
by such producers;
(ii) a complete description of the allegedly subsidised product, the names of the country or
countries of origin or export in question, the identity of each known exporter or foreign
producer and a list of known persons importing the product in question;
(iii) evidence with regard to the existence, amount and nature of the subsidy in question;
(iv) evidence that alleged injury to a domestic industry is caused by subsidised imports through
the effects of the subsidies; this evidence includes information on the evolution of the volume
of the allegedly subsidised imports, the effect of these imports on prices of the like product
in the domestic market and the consequent impact of the imports on domestic industry, as
demonstrated by relevant factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the domestic
industry.
123.
ANNEX III (b)
ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF INFORMATION ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF INFORMATION
REQUIRED BY ARTICLE 129 REQUIRED BY ARTICLE 129
(i) The identity of the applicant and a description of the volume and value of the
domestic production of the like product by the applicant. Where a written application
is made on behalf of the domestic industry, the application shall identify the industry
on behalf of which the application is made by a list of all known domestic producers
of the like product (or associations of domestic producers of the like product) and,
to the extent possible, a description of the volume and value of domestic production
of the like product accounted for by such producers;
(ii) A complete description of the allegedly dumped product, the names of the country
or countries of origin or export in question, the identity of each known exporter or
foreign producer and a list of known persons importing the product in question;
(iii) Information on prices at which the product in question is sold when destined for
consumption in the domestic markets of the country or countries of origin or export
(or, where appropriate, information on the prices at which the product is sold from the
country or countries of origin or export to a third country or countries, or on the
constructed value of the product) and information on export prices or, where
appropriate, on the prices at which the product is first resold to an independent buyer
in the territory of the importing Member State;
(iv) Information on the evolution of the volume of the allegedly dumped imports, the
effect of these imports on prices of the like product in the domestic market and the
consequent impact of the imports on the domestic industry, as demonstrated by
relevant factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the domestic industry,
such as those referred to in Article 128. (b) RULES REGARDING COMMUNITY ORIGIN
For the purpose of determining the origin of goods under Article 84 of the Treaty and for
the application of that Article and the List, the following Rules shall be applied.
RULE 1 - Interpretative Provisions
1. In determining the place of production of marine products and goods produced therefrom,
a vessel of a Member State shall be regarded as part of that State. In determining the place from which
goods have been consigned, marine products taken from the sea or goods produced therefrom at sea shall
be regarded as having been consigned from a Member State if they were taken by or produced in a vessel
of a Member State and have been brought direct to the Community.
2. For the purpose of these Rules a vessel shall be treated as a vessel of a Member State
only if -
(a) it is registered in a Member State;
(b) it carries a complement (inclusive of the Master thereof) of which not less than
three-fourths are nationals of Member States; and
(c) it is majority owned and operated by -
 (i) nationals of Member States, or
 (ii) a Government of a Member State, or
(iii) a statutory Corporation of a Member State
In this paragraph nationals of Member States shall have the same meaning as in paragraph 5 of Article 32
of this Treaty.
3. "Materials" includes raw materials, intermediate products, parts and components used in
the process of production, repair, renovation or improvement of the goods.
4. Energy, fuel, plant, machinery and tools used in the production, repair, renovation or
improvement of goods within the Community and materials used in the maintenance of such plant,
machinery and tools, shall be regarded as wholly produced within the Community when determining the
origin of these goods.
5. Goods other than those to which paragraph 1 of Rule 2 of these Rules applies shall not
be treated as being of Community origin if they are produced by any operation or process which consists
only of one or more of the following, whether or not there is a change of tariff heading -
(a) operations to ensure the preservation of goods during transport and storage
(ventilation, spreading out, drying, chilling, placing in salt, sulphur dioxide or other
aqueous solution, removal of damaged parts, and like operations);
(b) simple operations consisting of removal of dust, sifting or screening, sorting,
grading, classifying, matching (including the making up of sets of articles),
washing, painting and cutting up resulting in the mere reduction in size;
(c) (i) changes of packing;
253.
(ii) simple placing in bottles, flasks, bags,cases, boxes, fixing on cards
 or boards and other simple packing operations;
(d) affixing marks, labels or other like distinguishing signs on goods or their
packaging;
(e) simple mixing of materials imported from outside the Community or of
undetermined origin if the characteristics of the goods as a whole are not
essentially different from the characteristics of the materials which have been
mixed;
(f) operations which consist solely of welding, soldering, fastening, riveting, bolting
and like operations, or otherwise putting together of all finished parts or
components to constitute a finished product.
6. "Chapter" and "tariff heading" in article 84 or in this Schedule shall mean the Chapters and
headings of the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System.
7. For the purpose of sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 5, the expression "finished parts or
components" refers to those articles which are imported into the Community in a form or condition which
does not require any further fabrication, change in shape or form, resulting in a change in identity or use
or the application of permanent protective/decorative coating for the purposes of incorporation in the
finished product.
8. Paragraphs 5(f) and 7 in this Rule shall take effect one year after the entry into force of
the amendment of this Schedule, pursuant to the decision of the Council at its Special Meeting in July
1990.
RULE 2 - Goods wholly produced within the Community
1. The expression "wholly produced" when used with reference to goods means:
(a) mineral products extracted from the ground within the Community;
(b) vegetable products harvested within the Community;
(c) live animals born and raised within the Community;
(d) products obtained within the Community from live animals;
(e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted within the Community;
(f) marine products taken from the sea by a vessel of a Member State;
(g) goods produced within the Community exclusively from one or both of the
following -
254.
 (i) goods referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) to (f) and (h) and (i) of this
paragraph;
 (ii) goods containing no materials imported from outside the Community or
of undetermined origin, or containing those materials but which would not
be regarded as such under paragraph 1 of Rule 3;
and shall be taken to include -
(h) used articles fit only for the recovery of materials provided that they have been
collected from users within the Community;
(i) scrap and waste resulting from manufacturing operations within the Community.
2. Wherever in paragraph 1 of Article 84 of this Treaty goods are required to be wholly
produced, the use of small quantities of preservatives, vitamins, colouring and similar materials imported
from outside the Community or of undetermined origin shall not affect their eligibility for Community
treatment as wholly produced.
RULE 3 - Application of the criterion of substantial
 transformation
1. Where materials containing any element imported from outside the Community meet the
conditions specified in Article 84, those materials shall be regarded as containing no such element.
2. For the purpose of Article 84 -
(a) the value of any materials imported from outside the Community shall be the
customs value determined for them by the Customs Authority in the Member
State where they were used in a process of production, less the amount of any
transport costs incurred in transit through other Member States;
(b) if the origin of any materials cannot be determined, such materials shall be
deemed to have been imported from outside the Community;
(c) the export price of the goods shall be the value accepted for this purpose by the
Customs Authority in the Member State in which they were produced. It shall be
based, mutatis mutandis, on the provision set out in sub-paragraph (a), but shall
not include the amounts of transport and insurance costs incurred after the
exportation of the goods.
3. In the application of the List the conditions to be complied with other than a percentage
value-added condition applicable to any goods shall be fulfilled in respect of the whole of the goods,
excluding any packing.
4. The expressions appearing in the columns headed "conditions to be complied with" in the
List and set out below shall be applied in the following manner:
(a) "produced from regional materials of" - the materials falling within the tariff
headings or Chapters named may be used only if they qualify to be treated as of
Community origin within the meaning of Article 84. This does not preclude the
use of regional materials in an earlier stage of production;
(b) "produced from materials of" and "produced from" - the materials named or
designated as the case may be must be used in the condition in which they are
described. This does not preclude the use of the materials in an earlier stage of
255.
production;
(c) "produced from materials not included in" - the materials which fall in the tariff
headings named may not be used if they are imported from outside the
Community or are of undetermined origin;
(d) "extraregional materials" shall mean materials imported from outside the
Community or of undetermined origin;
(e) "chemical transformation" shall mean the forming of the molecule of the finished
product by -
(i) the combination of two or more elements; or
(ii) any modification of the structure of the molecule of a compound with the
exception of ionisation and the addition or removal of water of
crystallisation.
RULE 4 - Unit of Qualification
1. Each article in a consignment shall be considered separately.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this Rule -
(a) where the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System specifies that
a group, set or assembly of articles is to be classified within a single heading,
such a group, set or assembly shall be treated as one article;
(b) tools, parts and accessories which are imported with an article, and the price of
which is included in that of the article or for which no separate charge is made,
shall be considered as forming a whole with the article, provided that they
constitute the standard equipment customarily included on the sale of articles of
that kind;
(c) in cases not within sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), goods shall be treated as a single
article if they are so treated for purposes of assessing Customs duties by the
importing Member State.
3. An unassembled or disassembled article which is imported in more than one consignment
because it is not feasible for transport or production reasons to import it in a single consignment shall, if
the importer so requests, be treated as one article.
RULE 5 - Segregation of materials
1. For those products or industries where it would be impracticable for the producer physically
to segregate materials of similar character but different origin used in the production of goods, such
segregation may be replaced by an appropriate accounting system, which ensures that no more goods
received Community tariff treatment, than would have been the case, if the producer had been able
physically to segregate the materials.
2. Any such accounting system shall conform to such conditions as may be agreed upon by
Member States concerned in order to ensure that adequate control measures will be applied.
RULE 6 - Treatment of repaired goods
1. For the purposes of paragraph 4 of Article 84 goods shall be treated as having undergone
256.
a process of repair, renovation or improvement if the performance of such process within the Community
does not result in a change of the form or character of the goods.
2. The cost of repair, renovation or improvement shall refer to the cost of all materials which
are used plus the costs involved in effecting the repair, renovation or improvement, excluding freight, other
transport charges, insurance and other shipping costs.
RULE 7 - Treatment of Packing
1. Where for purposes of assessing Customs duties a Member State treats goods separately
from their packing, it may also, in respect of its imports consigned from another Member State, determine
separately the origin or such packing.
2. Where paragraph 1 of this Rule is not applied, packing of any sort shall be considered as
forming a whole with the goods for the purposes only of the application of the percentage value-added
conditions. No part of any packing required for the transport or storage of goods shall be considered as
having been imported from outside the Community when determining the origin of the goods as a whole.
RULE 8 - Documentary Evidence
1. A claim that goods shall be accepted as eligible for Community tariff treatment shall be
supported by appropriate documentary evidence or origin and consignment. The evidence of origin shall
consist of a certificate given by a Governmental authority or authorised body nominated by the exporting
Member State and notified to the other Member States together with a declaration completed by the
exporter of the goods.
2. The governmental authority or the authorised body shall obtain a declaration as to the
origin of the goods given by the last producer of the goods within the Community. The authority or body
shall satisfy themselves as to the accuracy of the evidence provided; where necessary they shall require
the production of additional information, and shall carry out any suitable check. If the authorities of the
importing Member State so require, a confidential indication of the producer of the goods shall be given.
3. Nominations of authorised bodies for the purpose of this Rule may be withdrawn by the
exporting Member State if the need arises. Each Member State shall retain, in regard to its imports, the
right of refusing to accept certificates from any authorised body which is shown to have repeatedly issued
certificates in an improper manner, but such action shall not be taken without adequate prior notification
to the exporting Member State of the grounds for dissatisfaction.
4. In cases where the Member States concerned recognise that it is impracticable for the
producer to make the declaration of origin specified in paragraph 2 of this Rule, the exporter may make that
declaration in such form as those Member States may for the purpose specify.
5. The certificate and declaration provided for in this Rule shall be in the form prescribed by
COTED from time to time.
6. COTED may decide that further or different provisions concerning evidence of origin or
of consignment shall apply to particular categories of goods or classes or transactions.
RULE 9 - Verification of Evidence of Origin
1. The importing Member State may as necessary require further evidence to support any
declaration or certificate of origin furnished under Rule 8.
2. The importing Member State shall not prevent the importer from taking delivery of the
goods solely on the grounds that it requires such further evidence, but may require security for any duty
257.
or other charge which may be payable; provided that where goods are subject to any import restrictions
or prohibitions, the stipulation for delivery under security shall not apply.
3. Where, under paragraph 1 of this Rule, a Member State has required further evidence to
be furnished, those concerned in another Member State shall be free to produce it to a governmental
authority or an authorised body of the latter State, who shall, after thorough verification of the evidence,
furnish an appropriate report to the importing Member State.
4. Where it is necessary to do so by reason of its legislation, a Member State may prescribe
that requests by the authorities of importing Member States for further evidence from those concerned in
the Member State shall be addressed to a specified governmental authority, who shall after thorough
verification of the evidence furnish an appropriate report to the importing Member State.
5. If the importing Member State wishes an investigation to be made into the accuracy of the
evidence which it has received it may make a request to that effect to the other Member State or States
concerned.
6. Information obtained under the provisions of this Rule by the importing Member State shall
be treated as confidential.
RULE 10 - Application of the Safeguard Mechanism
1. The information required pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 84 shall be rendered in writing
and shall be such as the Competent Authority may require.
2. For the purposes of carrying out his investigations, the Secretary-General may seek such
additional information as he considers to be relevant. Replies to the enquiries by the Secretary-General
should be sent by telex, telefax or other similar means of communication.
3. The Competent Authority shall ensure that no more extraregional materials are used in
production for purposes of Common Market treatment than are authorised by the Secretary-General. The
Competent Authority shall make available to the Governmental authority or authorised body nominated for
his State under paragraph 1 of Rule 8 such information as may be necessary for this purpose.
4. The Member States agree to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General in the foregoing
provisions of this Rule.
RULE 11 - Sanctions
1. Member States undertake to introduce legislation, making such provision as may be
necessary for penalties against persons who, in their State, furnish or cause to be furnished a document
which is untrue in a material particular in support of a claim in another Member State that goods should be
accepted as eligible for Community tariff treatment. The penalties applicable shall be similar to those
applicable in case of untrue declarations in regard to payment of duty on imports.
2. A Member State may deal with the offence out of court, if it can be more appropriately
dealt with by a compromise penalty or similar administrative procedure.
3. A Member State shall be under no obligation to institute or continue court proceedings,
or action under paragraph 2 of this Rule:
(a) if it has not been requested to do so by the importing Member State to which the
untrue claim was made; or
(b) if, on the evidence available, the proceedings would not be justified.
258.
259.
SCHEDULE II
MARKETING ARRANGEMENTS FOR
UNREFINED CANE SUGAR
1. Any Member State in which unrefined cane sugar is produced may, subject to paragraph
2 and consistently with any international obligations to which it is subject, apply any quantitative restriction
within the meaning of Article 87 on imports into that State of unrefined cane sugar from any other part of
the Community.
2. Any Member State taking measures in accordance with paragraph 1 shall notify them to
COTED, if possible before they come into force.
260.
SCHEDULE III
DEVELOPMENT OF THE OILS AND FATS SUB-SECTOR
Preamble
The Member States:
Recognising that it is their policy to -
(ii) enhance the long-term viability of the regional oils and fats industry;
(iii) facilitate the regional marketing of oils produced from indigenous raw materials;
(iv) encourage the development and marketing of a wider range of competitive value-added products
especially in the less developed countries;
(v) encourage the role of the private sector in determining the conduct of the trade,
Have Agreed as follows:
PART I
Preliminary
1. Use of Terms
In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires:
“ancillary” means any substance actually required to be used in conjunction with oils and fats in
the process leading to a finished product but which cannot be used as a substitute for oils and fats
produced within the Community and which is
... included in Appendix I to this Schedule;
“(Intra-Regional)Price” means the f.o.b. price of raw materials, refined edible oil and
hydrogenated edible fats, when exported from one Member State to another;
“oils and fats” means oilseeds, their seedlings and intermediate or final products including
margarine, shortening and soaps in the form of toilet and laundry derived therefrom, provided
those oilseeds and seedlings qualify as being of Community Origin;
“raw materials” means copra and other oilseeds, and unrefined oils qualifying as being of
Community Origin;
... “substitute” means commodities listed in Appendix II to this Schedule which are put to similar use
as, and are in commercial competition with, oils and fats.
2. Objectives
(a) to support and encourage the viability and expansion and diversification of the Oils and
Fats Sub-Sector in the Community;
(b) to promote intra-regional trade in oils and fats and exports to third countries;
(c) to increase competitiveness of the Oils and Fats Sub-Sector;
(d) to improve and promote the production of traditional and non-traditional oilseeds within
the Community.
261.
PART II
Scope of the Schedule
3. The intra-Community reference price of copra and coconut oils shall be determined as a result of
consultations and negotiations by a Committee of Buyers and Sellers at the Meeting of
representatives of Member States (hereinafter called “the Conference on Oils and Fats”). The
resultant prices would be presented by the Committee of Buyers and Sellers to the Conference
on Oils and Fats for acceptance and notification to COTED.
4. COTED, on the recommendation of the Conference on Oils and Fats, shall endorse the intraCommunity reference price for the ensuing year in respect of:
(a) copra, which shall be expressed as an f.o.b. price in buyers’ containers;
(b) unrefined coconut oil, which shall be expressed as an f.o.b. price in buyers’ containers.
5. (1) The Committee of Buyers and Sellers shall undertake consultations and negotiations to
determine -
(a) the quantities of copra and coconut oil to be purchased and sold by respective
buyers and sellers present at the Meeting of the Conference on Oils and Fats;
(b) the period and other particulars under which the transactions at (a) shall be made;
(2) The determination of the Committee of Buyers and Sellers with respect to (a) and (b) shall
be presented to the Conference on Oils and Fats for acceptance;
(3) The Conference on Oils and Fats shall notify COTED of the quantities of copra and
coconut oil to be traded, the period over which the trade shall be undertaken and other
relevant particulars relating to purchase and sale of coconut oil in the Community;
(4) In the determination of the quantities of coconut oil to be supplied by the sellers, the
Committee of Buyers and Sellers shall give consideration to information on the availability
of copra and coconut oil from the less developed countries.
4. COTED shall, as necessary, determine the conditions for intra-regional trade in oils and fats, other
than coconut oil.
5. COTED shall, as necessary, determine the conditions for the importation and exportation of
substitutes.
6. Importation of ancillaries shall be free from restriction.
PART III
Implementation of the Schedule
9. (1) Member States shall, not later than 31 January in every year, submit to the SecretaryGeneral in such form as COTED may, from time to time prescribe, its estimates of
production, domestic consumption requirements, exports and imports in respect of such
oils and fats and substitutes as may be determined by COTED.
(2) Member States shall provide the Secretary-General, upon request, with such other
information as may be required in order to monitor the operation of this Schedule.
10. The Secretary-General, on the basis of information supplied by Member States, shall keep the
Member States informed of production and supply capabilities.
11. The Meeting of the Conference on Oils and Fats shall be convened by the Secretary-General at
least once per year.
262.
12. The Secretary-General shall, at the request of a Member State, and with the concurrence of the
majority of the Member States, convene a Special Meeting of the Conference on Oils and Fats.
13. (1) The Conference on Oils and Fats shall consist of one delegate (with such advisers as may
be considered necessary) to be nominated by each Member State.
(2) Private sector and other organisations, including the farming community, shall be invited
to participate as observers at Meetings of the Conference on Oils and Fats.
(3) Every Meeting of the Conference on Oils and Fats shall elect its Chairman;
(4) At every Meeting of the Conference on Oils and Fats, the delegates of six Member States,
including two MDCs, shall form a quorum;
(5) At Meetings of the Conference on Oils and Fats, private sector representatives shall play
a more active role in the deliberations through the participation of buyers and sellers. In
this regard, the Conference on Oils and Fats shall facilitate the establishment of a
Committee of Buyers and Sellers of Copra and Coconut Oil to engage in consultations
and negotiations to determine the prices and quantities governing trade in selected oils
and fats.
(6) The Chairman of the Committee of Buyers and Sellers shall submit conclusions to the
Conference on Oils and Fats for acceptance.
(7) Every Meeting of the Conference on Oils and Fats shall be serviced by the Secretariat.
(8) Recommendations of the Conference on Oils and Fats shall be submitted to COTED for
its approval.
14. (1) The Conference on Oils and Fats shall -
(a) review the operation of this Schedule;
(b) consider any matter relating to this Schedule referred to the Conference on Oils
and Fats by any Member State or any Organ or Body of the Community;
(c) review regional and international developments affecting the Oils and Fats SubSector;
(d) make recommendations to support and promote the growth and development of
the Oils and Fats Sub-Sector.
(2) Recommendations emanating from 14(c) and (d) shall be submitted to COTED and
Ministers with responsibility for Agriculture for consideration and appropriate action.
15. Member States shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of this Schedule within
their respective countries and, for that purpose, shall enact the necessary legislative or other
measures required to give effect to the provisions of this Schedule.
16. Where COTED is satisfied that the action taken by a Member State is not in compliance with the
provisions of this Schedule and is likely to prejudice any benefits likely to be derived by another
Member State, COTED may recommend measures intended to ameliorate any damage or institute
any corrective measures or apply any appropriate sanctions.
17. COTED may, by unanimous decision, recommend the amendment of the provisions of this
263.
Schedule or the substitution of a new Schedule therefor.
PART IV
Regulation of Inputs in the Community
18. The Member States shall apply the rate of duty set by COTED on all imported oils, fats and their
substitutes.
19. (1) (a) In the event of insufficient supply, the Secretary-General acting on behalf of
COTED may grant a suspension of the Common External Tariff in accordance
with Article 72 of the Treaty.
(b) In determining the adequacy of supply, the Secretary-General shall take into
consideration the allocation and provisions which obtain under this Schedule.
(2) (a) The Secretary-General may issue a certificate under the Safeguard Mechanism
of the Rules of Origin in accordance with Article 73 of the Treaty, in the event of
insufficient supply of inputs used in the manufacture of oils and fats products.
(b) In determining the adequacy of supply, the Secretary-General shall take into
consideration the guidelines established by the Conference of Oils and Fats and
COTED.
20. The Member States may use automatic licences to monitor imports of oils and fats especially
where other methods prove inadequate.
21. No Member State shall use non-automatic licences to regulate or restrict the imports of oils and
fats except under paragraph 22.
22. (1) If any Member State considers that-
(a) its oils and fats processing industry is being injured as a result of a substantial
decrease (10 per cent for LDCs and 25 per cent for MDCs) in internal demand for
a domestic product; and
(b) this decrease in demand is due to an increase in imports consigned from other
Member States,
that Member State shall take remedial measures in accordance with Chapter V of this
Treaty;
264.
(2) Where in the Community, especially in any of the LDC Member States, a difficulty arises
from the importation of oils, fats or their substitutes from third countries, the affected Member State
shall, notwithstanding the provisions identified at paragraph 18, 19 and 21, use non-automatic
licences and quantitative restrictions in accordance with its international obligations.