Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States and the Republic of Costa Rica
Preamble
The Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Costa Rica,
DETERMINED TO
STRENGTHEN the special bonds of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between their peoples;
ACCELERATE and strengthen the revitalization of American integration schemes;
ACHIEVE a better balance in trade relations between their countries, taking into account their relative levels of economic development;
CONTRIBUTE to harmonious development, the expansion of world trade and the expansion of international cooperation;
CREATE a more extensive and secure market for goods produced and services supplied in their territories;
REDUCE distortions in trade;
ESTABLISH clear and mutually beneficial rules for your commercial exchange;
ENSURE a predictable commercial framework for the planning of productive activities and investment;
DEVELOP their respective rights and obligations derived from the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), as well as from other bilateral and multilateral cooperation instruments;
STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their companies in world markets;
ENCOURAGE innovation and creativity through the protection of intellectual property rights;
CREATE new job opportunities, improve working conditions and living standards in their respective territories;
TO UNDERTAKE all of the above in a manner consistent with the protection and conservation of the environment;
PRESERVE its ability to safeguard the public welfare;
PROMOTE sustainable development;
STRENGTHEN the preparation and application of environmental laws and regulations;
PROMOTE the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening economic relations between the Parties and developing and maximizing the possibilities of their joint presence in international markets; Y
PROTECT and strengthen the fundamental rights of its workers.
CELEBRATE this Free Trade Agreement.
Chapter I
Initial Provisions
Article 1-01: Establishment of the free trade zone.
The Parties establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the GATT.
Article 1-02: Objectives.
1. The objectives of this Agreement, developed specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:
a. stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;
b. eliminate trade barriers and facilitate the circulation of goods and services between the Parties;
c. promote conditions of fair competition in trade between the Parties;
d. substantially increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;
and. protect and enforce, adequately and effectively, intellectual property rights in the territory of each Party;
F. establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement;
g. create effective procedures for the application and compliance of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of disputes.
2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.
Article 1-03: Relationship with other international treaties and agreements.
1. The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them in accordance with the GATT and other treaties and agreements to which they are party.
2. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 1-04: Observance of the Treaty.
Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional provisions, compliance with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory at the central or federal, state or municipal level, except in cases where this Agreement provides otherwise.
Article 1-05: Succession of treaties.
Any reference to another international treaty or agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms to any successor treaty or agreement to which the Parties are party.
Chapter II
General Definitions
Article 2-01: Definitions of General Application.
1. For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, it shall be understood as:
customs duty: any import tax, duty or tribute and any charge of any kind applied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except:
a. any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT or any equivalent provision of a successor agreement to which the Parties are a party, in respect of like goods, direct competitors or substitutes of the Party, or in respect of goods from which the imported good has been manufactured or produced in whole or in part;
b. any countervailing duty that is applied in accordance with the legislation of each Party;
c. any duties or other charges related to importation, proportional to the cost of services rendered; Y
d. any premium offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariffs-quota or tariff preference quotas.
good of a Party: national products as understood in the GATT, those goods that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating goods; a good of a Party may incorporate materials from other countries;
originating good: good that complies with the rules of origin established in Chapter V (Rules of origin);
Customs Valuation Code: the Agreement on the Application of Article VII of the GATT, including its interpretative notes;
Commission: the Administrative Commission established in accordance with article 16-01 (Administrative Commission);
countervailing duty: antidumping duties and quotas or countervailing duties according to the legislation of each Party;
days: calendar days, including Saturday, Sunday and holidays;
business: any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and whether privately or governmental owned, including any partnerships, foundations, companies, branches, trusts, shares, ethnically owned businesses, joint ventures, or other associations;
state enterprise: an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through equity participation;
enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party;
tariff fraction: the breakdown of a Harmonized System tariff classification code to more than six digits;
measure: any law, regulation, procedure, administrative provision, or practice, among others;
national: a natural person who has the nationality of a Party under its law. It shall be understood that the term also extends to persons who, in accordance with the legislation of that Party, have the status of permanent residents in the territory thereof;
Party: any State for which this Treaty has entered into force;
Exporting Party: the Party from whose territory a good or service is exported;
Importing Party: the Party into whose territory a good or service is imported;
heading: a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the four-digit level;
person: a natural person or a company;
person of a Party: a national or company of a Party;
Tariff Reduction Program: the one established in article 3-04 (Tariff Reduction);
Secretariat: the Secretariat established in accordance with Article 16-02 (Secretariat);
Harmonized System: the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System, including the General Classification Rules and their explanatory notes;
subheading: a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the six-digit level;
territory: means, for each Party, the territory of that Party as defined in the annex to this article.
Annex to the Article2-01:
Country-specific definitions
Unless otherwise provided, for the purposes of this Agreement, the following shall be understood as:
territory:
a. regarding Mexico:
i) the states of the Federation and the Federal District;
ii) islands, including reefs and cays in adjacent seas;
iii) the islands of Guadalupe and Revillagigedo, located in the Pacific Ocean;
iv) the continental platform and the submarine bases of the islands, cays and reefs;
v) the waters of the territorial seas, to the extent and terms established by international law, and internal maritime waters;
vi) the space located on the national territory, with the extension and modalities established by international law itself; Y
vii) any area beyond the territorial seas of Mexico within which Mexico may exercise rights over the seabed and subsoil and over the natural resources they contain, in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea, as well as with its internal legislation;
b. with respect to Costa Rica, the national territory including the maritime and air space, where the State exercises complete and exclusive sovereignty or special jurisdiction in accordance with articles 5 and 6 of its Political Constitution.
Chapter III
National Treatment and Market Access for Goods
Section A - Definitions
Article 3-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
consumed:
a. actually consumed; either
b. processed or manufactured in a way that results in a substantial change in the value, form or use of a good or in the production of another good;
material: material according to the definition of chapter V (Rules of origin);
samples of no commercial value: commercial samples that are marked, broken, perforated, or otherwise treated in a way that makes them unfit for sale or for any use other than as samples;
performance requirement: the requirement of:
a. export a certain volume or percentage of goods or services;
b. substitute imported goods or services with goods or services from the Party granting an exemption from customs duties;
c. that the person benefiting from an exemption from customs duties buys other goods or services in the territory of the Party that grants it, or gives preference to goods or services of national production;
d. that the person benefiting from an exemption from customs duties produces goods or provides services in the territory of the Party that grants it, with a given level or percentage of national content; either
and. relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports or with the amount of foreign currency input.
Section B - Scope of application and national treatment
Article 3-02: Scope of application.
This chapter shall apply to trade in goods between the Parties, except as provided in other chapters.
Article 3-03: National treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 mean, with respect to a state or municipality, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that state or municipality accords to any like goods, direct competitors or substitutes, as the case may be, of the Party of which are members.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the measures listed in the annex to this article and to article 3-09.
Section C - Customs Duties
Article 3-04: Tariff relief.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on originating goods. one 23
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article (Tariff Elimination Program).
3. At the request of any of them, the Parties will hold consultations to examine the possibility of accelerating the elimination of customs duties provided for in the Tariff Elimination Program. Once approved by the Parties, in accordance with their applicable legal procedures, the agreement on the accelerated elimination of the customs duty on a good that is reached between the Parties, shall prevail over any customs duty or period of relief indicated in accordance with the Program of Tariff Deduction for that good.
4. Except as otherwise provided, this Agreement incorporates the tariff preferences previously negotiated between the Parties, in accordance with the Second Modifying Protocol of the Partial Scope Agreement signed between the United Mexican States and the Republic of Costa Rica, in the manner set forth reflected in the Tariff Elimination Program. Likewise, as of the entry into force of this Agreement, the preferences previously negotiated or granted between the Parties within the framework of the Second Modifying Protocol of the Partial Scope Agreement signed between the United Mexican States and the Republic of Costa Rica are null and void.
5. Each Party may adopt or maintain measures on imports in order to allocate the quota of imports carried out under a quota through tariffs (tariff-quota) established in the Tariff Elimination Program and in Annex 3 to Article 4- 05 (Trade in sugar), as long as these measures do not have restrictive trade effects on imports, in addition to those derived from the imposition of the quota tariff.
6. Upon the written request of either Party, the Party applying or proposing to apply measures on imports in accordance with paragraph 5 shall hold consultations to review the administration of those measures.
Article 3-05: Restrictions on the refund of customs duties on exported goods and on customs duty deferral programs.
1. For the purposes of this article, the following shall be understood as:
customs duties: the customs duties that would be applicable to a good that is imported for consumption in the customs territory of a Party if the good were not exported to the territory of another Party;
consumables: consumables as defined in Chapter V (Rules of Origin);
identical or similar goods: goods that are the same in everything, including their physical characteristics, quality and commercial prestige, as well as goods that, although they are not the same in everything, have similar characteristics and composition, which allows them to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable.
2. Neither Party may refund the amount of customs duties paid or waive or reduce the amount of customs duties due, in relation to a good imported into its territory, that is:
a. used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party; either
b. substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party;
in an amount that exceeds the total customs duties paid or owed on that quantity of that imported good that is physically incorporated into the good exported to the territory of the other Party, or substituted by identical or similar goods physically incorporated into the good exported to the territory of the other Party. another Party, with due discount for waste.
3. No Party, subject to export, may reimburse, exempt or reduce:
a. the countervailing duties that are applied in accordance with the legislation of the Party;
b. the premiums that are offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system related to the application of quantitative restrictions on imports, tariff-quota, or preferential tariff quotas; either
c. customs duties, paid or owed, with respect to a good imported into its territory and replaced by an identical or similar good that is subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
4. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, as of the date and in the circumstances indicated in paragraphs 7 and 8, neither Party may refund the amount of customs duties paid, or waive or reduce the amount of customs duties owed. , in relation to a good imported into its territory, provided that the good is:
a. used as a material in the production of an originating good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party; either
b. substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of an originating good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
5. As of the date and in the circumstances indicated in paragraphs 7 and 8, when a good is imported into the territory of a Party in accordance with a customs duty deferral program and any of the conditions indicated in paragraphs are met. a) and b) of paragraph 4, the Party from whose territory the good was exported:
a. it will determine the amount of customs duties as if the exported good had been destined for internal consumption; Y
b. within 60 days from the date of export, it will collect the amount of customs duties as if the exported good had been destined for domestic consumption.
6. Paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 do not apply to:
a. a good that is imported under bond or guarantee to be transported and exported to the territory of the other Party;
b. a good that is exported to the territory of the other Party in the same condition in which it was imported into the territory of the Party from which it is exported. Processes such as testing, cleaning, repackaging, inspection or preservation of the good in its same condition will not be considered as changes in the condition of a good. When a good has been mixed with fungible goods and exported in the same condition, its origin, for the purposes of this paragraph, may be determined based on the inventory methods established in Chapter V (Rules of Origin);
c. a good imported into the territory of a Party that is subsequently deemed to be exported from its territory or used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently deemed to be exported to the territory of the other Party, or is substituted for an identical or similar used good as a material in the production of another good that is later considered to be exported to the territory of the other Party, due to:
i) sending it to a store free of customs duties; either
ii) their shipment to stores on board ships or as supplies for ships or aircraft;
d. the reimbursement made by a Party of the customs duties paid on a specific good imported into its territory and subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party, when such reimbursement is granted because the good does not correspond to the samples or specifications of the object object, or due to the shipment of that good without the consent of the consignee; either
and. an originating good imported into the territory of a Party that is subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party, or is used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party, or is substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
7. Subject to paragraph 8, paragraphs 4 and 5 shall apply:
a. from the moment Costa Rica applies to a non-Party country provisions similar to those contained in those paragraphs; either
b. With respect to a good imported into the territory of a Party that meets the conditions of subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 4, for three years when it is shown that the reimbursement, exemption, or reduction of customs duties simultaneously:
i) creates a significant distortion of the tariff treatment applied by the Party that grants the reimbursement, exemption or reduction of tariffs in favor of the export of goods from the territory of that Party; Y
ii) causes damage to the national production of identical, similar or direct competitive goods of the other Party.
8. In no event shall paragraphs 4 and 5 apply before January 1 , 2002.
9. For the purposes of paragraph 7, there is a significant distortion of the tariff treatment applied by the Party that grants the refund, exemption or reduction of tariffs in favor of the export of goods from the territory of that Party, when:
a. the amount of duties reimbursed, exempted or reduced on goods imported into the territory of that Party that meet the conditions indicated in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 4 and for which there is production in the territory of the Parties, exceeds 5% of the total value of imports of originating goods during a year covered in a tariff fraction of the Party to whose territory those originating goods are exported; either
b. a Party reimburses, exempts, or reduces customs duties on goods or materials originating from the territory of non-Parties on whose importation it maintains quantitative restrictions and those goods or materials are subsequently exported to the other Party, used in the production of goods subsequently exported to the other Party. another Party, or substituted by identical or similar materials used in the production of goods subsequently exported to the other Party.
10. For the purposes of paragraph 7, for the determination of damage:
a. Injury is understood as a significant impairment of national production; Y
b. Domestic production is understood to be the producer or producers of identical or similar or directly competitive goods that operate within the territory of a Party and that constitute a significant proportion greater than 35% of the total national production of those goods.
11. The Party that refunds, exempts or reduces customs duties will provide, at the request of the other Party, the information required to verify the existence of the conditions established in paragraph 7, including statistical information regarding the imports for which it grants refunds. , exemptions or reductions of customs duties in relation to a good exported to the territory of another Party.
12. As a condition to exclude from the calculation of the percentage referred to in subparagraph a) of paragraph 9, refunds, exemptions or reductions of customs duties granted on a good that meets the conditions of subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 4, the Party that reimburses, exempts or reduces those customs duties will demonstrate that there is no production in the free trade area of ​​a good identical or similar to that good.
13. For the purposes of paragraph 12, at the request of the Party that refunds, waives or reduces customs duties on a good, the other Party shall provide to the extent possible relevant and available information on that good.
14. Each Party shall establish clear and strict procedures for the application of paragraphs 4 and 5, in accordance with the following:
a. the Party that decides to initiate an investigation to apply paragraphs 4 and 5 will publish the initiation of the investigation in the corresponding official dissemination bodies and will notify the exporting Party in writing the day after the publication;
b. For purposes of determining a significant distortion and damage in accordance with numerals i) and ii) of letter b) of paragraph 7, the competent authorities will evaluate all the factors of an objective and quantifiable nature;
c. To determine the application of paragraphs 4 and 5, a direct causal relationship between the reimbursement, exemption, or reduction and the distortion and damage to the national production of identical, similar or direct competitive goods will also be demonstrated;
d. If, as a result of this investigation, the competent authority determines, based on objective evidence, that the assumptions set forth in this article are met, the importing Party may initiate consultations with the other Party;
and. the consultation procedure will not oblige the Parties to reveal the information that has been provided confidentially, the disclosure of which may impede compliance with the laws of the Party that regulate the matter or harm commercial interests;
F. The period for prior consultations will begin on the day following the receipt by the exporting Party of the notification requesting the initiation of consultations. The prior consultation period will be 45 days unless the Parties agree on a shorter period;
g. The notification referred to in subparagraph f) will be made through the competent authority and will contain sufficient information to support the application of paragraphs 4 and 5, including:
i) the names and addresses of the national producers of identical or similar goods or direct competitors representative of the national production, their participation in the national production of that good and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of that sector;
ii) a clear and complete description of the good subject to the procedure, the tariff subheading in which it is classified and the current tariff treatment, as well as the description of the identical, similar or direct competitive good;
(iii) import data for each of the three most recent calendar years that provide the basis that the good is being imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute terms or relative to domestic production;
iv) the data on the total national production of the identical or similar good or direct competitor corresponding to the last three most recent years;
v) the data that demonstrate damage caused by imports of the good in question in accordance with subparagraphs b) and c) ;
h. the application of paragraphs 4 and 5 may only be adopted once the prior consultation period has concluded;
Yo. during the consultation period, the exporting Party will make all the observations it deems pertinent; Y
j. The exporting Party will apply paragraphs 4 and 5 at the conclusion of the consultation period provided for in subparagraph f) if the existence of any assumption established in paragraph 7 is verified.
15. The Parties shall hold annual consultations regarding the application of this Article.
Article 3-06: Temporary importation of goods.
Each Party shall authorize the temporary importation without payment of customs duty to the following goods that are imported from the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin and whether similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes are available in the territory of the Party:
a. professional equipment necessary for the exercise of the activity, trade or profession of a business person;
b. press equipment or for broadcasting radio or television signals and cinematographic equipment;
c. goods for sporting purposes or intended for exhibition or demonstration, including components, ancillary devices and accessories; Y
d. commercial samples and publicity films.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation without payment of customs duty of a good of the type indicated in subparagraphs a), b) or c) of paragraph 1, to any of the following conditions, without the possibility of adopting additional conditions:
a. that the good is imported by a national or resident of the other Party;
b. that the property is used exclusively by the visiting person, or under his personal supervision, in the performance of his activity, trade or profession;
c. that the good is not subject to sale, lease or assignment in any other way while it remains in its territory under the temporary importation regime;
d. that the good is accompanied by a bond or guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be owed in its case for the definitive entry or importation, or of another form of guarantee, refundable at the time of export of the good, except that no bond or guarantee may be required for customs duties on an originating good;
and. that the good is susceptible to identification by any reasonable means established by the customs authority;
F. that the good is exported upon the departure of that person or within the term that corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation;
g. that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use;
h. that the good does not undergo any transformation or modification during the authorized import period, except for wear and tear due to the normal use of the good; Y
Yo. that the good complies with the phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures and with the applicable standardization measures, in accordance with the provisions of section B of chapter IV (Phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures) and in chapter XI (Standardization measures) respectively.
3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation without payment of customs duty of a good of the type indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 1, to any of the following conditions, without being able to additional conditions may be adopted:
a. that the good is imported only for the purposes of placing orders for goods or services that are supplied from the territory of the other Party or from another country that is not a Party;
b. that the property is not subject to sale, lease or assignment in any other way, and is used only for demonstration or exhibition while it remains in its territory;
c. that the good is accompanied by a bond or guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be owed in its case for the definitive entry or importation, or of another form of guarantee, refundable at the time of export of the good, except that no bond or guarantee may be required for customs duties on an originating good;
d. that the good is susceptible to identification by any reasonable means established by the customs authority;
and. that the good is exported within a period that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation;
F. that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use;
g. that the good does not undergo any transformation or modification during the authorized import period, except for wear and tear due to the normal use of the good; Y
h. that the good complies with the phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures and with the applicable standardization measures, in accordance with the provisions of section B of chapter IV, (Phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures) and in chapter XI (Standardization measures) respectively.
4. When a good that is imported temporarily does not meet any of the conditions that a Party imposes in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, that Party may apply the customs duties and any other charges that would be due for the final entry or importation of the good. .
Article 3-07: Import free of customs duty for samples without commercial value.
Each Party will authorize the free import of samples without commercial value from the territory of the other Party.
Article 3-08: Exemption from customs duties.
1. No Party may adopt a new customs duty exemption measure when the exemption is conditioned, explicitly or implicitly, on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.
2. As of January 1 , 2002, no Party may condition, explicitly or implicitly, the validity of any current customs duty exemption on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.
3. The Party that grants an exemption or a combination of exemptions from customs duties to goods intended for commercial use by a designated person, will stop doing so or make it available to any importer, if the other Party can demonstrate that such exemption or combination of them has an unfavorable effect on:
a. your economy;
b. the business interests of a person of that Party; either
c. the business interests of an enterprise owned or controlled by a person of that Party, located in the territory of the Party granting the exemption.
Section D - Non-tariff measures
Article 3-09: Import and export restrictions.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the import of any good of the other Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party. , except as provided for in Article XI of the GATT, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, in all circumstances in which any other type of restriction is prohibited, the requirements of export prices and, except as permitted for the application of sanctions and commitments in terms of countervailing duties, import price requirements.
3. In cases where a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import or export of goods from or to a non-Party, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent it from:
a. limit or prohibit the importation of the goods of the country that is not a Party, from the territory of the other Party; either
b. require as a condition for the export of those goods from the Party to the territory of the other Party, that they not be re-exported to the country that is not a Party, directly or indirectly, without being consumed in the territory of the other Party.
4. In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a good from a non-Party, at the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult in order to avoid undue interference or distortion. in the price, marketing and distribution mechanisms in the other Party.
5. Paragraphs 1 through 4 shall not apply to the measures set out in the annex to this article and article 3-03.
Article 3-10: Export taxes.
Neither Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, duty or charge on the export of any good destined for consumption in the territory of the other Party, unless they are adopted or maintained on that good when it is destined for domestic consumption.
Article 3-11: Customs processing fees.
Neither Party shall increase or establish any customs duty for the service rendered by customs on originating goods and shall eliminate such duties on originating goods on July 1 , 1999.
Article 3-12: Country of origin marking.
The annex to this article shall apply to measures related to country of origin marking.
Section E - Publication and notification
Article 3-13: Publication and notification.
1. Each Party shall promptly publish and notify the laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative provisions of general application that it has put into effect and that refer to the classification, valuation, or customs appraisal of goods, customs duty rates, taxes or other charges or import or export measures, restrictions or prohibitions, or the transfer of payments related thereto, or the sale, distribution, transportation, insurance, storage, inspection, display, processing, mixing or any other use of those goods, so that governments and traders or interested persons of the other Party have knowledge of them.Each Party shall also publish agreements related to international trade policy that are in force between the government or a government agency of that Party and the government or a government agency of the other Party.
2. To the extent possible, each Party shall publish in advance any measure indicated in paragraph 1 that it proposes to adopt and shall provide interested persons a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures.
3. Neither Party shall apply before its official publication any measure of a general nature adopted by that Party that has the effect of increasing a customs duty or other charge on the importation of goods of the other Party, or that imposes a new or more onerous measure, restriction or prohibition for imports of goods from the other Party or for transfers of funds related to them.
4. The provisions of this Article shall not oblige any Party to disclose information of a confidential nature, the disclosure of which may constitute an obstacle to compliance with the law, is contrary to the public interest, or harm the legitimate business interests of public or private companies.
5. Each Party will identify, in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them in accordance with their respective rates, the measures, restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of goods for reasons of national security, public health, preservation of the flora or fauna, the environment, plant health, standards, labels, international commitments, public order requirements or any other regulations.
Section F - Provisions on textile goods
Article 3-14: Temporary Flexibility Levels for goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System.
1. Each Party shall grant goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, produced in the territory of the other Party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 and imported into its territory, the preferential tariff treatment established in the Tariff Elimination Program Tariff corresponding to original goods, in accordance with the amounts and dates established in the annex to this article.
2. For the purposes of this article:
a. the threads and yarns classified in headings 51.06 to 51.10, 52.04 to 52.07, 53.07 to 53.08 and 55.08 to 55.11 of the Harmonized System must be totally produced in the territory of the exporting Party from non-originating fiber;
b. the goods classified in headings 54.01 to 54.06 of the Harmonized System must be totally produced in the territory of the exporting Party from non-originating materials classified in chapters 29 and 39;
c. fabrics classified in headings 51.11 to 51.13, 52.08 to 52.12, 53.10 to 53.11, 54.07 to 54.08, 55.12 to 55.16 and 60.01 to 60.02 of the Harmonized System must be wholly woven or woven in the territory of the exporting Party from thread or yarn not originating;
d. textile goods classified in chapters 56 to 59 of the Harmonized System must be entirely produced in the territory of the exporting Party from non-originating cloth, thread or yarn; Y
and. garments and other goods classified in chapters 61 through 63 of the Harmonized System shall be wholly cut (or knit to shape) and sewn or otherwise assembled in the territory of the exporting Party from cloth, thread, or non-originating yarn.
3. The total annual amounts established in the annex to this article assignable to the assets described in paragraph 1, may not be assigned to the assets classified in a certain heading in an amount that exceeds 30% of the total annual amount.
4. As of January 1 , 2000, each Party shall only grant preferential tariff treatment to originating goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System.
5. Regarding the goods that exceed the amounts determined in the annex to this article, each Party will only grant them the preferential tariff treatment established in the Tariff Elimination Program if they comply with the corresponding rule of origin established in the annex to article 5- 03 (Specific rules of origin).
Annex to articles3-03 and 3-09
Exceptions to articles 3-03 and 3-09
Section A - Measures of Costa Rica
1. Article 3-03 shall not apply to measures adopted in accordance with the provisions in force in Article 1 of Law 7356 of September 6, 1993 on the monopoly in favor of the State for the importation, refining and wholesale distribution of crude oil, its derived fuels, asphalts and naphthas, described in the following headings and subheadings, and the current tariff fractions of the Central American Tariff System (SAC):
2. Article 3-03 will not apply to measures adopted in accordance with the current provisions of numeral 14 of article 121 of the Political Constitution of the Republic of Costa Rica for the good described in tariff fraction 2716.00.00 (Electric Power) of the SAC.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Costa Rica may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods under headings 63.09 and 63.10 of the SAC.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Costa Rica may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of the goods described in the following headings, subheadings and current tariff fractions of the SAC:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Costa Rica may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods described in the following current SAC headings:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
Section B - Measures of Mexico
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-03, Mexico may maintain until January 1 , 2006 the provisions of the Decree for the Promotion and Modernization of the Automotive Industry (December 11, 1989), as well as any renewal or modification of it, even when they are incompatible with this Agreement.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the import of goods under headings 63.09 and 63.10 of the Tariff of the General Import Tax Law (TIGI).
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods described in the following subheadings of the TIGI:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods described in the following headings and subheadings of the TIGI:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods described in the following headings and subheadings of the TIGI:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
6. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may maintain until January 1 , 2006 prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods described in the following headings and subheadings of the TIGI:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
Annex to the article3-04
Tariff Elimination Program
1. Except as otherwise provided in each Party's tariff staging schedule, the following tariff staging categories apply to the elimination of customs duties by each Party under Article 3-04:
a. customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category A in a Party's staging list shall be completely eliminated and such goods shall be free of customs duty as of January 1 , 1995;
b. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff headings of staging category B in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in 5 equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 1995, and such goods shall be free of customs duty to beginning January 1 , 1999;
c. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff headings of staging category C in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in 10 equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 1995, and such goods shall be free of customs duties at beginning January 1 , 2004;
d. customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category D in the staging list of a Party shall continue to receive duty-free treatment;
and. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category E in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in 15 equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 1995, and such goods shall be free of customs duties at beginning January 1 , 2009;
F. Customs duties on goods included in tariff items of staging category C-2 in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in 6 equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 1997, and such goods shall be duty free customs from January 1 , 2002;
g. the customs duties on the goods included in the tariff headings of the Bp staging category in the staging list of a Party shall remain unreduced until December 31, 1998, and such goods shall be free of customs duty as of December 1, 1998 . January 1999;
h. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category C1 in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in 10 annual stages as of January 1 , 1995, and such goods shall be free of customs duty as of January 1 , 2004; the first five stages will each consist of reductions equivalent to 3% of the base customs duty rate and the residual customs duty will be eliminated in five equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 1999;
Yo. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category E1 in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in 15 annual stages beginning on January 1 , 1995, and such goods shall be duty-free as of January 1, 1995. January 1 , 2009; the first six stages will each consist of reductions equivalent to 2.5% of the base customs duty rate and the residual customs duty will be eliminated in nine equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 1999;
j. the customs duties on the goods included in the tariff headings of the staging category AE in the staging list of a Party shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of Annex 3 to Article 4-04 (Trade in sugar);
k. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category C3 in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in two equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 2003, and such goods shall be free of customs duties at beginning January 1 , 2004;
he. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category E3 in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in 4 equal annual stages starting on January 1 , 2006, and such goods shall be free of customs duties at as of January 1 , 2009.
m. the customs duty on the goods included in the tariff fraction of the tariff reduction category C2 in the tariff reduction list of Costa Rica will be eliminated in ten equal annual stages as of January 1, 1995 and these goods will be free of customs duty as of January 1, 2004; From January 10, 1995 to December 31, 2003, Costa Rica will apply a quota tariff on the goods included in this tariff fraction, in such a way that 800 annual tons from Mexico are imported free of customs duty; Y
no. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category E2 in a Party's staging list shall be eliminated in ten equal annual stages as of January 1, 2000, and these shall be free of customs duty as of January 1, 2000. January 1, 2009.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 3-04 and 3-09, a Party may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions, as well as customs duties, in accordance with its obligations and rights derived from the GATT, on originating goods included in a tariff fraction indicated with the code "EXCL" in the tariff reduction list of each Party.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-04, each Party may exclude from the Tariff Elimination Program the used goods described in the following headings:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
4. The base customs duty rate and the staging category for determining the transition customs duties at each stage of reduction for a tariff item are indicated for that tariff item in each Party's staging list.
5. For the purpose of eliminating customs duties in accordance with article 3-04, the transition rates shall be rounded up to the lower unit, except as provided in the reduction list of each Party, at least to one tenth of nearest percentage point or, if the duty rate is expressed in monetary units, at least to the nearest .001 of the official monetary unit of the Party.
Section A - Costa Rica's Tariff Reduction Schedule
(attached as a separate volume)


Section B - Mexico's Tariff Reduction Schedule (attached as a separate volume) 
Annex to the article3-12
Country of Origin Marking
1. For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
final buyer: the last person who, in the territory of the importing Party, acquires it in the form in which it is imported. This buyer is not necessarily the final user of the good;
container: among others, a container, packaging, packaging or wrapping;
common container: the container in which the good will usually arrive at the final purchaser;
legible: capable of being read easily;
Sufficient permanence: that the mark will remain on the good until it reaches the final purchaser, unless it is intentionally removed;
customs value: the value of a good for the purpose of imposing customs duties on an imported good; Y
visible: that can be seen with the ordinary handling of the good or container.
2. Each Party may require that a good of the other Party imported into its territory bear a country of origin mark that indicates the name of the country of origin to the final buyer of the good.
3. Each Party may require, among its general consumer information measures, that an imported good bear the country of origin mark in the manner prescribed for goods of the importing Party.
4. By adopting, maintaining and applying any country of origin marking measure, each Party shall minimize the difficulties, costs and inconvenience that such measure may cause to the trade and industry of the other Party.
5. Each Party:
a. will accept any reasonable method of marking a good of the other Party, such as the use of adhesive or pressure labels, tags or paint, which ensures that the mark is visible, legible and of sufficient permanence;
b. shall exempt from the requirement of marking of origin a good of the other Party that:
i) is not capable of being marked;
ii) it cannot be marked before being exported to the territory of the other Party without damaging it;
iii) cannot be marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value so as to discourage its export to the territory of the other Party;
iv) cannot be marked without material impairment of its operation or substantial deterioration of its appearance;
v) is in a container marked in such a way that the origin of the good is reasonably indicated to the final buyer;
vi) is raw material;
vii) is to be produced in the territory of the importing Party by or on behalf of the importer, in such a way that the good becomes a good of the importing Party;
viii) due to its nature or the circumstances of its importation, the final buyer can reasonably know its country of origin, even if it is not marked;
ix) it has been produced more than 20 years before it was imported;
x) has been imported without the required marking and cannot be marked afterwards except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, provided that the omission of marking was not for the purpose of circumventing the country of origin marking requirements ;
xi) is in transit, in guarantee or at the disposal of the customs authority for purposes of temporary importation without payment of customs duties;
xii) is an original work of art; either
xiii) has been imported for the importer's use and not to be sold in the form in which it was imported.
6. With the exception of the goods described in numerals vi, vii, viii, ix, xi, and xii of letter b) of paragraph 5, a Party may provide that, when a good is exempt from the country of origin marking requirement In accordance with subparagraph b) of paragraph 5, the common outer container is marked in such a way as to indicate the country of origin of the good it contains.
7. Each Party shall provide that:
a. a common container that is imported empty, disposable or not, will not require country of origin marking, but the container in which it is imported may be required to be marked with the country of origin of its content; Y
b. a full common container, disposable or not:
i) will not require country of origin marking; but
ii) may be required to be marked with the name of the country of origin of its contents, unless its contents are already marked and the container can be easily opened for inspection, or the marking of the contents is clearly visible through the container.
8. Whenever administratively and legally feasible, each Party shall allow the importer to mark a good of the other Party after importing it, but before releasing it from the control or custody of customs authorities, unless the importer has committed repeated violations of the Party's country of origin marking requirements and has been previously notified in writing that the good must be marked prior to importation.
9. Each Party shall provide that, except for importers who have been notified in accordance with paragraph 8, no special assessment or penalty shall be imposed for failure to comply with that Party's country of origin marking requirements, unless that the goods are withdrawn from the control or custody of the customs authorities without having been adequately marked or misleading marks have been affixed to them.
10. The Parties shall cooperate and consult with each other on matters related to this Annex, including additional exemptions from the country of origin marking requirement.
Annex to the article3-14
Amounts and dates for the levels of temporary flexibility for certain goods classified in chapters 51 to 63 of the Harmonized System
1. Mexico will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Elimination Program to the goods referred to in paragraph 1 of article 3-14, produced in Costa Rica in accordance with paragraph 2 of the same article, up to the amounts and dates specified below:
a. US$5 million from January 1 , 1995 to December 31, 1995;
b. US$5 million 750 thousand from January 1 , 1996 to December 31, 1996;
c. US$6,612,500 from January 1 , 1997 to December 31, 1997;
d. US$7,604,375 from January 1 , 1998 to December 31, 1998; Y
and. 8 million 745 thousand 031 United States dollars from January 1 , 1999 to December 31, 1999.
2. Costa Rica will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Elimination Program to the goods referred to in paragraph 1 of article 3-14, produced in Mexico in accordance with paragraph 2 of the same article, up to the amounts and dates specified below:
a. US$5 million from January 1 , 1995 to December 31, 1995;
b. US$5 million 750 thousand from January 1 , 1996 to December 31, 1996;
c. US$6,612,500 from January 1 , 1997 to December 31, 1997;
d. US$7,604,375 from January 1 , 1998 to December 31, 1998; Y
and. 8 million 745 thousand 031 United States dollars from January 1 , 1999 to December 31, 1999.
Chapter IV
Agricultural sector and phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures
Section A - Agricultural Sector
Article 4-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, it shall be understood as:
agricultural good: a good classified in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System.
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
fish and fish products: fish, crustaceans, molluscs or any other aquatic invertebrates, marine mammals and their derivatives, classified in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
export subsidies:
a. the granting of direct export subsidies, including payments in kind by governments or public bodies to a company, a branch of production, producers of an agricultural good, a cooperative or other association of such producers, or to a marketing council;
b. the sale or placement for export of non-commercial stocks of agricultural goods by governments or public agencies at a price less than the comparable price charged to buyers in the domestic market for a similar agricultural good;
c. payments for exports of agricultural goods financed by virtue of government measures, whether or not they are debited in the public accounts, including payments financed from revenues from a lien imposed on the agricultural good in question or on an agricultural good to from which the exported good is obtained;
d. the provision of subsidies to reduce the costs of marketing exports of agricultural goods (except readily available export promotion and advisory services), including handling, processing and other processing costs, and the costs of international transport and freight;
and. internal transportation and freight costs for export shipments established or imposed by governments on more favorable terms than for internal shipments;
F. subsidies on agricultural goods subject to their incorporation into exported goods;
over-quota duty rate: the duty rate applied to quantities in excess of the amount specified in a quota-duty.
Article 4-02: Scope of application.
This section applies to measures related to agricultural trade adopted or maintained by any Party.
Article 4-03: Consultations.
Before adopting a measure that may affect trade in an agricultural good between the Parties, a Party shall consult with the other Party within a reasonable period of time to avoid the annulment or impairment of a concession granted by that Party in the Tariff Elimination Program.
Article 4-04: Access to markets.
1. The Parties shall facilitate access to their respective markets by reducing or eliminating barriers to trade in agricultural goods. Except as expressly provided in this Agreement, the Parties shall not establish new barriers to trade.
Quantitative restrictions and customs duties.
2. The Parties waive the rights granted by Article XI:2 c) of the GATT and those same rights incorporated in Article 3-09 (Restrictions on imports and exports), with respect to any measure adopted or maintained on the import of agricultural goods.
3. When the tariff rate applied by a Party on an agricultural good indicated in the Tariff Elimination Program is higher than the tariff rate specified for that good in its GATT Schedule of Tariff Concessions as of January 1 , 1994, the other The Party will renounce the rights conferred by Articles II, XXII and XXIII of the GATT and its interpretative notes regarding the application of the tariff rate determined in that Schedule. This paragraph shall not apply to the goods listed in annex 1 to this article.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 3, when pursuant to an agreement resulting from multilateral negotiations on agricultural trade under the GATT that has entered into force with respect to a Party, that Party agrees to convert a prohibition or restriction on its imports into an agricultural good in a tariff-quota or in a customs tariff, that Party may not apply to that agricultural good a customs tariff that is higher than the lower of the customs tariff established in:
a. its list contained in the Tariff Elimination Program; Y
b. that deal.
5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, with respect to the agricultural goods listed in Annex 1 to this article, any Party may adopt or maintain a prohibition or restriction, or a customs duty on the importation of those agricultural goods in accordance with their rights and obligations derived from the GATT. Once a year from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Agricultural Trade Committee established in article 4-08, will examine the possibility of gradually eliminating the prohibitions, restrictions or customs duties on imports of goods indicated in the Agreement. annex 1 to this article. Also, once a year from the entry into force of this Agreement,
6. The Parties establish a base rate for tariff relief other than the applicable most-favored-nation rate for the agricultural goods listed in Annex 2 to this Article, as provided in that Annex.
7. Trade in sugar will be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Annex 3 to this article.
Restriction on the return of customs duties on exported agricultural goods.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of the annex to Article 5-03 (Specific Rules of Origin), as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party may reimburse the amount of customs duties paid, nor exempt or reduce the amount of customs duties owed, in relation to any agricultural good imported into its territory that is:
a. replaced by an identical or similar agricultural good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party; either
b. replaced by an identical or similar agricultural good used as a material in the production of another agricultural good subsequently exported to the territory of another Party.
Article 4-05: Internal supports.
1. The Parties recognize that domestic support measures can be of vital importance for their agricultural sectors, but that they can also distort trade and affect production. In addition, they recognize that commitments on the reduction of domestic support may arise in multilateral agricultural negotiations within the GATT framework. In this sense, when a Party decides to support its agricultural producers, it will strive to move towards domestic support policies that:
a. have minimal or no distorting effects on trade or production; either
b. are exempted from any commitment to reduce internal support that could be negotiated under the GATT.
2. The Parties also acknowledge that any of them may modify their domestic support measures, including those that may be subject to reduction commitments, in accordance with their GATT rights and obligations.
Article 4-06: Export subsidies.
1. The Parties share the objective of achieving the multilateral elimination of export subsidies for agricultural goods and in this sense they will cooperate in the effort to reach an agreement within the GATT framework.
2. The Parties shall eliminate the export subsidy on an agricultural good at the moment in which the customs duty that the importing Party applies to the exporting Party under the Tariff Elimination Program for that agricultural good reaches zero.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, neither Party may maintain or introduce export subsidies on agricultural goods in their reciprocal trade as of January 1 , 1999. Likewise, as of that date, the Parties renounce the rights that the GATT confers on them to use export subsidies, as well as the rights regarding the use of these subsidies that could result from multilateral agricultural trade negotiations within the framework of the GATT.
Article 4-07: Agricultural standardization and marketing measures.
1. In addition to the commitments established in Chapter XI (Standardization measures), in the event that any Party makes use of agricultural standardization or marketing measures that correspond to requirements imposed on an agricultural good in terms of packaging, grades and size of the goods, that Party shall accord to an identical agricultural good originating in the other Party treatment no less favorable than that accorded to a good of that Party with respect to the application of those standards.
2. The Parties establish the Committee for Agricultural Standardization and Marketing Measures made up of representatives of each one, which will meet annually or at the request of a Party. The Committee will review, in coordination with the Committee for Standardization Measures established in Article 11-17 (Committee for Standardization Measures), the operation of agricultural classification and quality standards that affect trade between the Parties, and will resolve issues that may arise in relation to the operation of the rules. This Committee will report its activities to the Agricultural Trade Committee established in article 4-08.
Article 4-08: Committee on Agricultural Trade.
The Parties establish an Agricultural Trade Committee made up of representatives of each of them, which will meet at least once a year. The Committee will monitor and promote cooperation between the Parties for the application and administration of this chapter and will serve as a consultation forum for the Parties on matters related to it. The Committee shall submit an annual report to the Commission on the implementation of this Chapter.
Annex 1 to the article4-04
Exclusions
Costa Rican Roster
Annex 2 to the article4-04
Consolidation of tariff preferences
1. For the purposes of the Tariff Reduction Program and only for the following agricultural goods, Mexico will begin its tariff reduction from the base rate indicated:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes
2. Mexico will maintain the tariff preferences that it has granted to Costa Rica in accordance with the Third Modifying Protocol of the Partial Scope Agreement
signed between the United Mexican States and the Republic of Costa Rica on agricultural goods that are not listed in paragraph 1, while that Agreement remains in force.
3. Unless the agricultural goods referred to in paragraph 2 are listed in Annex 1 to Article 4-04, the tariff reduction for those goods
will begin in accordance with the provisions of the Tariff Elimination Program from the date on which that the validity of the Third Modifying Protocol of
the Partial Scope Agreement signed between the United Mexican States and the Republic of Costa Rica expires. The applicable duty rate shall be the most favored nation duty rate in effect on that date.
Annex 3 to the article4-04
Trade in sugar
1. In the event that Mexico requires sugar in a particular year, the percentage participation of sugar originating from Costa Rica over the
total sugar requirements of Mexico (preferential quota of sugar that Mexico grants to Costa Rica) will be 19%. . In the event that Mexico grants a
percentage participation to other countries in a trade agreement, Mexico will modify the percentage participation of Costa Rica two years after the entry into force of that trade agreement, adjusting its percentage participation in accordance with the following formula:
PE x NCR
CPCR= -------------------------
TPE x N
CPCR = Preferential sugar quota that Mexico grants to Costa Rica.
PE x NCR = Costa Rica's average net exports of sugar during the last three years for which information is available.
TPE x N = Total sum of the average net exports of sugar from the countries with which Mexico has commitments derived from a trade agreement during the last three years for which information is available (including Colombia and Venezuela).
2. The preferential sugar quota that Mexico grants to Costa Rica will not be modified in the event that Mexico grants a preferential sugar quota to Colombia or Venezuela.
3. The preferential sugar quota that Mexico grants to Costa Rica in accordance with paragraph 1 shall never be less than 8%.
4. The preferential sugar quota that Mexico grants to Costa Rica will be taxed with a 0% tariff and its sale price to Mexico will have as a reference Contract 14 of the New York Coffee, Cocoa and Sugar Exchange. Since this market reflects the price of raw or raw sugar, when refined sugar is exported, the corresponding adjustment for refined sugar will have to be made according to internationally recognized conversions.
5. In the event that Mexico does not require sugar in a particular year, the preferential quota of sugar that Mexico grants to Costa Rica will be zero. Therefore, for that particular year, there will be no concession of preferential access for Costa Rica.
6. For the tariff that is applied above the preferential sugar quota that Mexico grants to Costa Rica, notwithstanding the provisions of article 4-04, Mexico may maintain its rights and obligations under the GATT.
7. The Parties establish the Sugar Committee made up of representatives of each of them, whose function will be to monitor the application and administration of this annex. Likewise, the Sugar Committee will monitor the application of the preferential sugar quota that Mexico grants to Costa Rica based on the qualities and prices offered by Costa Rica. When the Sugar Committee concludes that the quality or price requirements referred to in paragraph 4 are not met, Mexico may reallocate the quota among other exporting countries in order to meet those requirements. The Sugar Committee shall meet at least once a year or at the request of a Party.
8. For the purposes of this annex and article 4-04, sugar shall be understood as the tariff fractions described in the Mexican General Import Tax Law Tariff: 1701.11.01, 1701.11.99, 1701.12.01, 1701.12.99 , 1701.91 (except those containing flavorings), 1701.99.01 and 1701.99.99.
9. For the purposes of paragraph 1, originating sugar shall be understood to mean sugar that complies with the corresponding rule of origin established in Chapter V (Rules of Origin).
10. This annex will be valid until December 31, 2007.
Section B - Phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures
Article 4-11: Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, it shall be understood as:
animal: any animal, including domestic animals, fish, and wildlife;
contaminant: any contaminant, including residues of pesticides, fertilizers and agricultural chemicals, as well as veterinary drugs and other foreign substances;
risk assessment: an assessment of:
a. the probability of entry, establishment and spread of a disease or pest and the possible biological, agronomic and economic consequences; Y
b. the likelihood of adverse effects to human, animal, or plant life or health from the presence of an additive, contaminant, toxin, or disease-causing organism in a product;
scientific information: data or information derived from the use of scientific principles and methods;
phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure: a measure, including a criterion related to the final product; a process or production method directly related to the product; a test, inspection, certification, or approval procedure; a relevant statistical method; a sampling procedure; a risk assessment method; a packaging and labeling requirement directly related to food safety; and a quarantine regime, such as a relevant requirement associated with the transport of animals or plants, or with material necessary for their survival during transport, that a Party adopts, maintains or applies to:
a. protect animal or plant life or health in its territory from the risks arising from the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease;
b. protect human, animal or plant life or health in its territory from risks resulting from the presence of an additive, contaminant, toxin or pathogenic organism in a product;
c. protect human life or health in its territory from risks from an organism that causes a pest or disease carried by an animal or plant or a derivative thereof; either
d. prevent or limit other damage to its territory from the introduction, establishment and spread of a pest or disease;
appropriate level of phytosanitary or animal health protection: the level of protection of human, animal or plant life or health that a Party considers adequate;
international standard, guideline or recommendation: a standard, guideline or recommendation:
a. in relation to food safety, that established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission , including that related to product decomposition, prepared by the Codex Alimentarius Committee on Fish and Fishery Products, food additives, contaminants, hygiene practices and analysis and sampling methods;
b. in relation to animal health and zoonoses, the one elaborated under the auspices of the International Office of Epizootics;
c. in relation to plant health, the one prepared under the auspices of the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention; Y
d. that established by, or developed in accordance with, other international organizations agreed upon by the Parties;
pest: any pest including the living stages of any insect, mite, nematode, slug, snail, protozoan, or other invertebrate animal, bacteria, fungi, other parasitic plants or reproductive parts thereof, virus, mycoplasma, weeds, or any similar organism or the same associated with any of the above or any infectious substance that may directly or indirectly damage or cause disease to the terminal plants or their parts and to other processed products or manufactures;
approval procedure: any registration, notification or any other mandatory administrative procedure for:
a. approve the use of an additive for a defined purpose or under defined conditions; either
b. establish a tolerance for a defined purpose or with adherence to defined conditions for a contaminant; in a food, drink, or feed prior to permitting the use or marketing of a food, drink, or feed containing the additive or contaminant;
control or inspection procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine whether a phytosanitary or animal health measure is being complied with, including sampling, testing, inspection, verification, monitoring, auditing, evaluation of the application of phytosanitary and animal health measures, accreditation , registration, certification or other procedures that involve the physical examination of a product, product packaging, or equipment or facilities directly related to the production, marketing or use of a product, but does not mean an approval procedure;
product: animals, plants and their products and by-products;
vegetable: Any vegetable, including crops of economic, scientific, medicinal, ornamental interest and wild flora;
zone: a country, part of a country, parts of several countries, or all parts of several countries;
area of ​​low pest or disease prevalence: an area in which a specific pest or disease occurs at low levels;
pest or disease free zone: an area in which a specific pest or disease is not present;
Article 4-12: Scope of application.
In order to establish a framework of disciplines and rules that guide the development, adoption and compliance of phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures, the provisions of this section apply to any of those measures that may directly or indirectly affect trade between the Parties. .
Article 4-13: Main rights and obligations.
1. Each Party may, in accordance with this section, establish, adopt, maintain or apply any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure necessary for the protection of human, animal and plant life and health in its territory, even those that are stricter than an international standard, guideline or recommendation.
adoption of measures
2. Each Party may adopt, maintain and apply a phytosanitary and zoosanitary measure that regulates the protection of human, animal or plant life or health. These measures include those that ensure their compliance or application, including those that prohibit the importation of any product from the territory of the Parties, when they do not comply with the applicable requirements, or do not satisfy the approval procedures defined in these measures.
3. Each Party shall ensure that any phytosanitary or animal health measure it adopts, maintains or applies:
a. is based on scientific principles, taking into account, where appropriate, both relevant factors and different geographical conditions;
b. be maintained only when there is a scientific basis to support it; Y
c. that is based on a risk assessment appropriate to the circumstances.
non-discriminatory treatment
4. When similar or identical conditions exist, each Party shall ensure that a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure that it adopts, maintains or applies does not arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminate between its products and similar products of the other Party, or between products of the other Party. Part and similar products from another country.
unnecessary obstacles
5. Each Party shall ensure that no phytosanitary or animal health measures are prepared, adopted or applied, which have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties. In this sense, phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures will not restrict trade more than is necessary in order to protect human, animal or plant life or health in their territory, taking into account technical and economic feasibility.
covert restrictions
6. No Party may adopt, apply or maintain any phytosanitary or animal health measure that has the purpose or consequence of creating a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Support in non-governmental organizations
7. Each Party shall ensure that any non-governmental body that it relies on for the application of a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure, acts in a manner consistent with this section.
Right to set the level of protection
8. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, each Party, in order to protect human, animal or plant life or health in its territory, may set its appropriate levels of protection, in accordance with the provisions of Article 4-16.
Article 4-14: Use of international standards.
1. Each Party shall use, as a basis for its phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures, international standards, guidelines, or recommendations or their relevant or imminently adopted elements, except when such measures do not constitute an effective or adequate means to protect life or health. human, animal or vegetable in its territory; for example, due to factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature, or for scientifically justified reasons or because the level of protection considered appropriate is not obtained.
2. A phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of a Party that conforms to an international standard shall be presumed to be consistent with paragraphs 4 and 5 of Article 4-13.
3. Nothing in paragraph 1 shall be construed to prevent a Party, in the protection of human, animal or plant life or health in its territory from adopting, maintaining or applying any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure, which results in a higher level of protection than would have been obtained if the measure were based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation.
4. When a Party has reason to suppose that a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of the other Party affects or may adversely affect its exports and the measure is not based on relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, it may request to be informed of the reasons. of measure. The other Party will inform it in writing within a period not exceeding 40 days.
5. Each Party shall participate, to the greatest extent possible, in the relevant international standard-setting organizations, including the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the International Office of Epizootics and the International Convention for the Protection of Plants, in order to promote the development and the periodic review of international standards, guidelines and recommendations.
Article 4-15: Equivalence.
1. The Parties will make their respective phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures equivalent to the greatest possible degree or identical when appropriate, without reducing the level of protection of human, animal or plant life or health in their territory without prejudice to the rights that they have. confers this section taking into account international standardization activities, in order to facilitate the trade of products between them.
2. Each importing Party:
a. treat a phytosanitary or animal health measure adopted or maintained by the exporting Party as equivalent to its own, when the latter provides the importing Party with scientific or other information, in accordance with the risk assessment methods agreed by them to objectively demonstrate, with adherence to literal b), that the measure of the exporting Party reaches the appropriate level of protection of the importing Party;
b. may, when there is a scientific basis for it, rule that the measure of the exporting Party does not reach the level of protection that the importing Party deems appropriate; Y
c. shall provide the exporting Party in writing, upon request, with its reasons for a finding in accordance with subparagraph b).
3. Each Party will accept the results of the phytosanitary and zoosanitary control procedures that are carried out in the territory of the other Party, as long as satisfactory guarantees are offered that the product complies with the applicable measure or with the standards that are developed. or maintain in the territory of that Party.
Article 4-16: Risk assessment and appropriate level of protection.
1. In the search for the protection of human, animal or plant life and health in its territory, each Party may carry out risk assessments. In making those evaluations, the Party shall take into account, among other factors related to a product, any of the following:
a. available scientific and technical information;
b. Appropriate risk assessment methods and techniques, developed by international standardization organizations;
c. critical control points in production processes, or methods of operation, handling, packaging, inspection, sampling, or testing;
d. the existence of pests and diseases that need to be taken into account, including the existence of pest and disease free areas and areas of low pest and disease prevalence;
and. ecological and other relevant environmental conditions; either
F. the quarantine measures and applicable treatments that satisfy the importing country such as quarantines, chemical and physical treatments, destruction, reshipment and other measures accepted by the Parties.
2. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1, when establishing their appropriate level of protection, taking into account the risk associated from the point of view of the consequences of the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease and, when evaluating risk, each Party shall also take into account, where relevant, the following economic factors:
a. loss of production or sales as a result of the pest or disease;
b. the costs of controlling or eradicating the pest or disease in its territory; Y
c. the cost-effectiveness of other options to limit risks.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 and subparagraph c) of paragraph 3 of Article 4-13, when a Party carries out a risk assessment and concludes that the scientific knowledge or other information available is insufficient to After completing the assessment, it may provisionally adopt a phytosanitary or animal health measure, basing it on the pertinent information available. Once sufficient information has been submitted to complete the risk assessment, the Party will have a reasonable period of time to complete its assessment, review and, where appropriate, modify the provisional phytosanitary or animal health measure in light of that assessment.
4. When a Party is capable of achieving its appropriate level of protection through the gradual application of a phytosanitary or animal health measure, it may, at the request of the other Party and in accordance with this section, allow such gradual application or grant specific exceptions for the measure. , for limited periods, taking into account the export interests of the requesting Party.
Article 4-17: Adaptation to regional conditions.
1. Each Party shall adapt any of its phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures related to the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease, to the phytosanitary or zoosanitary characteristics of the area where a product subject to that measure is produced and to the area in its territory. to which the product is destined, taking into account any pertinent conditions, including those related to transportation and loading between those zones. When evaluating the phytosanitary or zoosanitary characteristics of an area, taking into account whether it is an area free of pests or diseases, or an area with a low prevalence of these, and can be conserved as such, as the case may be, each Party shall take into account, among other factors:
a. the prevalence of pests and diseases in that area;
b. the existence of eradication and control programs in that area; Y
c. any relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations.
2. In addition to the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party, when establishing whether an area is free of pests or diseases or an area of ​​low prevalence thereof, shall base its opinion on factors such as geographic conditions, ecosystems, epidemiological surveillance, the effectiveness of the phytosanitary or zoosanitary controls in that area or the recognition of the corresponding international organization.
3. An area in the territory of the exporting Party shall be recognized by the importing Party as an area free of pests or diseases or an area of ​​low pest or disease prevalence, and may be conserved as such, as the case may be, when the exporting Party provides the importing Party scientific or other information sufficient to demonstrate it to the satisfaction of the importing Party. To this end, the exporting Party shall provide reasonable access to its territory to the importing Party for inspection, testing and other relevant procedures.
4. Each Party, subject to any relevant conditions, may, in accordance with this section:
a. adopt, maintain or apply a different risk assessment procedure for an area free of pests or diseases than for an area of ​​low prevalence; either
b. determine a different final destination for the disposal of a product produced in an area free of pests or diseases, than for a product produced in an area of ​​low prevalence of these, including those related to transport and cargo.
5. When adopting, maintaining or applying a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure in relation to the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease, each Party shall grant to a product produced in a pest or disease free zone in the territory of another Party, a treatment no less favorable than that granted to a product produced in a zone free of these in another country that presents the same level of risk. The Party shall use equivalent risk assessment techniques to assess relevant conditions and controls in the pest or disease free zone and in the area adjacent to that zone, and shall take into account any relevant conditions, including those related to transportation and cargo. .
6. The importing Party shall seek, upon request, an agreement with the exporting Party on specific requirements, compliance with which allows a product produced in an area of ​​low prevalence of pests or diseases in the territory of the exporting Party, to be imported into its territory if achieves its appropriate level of protection.
Article 4-18: Control, inspection and approval procedures.
1. Each Party, in relation to any control or inspection procedure that it carries out:
a. initiate and conclude the proceeding in the most expeditious manner possible and no less favorable for a product of another Party than for a like product of the Party or of any other country;
b. publish the normal duration of each of these procedures or inform the applicant, upon request, of the expected duration of the procedure;
c. ensure that the competent body:
i) upon receipt of an application, promptly examine the documentation for completeness and inform the applicant accurately and completely of any deficiencies;
(ii) as soon as possible, convey to the applicant the results of the procedure accurately and completely, so that the applicant can take any necessary corrective action; Y
iii) report, at the request of the applicant, on the status of the application and the reasons for any delay;
d. it will limit the information that the applicant must present to that necessary to carry out the procedure;
and. Confidential or reserved information derived from the conduct of proceedings in relation to a product of the other Party or presented in relation to such information shall be granted:
i) treatment no less favorable than that accorded to a product of the Party; Y
(ii) in any case, treatment that protects the legitimate business interests of the applicant in accordance with the law of that Party;
F. limit to what is reasonable or necessary any requirement regarding individual specimens or samples of a product;
g. shall not charge a higher duty on a product of the other Party than on its products or on the products of any other country, taking into account the costs of communication, transportation and other related costs;
h. use criteria to select the location of the facility where the procedure is performed so as not to cause unnecessary inconvenience to an applicant or his agent;
Yo. provide a mechanism to review complaints related to the operation of the procedure and to take corrective action when a complaint is substantiated;
j. use criteria to select product samples that do not cause undue inconvenience to an applicant or his agent; Y
k. in the case of a product that has been modified after the determination that it complies with the requirements of the applicable phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure, it will limit the procedure to what is necessary to establish that it continues to comply with the requirements of that measure.
2. Each Party shall apply to its approval procedures the pertinent provisions of subparagraphs a) to i) of paragraph 1, with the necessary modifications.
3. When in the production stage of a product the importing Party requires to carry out a control or inspection procedure, the exporting Party shall adopt, at the request of the importing Party, the reasonable measures at its disposal to facilitate access to its territory and provide the necessary assistance to the importing Party, for the execution of the control or inspection procedure.
4. A Party that maintains an approval procedure may establish an authorization requirement for the use of an additive, or set a tolerance level for a contaminant in a product, in accordance with that procedure, before granting access to its market. household to a product containing that additive or that contaminant. When that Party so requires, it may use a relevant international standard, guideline or recommendation as a basis for granting access to those products until it completes the procedure.
Article 4-19: Notification, publication and provision of information.
1. In addition to the provisions of Articles 15-02 (Publication) and 15-03 (Notification and provision of information), when proposing the adoption or modification of a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of general application in their respective territories, each Party :
a. at least 60 days in advance, post notice and provide written notice to the other Party of its intention to adopt or modify that measure, except in the case of a law, and publish and provide to the other Party the full text of the proposed measure, in a way that allows interested persons to become familiar with it;
b. identify in the notice and in the notification the product to which the measure would apply and include a brief description of the objective and the reasons for the measure;
c. provide a copy of the proposed measure to the other Party or interested person that so requests and, where possible, identify any provision that deviates substantially from relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations; Y
d. without discrimination, it will allow the other Party and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, will discuss them and take into account the results of those discussions.
2. Through appropriate measures, each Party shall seek to ensure, with respect to a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure that a competent authority other than the central or federal government of the Parties intends to adopt or modify:
a. that notice and notification of the type required in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 1 be made at an appropriate initial stage prior to its adoption; Y
b. the observance of the provisions of subparagraphs c) and d) of paragraph 1.
3. When a Party considers it necessary to address an urgent problem related to plant or animal health protection, it may omit any of the steps set out in paragraphs 1 or 2 provided that, once a phytosanitary or animal health measure has been adopted:
a. immediately notify the other Party, in accordance with the requirements established in subparagraph b) of paragraph 1, including a brief description of the emergency;
b. deliver a copy of the measure to the other Party or interested persons who so request; Y
c. without discrimination, allow the other Party and interested persons to submit comments in writing and, upon request, discuss them and take into account the results of those discussions.
4. Each Party, except when necessary to address an emerging problem referred to in paragraph 3, shall allow a reasonable period of time to elapse between the publication of a phytosanitary or animal sanitary measure of general application and the date of its entry into force. , in order to allow time for interested persons to adapt to the measure.
5. Each Party shall designate a governmental authority as responsible for the implementation in its territory of the notification provisions of this article and shall notify the other Party thereof. When a Party designates two or more government authorities for this purpose, it shall provide the other Party with complete and unambiguous information on the scope of responsibilities of those authorities.
6. When an importing Party denies entry to its territory to a product of the other Party because it does not comply with a phytosanitary or animal health measure, the importing Party shall provide, upon request, a written explanation to the exporting Party that identifies the corresponding measure as well as the reasons why the product does not comply with that measure.
Article 4-20: Information centers.
1. Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one information center capable of answering all reasonable questions from the other Party and interested persons, as well as supplying relevant documentation in relation to:
a. any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of general application, including any control or inspection procedure, or approval, proposed, adopted or maintained in its territory by any government, regardless of whether or not it is central or federal;
b. The Party's risk assessment processes and the factors it takes into consideration in conducting the assessment and in establishing its appropriate level of protection;
c. the Party's membership and participation in international and regional phytosanitary and animal health agencies and systems, and in bilateral and multilateral agreements within the scope of this section, as well as the provisions of such agencies, systems or agreements; Y
d. the location of notices published pursuant to this section or the place where such information may be obtained.
2. Each Party shall ensure that, when the other Party or interested persons request copies of documents, in accordance with the provisions of this section, they are provided at the same price as for their internal sale, in addition to the cost of shipping.
Article 4-21: Limitations on the provision of information.
Nothing in this section shall be construed in the sense of obliging a Party to communicate to the other Party any information the dissemination of which would impede investigation, surveillance and control activities of compliance with its legislation, or which is otherwise contrary to the public interest or harm commercial interests protected by its legislation.
Article 4-22: Committee on Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Measures.
1. The Parties establish the Committee on Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Measures, made up of representatives of each of them with responsibility for phytosanitary or zoosanitary matters, with the main function of issuing expedited recommendations on specific phytosanitary and zoosanitary problems.
2. Each Party, upon designating its representatives, shall notify the other Party thereof. When a Party designates more than one representative for this purpose, it shall provide the other Party with complete and unambiguous information on the scope of responsibility of those representatives.
3. The Committee will facilitate and encourage:
a. the activities of the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this section, particularly the provisions of Articles 4-14 and 4-15;
b. technical cooperation between the Parties, including cooperation in the development, application and enforcement of phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures; Y
c. improvement in food safety and phytosanitary and zoosanitary conditions in the territory of the Parties.
4. The Committee:
a. seek, to the greatest extent possible, the assistance of relevant international standard-setting organizations, in order to obtain available scientific and technical advice and to minimize duplication of effort in the exercise of its functions;
b. may establish the modalities that it deems appropriate for the coordination and expeditious solution of matters that are referred to it, among others:
i) rely on experts or expert organizations; Y
ii) establish working groups and determine their objectives and fields of action;
c. will comply with any instructions from the Commission;
d. report annually to the Commission on the application of this section; Y
and. It will meet at least once a year, unless otherwise agreed.
Article 4-23: Technical consultations.
1. Each Party may request consultations with the other Party on any issue related to this section.
2. When a Party requests consultations concerning the application of this Section with respect to a phytosanitary or animal sanitary measure of the other Party and so notifies the Committee, the Committee may facilitate the consultations, in case it does not consider the matter itself, referring it to a working group, ad hoc working group or other forum, for non-binding technical advice or recommendation.
3. Each Party may resort to relevant international standard-setting organizations, including those referred to in paragraph 5 of Article 4-14, for advice and assistance on phytosanitary and animal health matters within the framework of their respective mandates.
Article 4-24: Technical cooperation.
Each Party may, to the best of its ability:
a. provide the other Party with advice, information and technical assistance on mutually agreed terms and conditions to strengthen that Party's phytosanitary and animal health measures, as well as its related activities, processes and systems;
b. provide the other Party with information on its technical cooperation programs related to phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures on areas of particular interest; Y
c. consult, in accordance with its legislation, with the other Party during the elaboration of any phytosanitary or animal health measure, or before a change in its application.
Article 4-25: Settlement of disputes.
1. Nothing provided in this section shall prevent a Party, when in doubt about the application or interpretation of this section, from initiating consultations with the other Party in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement).
2. When a Party considers that a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of the other Party is interpreted or applied inconsistently with the provisions of this section, it shall have the obligation to demonstrate the inconsistency.
3. When the Parties have resorted to consultations pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 4-23, the consultations shall constitute those provided for in Article 17-05 (Consultations), if so agreed by the Parties.
Article 4-26: Expenses.
1. The expenses derived from the activities carried out in accordance with article 4-24, shall be subject to the availability of funds and priorities in the matter for each Party.
2. The expenses derived from the control or inspection and approval procedures will be borne by the interested parties.
Chapter V
Rules of origin
Article 5-01: Definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
good : any merchandise, product, article or material;
fungible goods : goods that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical, and which it is impractical to distinguish from one another by simple visual examination;
identical or similar goods : "identical goods" and "similar goods" respectively as defined in the Customs Valuation Code;
non-originating good or non-originating material : a good or a material that does not qualify as originating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties :
a. minerals extracted in the territory of one or both Parties;
b. plant goods harvested in the territory of one or both Parties;
c. live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or both Parties;
d. goods obtained from hunting or fishing in the territory of one or both Parties;
and. fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained from the sea by vessels registered or registered by a Party and flying the flag of that Party;
F. goods produced on board factory ships from the goods identified in subparagraph e), provided that these factory ships are registered or enrolled by any Party and carry the flag of that Party;
g. property obtained by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;
h. waste and scrap derived from:
i) production in the territory of one or both Parties; either
ii) used goods, collected in the territory of one or both Parties, provided that such goods serve only for the recovery of raw materials; and
Yo. goods produced in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from the goods mentioned in subparagraphs a) to h) or their derivatives, at any stage of production;
shipping containers and packaging materials: goods that are used to protect another good during transport, other than retail packaging and materials;
shipping and repackaging costs: the costs incurred in repackaging and transporting a good outside the territory where the producer or exporter of the good is located;
sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service cost: the following costs related to sales promotion, marketing and after-sale service:
a. sales promotion and marketing; advertising in broadcast media; advertising and market research; promotional and demonstration materials; exhibited goods; sales promotion conferences, trade shows and conventions; banners; marketing exhibitions; free samples; sales, marketing and after-sales service publications such as merchandise brochures, catalogues, technical publications, price lists, service manuals, sales support information; establishment and protection of logos and trademarks; sponsorships; restocking charges for wholesale and retail sales; representation expenses;
b. sales and marketing incentives; discounts to wholesalers, retailers, consumers and goods;
c. for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service personnel: wages and salaries; sales commissions; bonuses; medical, insurance and pension benefits; travel, lodging and subsistence expenses; and membership and professional fees;
d. recruitment and training of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel, and training of customer employees after the sale;
and. insurance for civil liability derived from the property;
F. office supplies for sales promotion, marketing and after sales services;
g. telephone, mail, and other means of communication for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales services;
h. rents and depreciation of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service offices, as well as distribution centers;
Yo. insurance premiums on property, taxes, cost of public services and costs of repair and maintenance of offices, as well as distribution centers; Y
j. producer payments to others for warranty repairs;
net cost: total cost minus the costs of sales promotion, marketing and post-sale services, royalties, shipping and repackaging, as well as non-admissible interest costs, in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article;
non-allowable interest costs: the interest that a producer has paid on its financial obligations that exceeds 10 percentage points over the highest interest rate of the debt obligations issued by the central or federal government of the Party in which the producer is located. producer, in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article;
total cost : the sum of the following elements in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article:
a. the cost or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;
b. the cost of direct labor used in the production of the good; Y
c. an amount for direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the good reasonably assigned to it;
direct manufacturing costs and expenses: the costs and expenses incurred in a period that are directly related to the good, other than the cost or value of direct materials and direct labor costs;
manufacturing overhead costs and expenses – the costs and expenses incurred in a period, other than direct manufacturing costs and expenses, direct labor costs, and direct material cost or value;
FOB : free on board (LAB);
place where the producer is located: in relation to a good, the production plant of that good;
material : a good used in the production of another good;
self-made material: a material produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;
fungible materials : materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;
indirect material – a good used in the production, testing, or inspection of a good, but not physically incorporated into the good; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of a good, including:
a. fuel and power;
b. tools, dies and molds;
c. spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;
d. lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;
and. gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;
F. equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;
g. catalysts and solvents; Y
h. any other good that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be a part of that production;
intermediate material : self-produced materials used in the production of a good and designated in accordance with article 5-07;
related person: a person who is related to another person, as follows:
a. one of them holds positions of responsibility or direction in a company owned by the other;
b. are legally recognized as business associates;
c. are in an employer-employee relationship;
d. a person directly or indirectly owns, controls or possesses 25% or more of the outstanding shares or securities and with voting rights in both;
and. one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;
F. both persons are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;
g. together directly or indirectly control a third person; either
h. are from the same family (children, siblings, parents, grandparents or spouses);
generally accepted accounting principles : the recognized consensus to the substantial support authorized in the territory of a Party, regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements. These standards can be broad guidelines of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;
production : the growing, extracting, harvesting, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or assembling of a good;
producer : a person who grows, mines, harvests, fishes, hunts, manufactures, processes, or assembles a good;
used : used or consumed in the production of goods;
transaction value of a good : the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the good is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good;
transaction value of a material : the price actually paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the material is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the supplier of the material and the buyer referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good.
Article 5-02: Application instruments.
For purposes of this chapter:
a. the tariff classification basis is the Harmonized System;
b. the determination of the transaction value of a good or a material will be made in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code; Y
c. all costs referred to in this chapter shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.
Article 5-03: Original goods.
1. A good shall be considered as originating in the territory of a Party when:
a. is a good wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties;
b. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;
c. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements as specified in the annex to this article, and the other applicable provisions of this chapter are complied with;
d. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification and other requirements, and the good meets a regional value content requirement, as specified in the annex to this article , and the other applicable provisions of this chapter are complied with;
and. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties and meets a regional value content requirement as specified in the annex to this article, and the other applicable provisions of this chapter are met; either
F. except for goods included in Chapters 61 to 63, is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, but one or more of the non-originating materials used in the production of the good do not comply with a change in tariff classification because:
i) the good has been imported into the territory of a Party without assembly or disassembly, but has been classified as an assembled good in accordance with General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System; either
(ii) the heading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and that heading is not divided into subheadings or the subheading is the same for both the good and its parts; provided that the regional value content of the good, determined in accordance with article 5-04, is not less than, except as otherwise provided in article 5-27 or article 5-15, 50% when used the transaction value method or 41.66% when the net cost method is used, and the other applicable provisions of this chapter are met.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, the production of a good from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in the annex to this article, will be made entirely in the territory of a or both Parties and any regional content requirement for a good must be fully satisfied in the territory of one or both Parties.
Article 5-04: Regional content value.
1. Except as provided in paragraph 5, each Party shall provide that the regional value content of a good be calculated, at the option of the exporter or producer of the good, in accordance with the transaction value method provided in paragraph 2 or using the net cost method provided in paragraph 4.
2. To calculate the regional content value of a good based on the transaction value method, the following formula will be applied:
VT - VMN
VCR= ------------- x 100
VT
where
RVC: regional value content expressed as a percentage.
VT: transaction value of an asset adjusted on an FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 3.
VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good, determined in accordance with the provisions of article 5-05.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, when the producer of the good does not export it directly, the transaction value shall be adjusted up to the point at which the buyer receives the good within the territory where the producer is located.
4. To calculate the regional content value of a good based on the net cost method, the following formula will be applied:
CN - VMN
VCR= ------------- x 100
CN
where
RVC: regional value content expressed as a percentage.
CN: net cost of the good.
VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good, determined in accordance with the provisions of article 5-05.
5. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer calculates the regional value content of a good exclusively based on the net cost method provided in paragraph 4 when:
a. there is no transaction value because the property is not the object of a sale;
b. the transaction value of the asset cannot be determined because there are restrictions on the assignment or use of the asset by the buyer, with the exception of those that:
i) imposed or required by the law or the authorities of the Party in which the buyer of the good is located;
ii) limit the geographic territory where the good can be resold; either
iii) do not significantly affect the value of the property;
c. the sale or price depends on some condition or consideration whose value cannot be determined in relation to the good;
d. reverts directly or indirectly to the seller any part of the good from the resale or from any subsequent assignment or use of the good by the buyer, unless the due adjustment can be made in accordance with the provisions of article 8 of the Customs Valuation Code;
and. the buyer and seller are related persons and the relationship between them influences the price, except as provided in article 1.2 of the Customs Valuation Code;
F. the producer sells the good to a related person and the sales volume in units of quantity of identical or similar goods sold to related persons during a six-month period immediately preceding the month in which the producer sold that good exceeds 85 % of the producer's total sales of those goods during that period;
g. the exporter or producer chooses to accumulate the regional value content of the good in accordance with article 5-08;
h. the good:
i) is a motor vehicle included in heading 8701 or 8702, subheading 8703.21 to 8703.90, or heading 8704, 8705 or 8706; either
ii) is identified in Annex 1 to Article 5-15 or Annex 2 to Article 5-15 and is for use in motor vehicles included in heading 8701 or 8702, subheading 8703.21 to 8703.90, or heading 8704, 8705 or 8706 ; either
Yo. the good is designated as an intermediate material under section 5-07 and is subject to a regional value content requirement.
Article 5-05: Value of materials.
1. The value of a material:
a. will be the transaction value of the material; either
b. In the event that there is no transaction value or that the transaction value of the material cannot be determined in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, it will be calculated in accordance with the principles of articles 2 to 7 of that Code. .
2. When they are not considered in literals a) or b) of paragraph 1, the value of a material will include:
a. freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the port of importation in the Party where the producer of the good is located, except as provided in paragraph 3; Y
b. the cost of waste and spoilage resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less any recovery of these costs, provided that the recovery does not exceed 30% of the value of the material determined under paragraph 1.
3. When the producer of the good acquires the non-originating material within the territory of the Party where it is located, the value of the material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred for transportation. of the material from the supplier's warehouse to the producer's location.
4. For purposes of calculating the regional value content pursuant to Article 5-04, except as provided in Article 5-15.2 and for a motor vehicle identified in Article 5-15.3, or a component identified in Annex 2 to Article 5-15, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used by:
a. another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either
b. the producer of the good in the production of an originating material of its own manufacture and that is designated by the producer as an intermediate material in accordance with article 5-07.
Article 5-06 : De minimis.
1. A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good that do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 5-03 does not exceed 7% of the transaction value. of the asset adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 5-04 or, in the cases referred to in subparagraphs a) to f) of paragraph 5 of article 5-04, if the value of all non-originating materials referred to above does not exceed 7% of the total cost of the good.
2. When the same good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of those non-originating materials shall be taken into account in the calculation of the regional value content of the good and the good must satisfy the other applicable requirements of this chapter. .
3. A good that is subject to a regional value content requirement established in the annex to article 5-03 will not have to satisfy it if the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 7% of the adjusted transaction value of the good on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 5-04 or, in the cases referred to in subparagraphs a) to f) of paragraph 5 of article 5-04, if the value of all materials non-originating goods referred to above does not exceed 7% of the total cost of the good.
4. Paragraph 1 does not apply to:
a. goods included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System;
b. a non-originating material included in chapters 04 and 15 and headings 09.01, 17.01, 19.01, 21.05 and 22.02 that is used in the production of goods included in chapters 01 to 24 of the Harmonized System; Y
c. a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 01 through 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading than the good for which origin is being determined in accordance with this article.
5. A good included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System that is not originating because the fibers and yarns used in the production of the material that determines the tariff classification of that good do not comply with the change in tariff classification provided in the annex to the article 5-03, it will nevertheless be considered as originating if the total weight of those fibers and yarns of that material does not exceed 7% of the total weight of that material.
Article 5-07: Intermediate materials.
1. For purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with article 5-04, the producer of a good may designate as an intermediate material, except for the components listed in annex 2 to article 5-15 and the goods included in the heading 8706 for use in motor vehicles included in paragraph 3 of article 5-15, any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good, provided that such material complies with the provisions of article 5-03.
2. When the intermediate material is subject to a regional value content requirement in accordance with the annex to article 5-03, it will be calculated based on the net cost method established in article 5-04.
3. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of the good, the value of the intermediate material will be the total cost that can be reasonably assigned to that intermediate material in accordance with the provisions of the annex to article 5-01.
4. If a material designated as an intermediate material is subject to a regional value content requirement, no other self-produced material subject to a regional value content requirement used in the production of that intermediate material may itself be designated by the producer as intermediate material.
5. When a good referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 5-15 is designated as an intermediate material, that designation will apply only to the calculation of the net cost of that good, and the value of non-originating materials will be determined in accordance with the provisions in paragraph 2 of article 5-15.
Article 5-08 : Accumulation.
For the purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, an exporter or producer may accumulate the production, with one or more producers in the territory of one or both Parties, of materials that are incorporated into the good so that the production of the materials is considered as carried out by that exporter or producer, provided that the provisions of article 5-03 are complied with.
Article 5-09: Consumable goods and materials.
1. For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined in inventory are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined by one of the inventory management methods. set out in paragraph 3.
2. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of the other Party, the origin of the good may be determined based on one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3.
3. The inventory management methods applicable to materials or fungible goods will be the following:
a. "FIFO" (first in, first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were first received in inventory is considered as the origin, in the same number of units of materials or consumables that first come out of inventory;
b. "LUEP" (last in-first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were received last in inventory is considered as the origin, in the same number units, materials or consumables that first come out of inventory; either
c. "Averages" is the inventory management method by which, except as provided in paragraph d), the determination as to whether the materials or consumables are originating will be made through the application of the following formula:
OMT
PMO = ------------ x 100
TMOYN
where
PMO: average originating materials or consumables.
TMO: total units of originating materials or consumables that are part of the inventory prior to departure.
TMOYN: total sum of units of originating and non-originating materials or consumables that are part of the pre-departure inventory.
d. In the event that the good is subject to a regional content value requirement, the determination of non-originating fungible materials will be made through the application of the following formula:
TMN
PMN = ------------ x 100
TMOYN
where
PMN: average of non-originating materials.
TMN: total value of non-originating fungible materials that are part of the inventory prior to departure.
TMOYN: total value of originating and non-originating fungible materials that are part of the pre-departure inventory.
4. Once one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3 is selected, it will be used throughout the fiscal year or period.
Article 5-10: Games or assortments.
1. The sets or assortments of goods that are classified according to the provisions of General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, as well as the goods whose description according to the nomenclature of the Harmonized System is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating provided that each of the goods contained in the set or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of the goods in this chapter.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the set or assortment, adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 5-04 or, in the cases referred to in subparagraphs a) to f) of paragraph 5 of article 5-04, if the value of all non-originating goods referred to above does not exceed 7% of the total cost of the game or assortment.
3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in the annex to article 5-03.
Article 5-11: Indirect materials.
Indirect materials will be considered as originating, without taking into account the place of their production, and the value of these materials will be their cost that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.
Article 5-12: Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools.
1. Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools delivered with the good as part of the good's usual accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools shall not be taken into account to determine whether all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 5-03, provided that:
a. the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the good, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately in the invoice itself; Y
b. the quantity and value of those accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the good.
2. When the good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools will be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, when calculating the regional value content of the good
Article 5-13: Containers and packaging materials for retail sale.
1. Containers and packaging materials in which a good is presented for retail sale, when classified with the good they contain, shall not be taken into account in deciding whether all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 5-03.
2. When the good is subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of the containers and packaging materials for retail sale will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good. .
Article 5-14: Shipping containers and packing materials.
1. The containers and packaging materials for transporting the good will not be taken into account for the purposes of establishing whether all the non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 5- 03.
2. When the good is subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of the packaging materials for transporting the good will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good and the value of that material will be the cost of the same that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.
Article 5-15: Goods of the automotive industry.
1. For the purposes of this article, the following shall be understood as:
frame: the bottom plate of a motor vehicle;
class of motor vehicles: any of the following categories of motor vehicles:
a. motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.20, Mexican tariff item 8702.10.03 or 8702.90.04 or in Costa Rican subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90 when they are motor vehicles designed to transport 16 people or more, subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23.2, 8 or 8704.90, or heading 87.05 or 87.06;
b. motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.10 or in 8701.30 to 8701.90;
c. Motor vehicles included in Mexican tariff item 8702.10.01, 8702.10.02, 8702.90.01, 8702.90.02 or 8702.90.03, or in Costa Rican subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90 when they are motor vehicles designed to transport fifteen people or less, or in subheading 8704.21 or 8704.31; either
d. motor vehicles included in subheading 8703.21 to 8703.90;
motor vehicle assembler : a producer of motor vehicles and any related persons or joint ventures in which the producer participates;
original equipment: material that is incorporated into a motor vehicle prior to the first transfer of title to or consignment of the motor vehicle to a person who is not an assembler of the motor vehicle. That material is:
a. a good included in annex 1 to this article; either
b. an assembly of automotive components, an automotive component or a material listed in annex 2 to this article;
model line: a group of motor vehicles having the same platform or model name;
model name: the word, group of words, letter(s), number(s), or similar designation assigned to a motor vehicle by a marketing division of a motor vehicle assembler for:
a. differentiate the motor vehicle from other motor vehicles using the same bed design;
b. associate the motor vehicle with other motor vehicles using a different platform design; either
c. indicate a platform layout;
platform: the primary assembly of a load-carrying structural assembly of a motor vehicle that determines the basic size of that vehicle and forms the structural base that supports the powertrain, and serves as a link to the motor vehicle in various types of frames, such as for assembly of bodywork, dimensional frame and unitary bodywork;
motor vehicle: the one included in heading 87.01, 87.02, 87.03, 87.04, 87.05 or 87.06.
2. For purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with the net cost method established in paragraph 4 of article 5-04 for:
a. goods that are motor vehicles included in Mexican tariff item 8702.10.01, 8702.10.02, 8702.90.01, 8702.90.02 or 8702.90.03, or in Costa Rican subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90 when they are motor vehicles designed to transport fifteen people or less, or in subheadings 8703.21 through 8703.90, 8704.21 or 8704.31; either
b. goods included in annex 1 to this article when they are subject to a regional content value requirement and are intended to be used as original equipment in the production of goods that are motor vehicles included in the Mexican tariff fraction 8702.10.01, 8702.10.02 , 8702.90.01, 8702.90.02 or 8702.90.03, or in Costa Rican subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90 when they are motor vehicles designed to transport fifteen people or less, or in subheading 8703.21 to 8703.90, 8704.21 or 8704.31, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good shall be the sum of the values ​​of non-originating materials, determined in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 5-05,
3. For purposes of calculating the regional content value in accordance with the net cost method established in article 5-04 for goods that are motor vehicles included in heading 87.01, in Mexican tariff fraction 8702.10.03 or 8702.90.04 , or in Costa Rican subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90 when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 16 people or more, in subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90, or heading 87.05 or 87.06, or for a component identified in the Annex 2 to this article to be used as original equipment in the production of motor vehicles described in this paragraph, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good will be the sum of:
a. for each material used by the producer and listed in annex 2 to this article, whether or not produced by the producer, at the producer's choice, and determined in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, or 3 of article 5-05 or the paragraph 3 of article 5-07, either of the following two values:
i) the value of the non-originating material; either
(ii) the value of non-originating materials used in the production of that material; Y
b. the value of any other non-originating material used by the producer, which is not included in annex 2 to this article, determined in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, or 3 of article 5-05 or paragraph 3 of article 5- 07.
4. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of a motor vehicle identified in paragraph 2 or 3, the producer may average the calculation in its fiscal year or period using any of the following categories, either taking all vehicles as a base motor vehicles of that category, or only motor vehicles of that category that are exported to the territory of the other Party:
a. the same model line in motor vehicles of the same class of vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;
b. the same class of motor vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;
c. the same model line in motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party.
5. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of one or all of the goods included in a tariff classification listed in annex 1 to this article, or of a component or material indicated in annex 2 to this article, produced in the same plant, the producer of the good may:
a. average your calculation:
i) in the fiscal year or period of the producer of the motor vehicle to whom the good is sold;
ii) in any quarterly or monthly period; either
iii) in its own financial year or fiscal period, if the good is sold as a spare part;
b. calculate the average referred to in subparagraph a) separately for any or all of the goods sold to one or more motor vehicle producers; either
c. with respect to any calculation made pursuant to this paragraph, calculate separately the regional value content of the goods that are exported to the territory of the other Party.
6. Notwithstanding what is established in the annex to article 5-03, the regional content value will be:
a. for goods that are motor vehicles included in heading 87.01, in Mexican tariff item 8702.10.03 or 8702.90.04, or in Costa Rican subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90 when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 16 people or more, in the subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32, or 8704.90, or heading 87.05 or 87.06, 35% under the net cost method for a producer's fiscal year or period beginning on the closest date to January 1, 1995 through fiscal year or period ending on the date closest to January 1, 1996; Y
b. for the goods listed in annex 1 to this article subject to the regional content value requirement and intended for use in motor vehicles included in paragraph 2 and 3 of article 5-15, except for goods included in heading 8407, 8408 or subheading 8708.40 when they are intended for use in motor vehicles included in paragraphs 2 and 3, in which case the regional content defined in footnotes 4 and 34 of section B of the annex to article 5 will apply. 03 and except for heading 87.06, in which case the provisions of subparagraph a) shall apply:
i) 40% according to the net cost method, for the fiscal year or period of a producer that begins on the date closest to January 1, 1995 until the fiscal year or period that ends on the date closest to January 1 the 2000; Y
ii) 50% according to the net cost method, for the fiscal year or period of a producer that begins on the date closest to January 1, 2000 until the fiscal year or period of a producer that ends on the date closest to January 1, 2005.
Article 5-16: Operations and practices that do not confer origin.
1. A good will not be considered as originating solely because:
a. dilution in water or in another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the good;
b. simple operations intended to ensure the preservation of goods during transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, extraction of damaged parts, drying or addition of substances;
c. dusting, screening, classification, selection, washing, cutting;
d. packaging, repackaging, or packaging for retail sale;
and. the gathering of goods to form sets or assortments;
F. the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs; Y
g. cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings.
2. No pricing activity or practice, for which it can be demonstrated, based on sufficient evidence, that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter, confers origin to a good.
3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in the annex to article 5-03.
Article 5-17: Transhipment and direct dispatch.
1. A good will not be considered as originating even when it has been produced in accordance with the requirements of article 5-03 if, after that production, the good undergoes a subsequent process or is the object of any other operation outside the territories of the Parties, except for unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep it in good condition when transporting it to the territory of the other Party.
2. A good shall not lose its originating status when, while in transit through the territory of one or more non-Party countries, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the supervision of the competent customs authority in those countries:
a. the transit is justified for geographical reasons or for considerations related to transportation requirements;
b. is not intended for trade, use or employment in the transit country(ies); Y
c. during its transport and storage it is not subjected to operations other than packaging, packing, loading, unloading or handling to ensure its conservation.
Article 5-18: Consultation and modifications.
1. The Parties create the Rules of Origin Committee, made up of representatives of each Party, which will meet at least twice a year, and at the request of any Party.
2. It will correspond to the Committee:
a. ensure the effective implementation and administration of this chapter;
b. reach agreements on the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter;
c. review annually, in relation to non-admissible interest costs, the percentage points over the highest interest rate of debt obligations issued by the central or federal government; Y
d. attend to any other matter agreed upon by the Parties.
3. The Parties shall consult regularly to ensure that this Chapter is applied effectively, uniformly and in accordance with the spirit and objectives of this Agreement and shall cooperate in the application of this Chapter.
4. Any Party that considers that this chapter needs to be modified due to changes in the development of production processes or other matters, may submit to the Committee a proposal for its consideration and the reasons and studies that support it. The Committee will submit a report to the Commission for it to make the pertinent recommendations to the Parties.
Article 5-19: Interpretation.
For purposes of this chapter, when applying the Customs Valuation Code to determine the origin of a good:
a. the principles of the Customs Valuation Code will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications required by circumstances, as they would be applied to international ones; Y
b. The provisions of this chapter will prevail over those of the Customs Valuation Code, in that in which they are incompatible.
Article 5-20: Regional Inputs Integration Committee.
1. The Parties establish the Committee for the Regional Integration of Inputs (CIRI).
2. Each Party shall designate two representatives of the public sector and two representatives of the private sector to integrate the CIRI.
3. The CIRI will operate for a period of ten years from the entry into force of this Agreement. This period may be extended by agreement between the Parties.
Article 5-21: Functions of the Committee.
1. The CIRI will evaluate the real and documented inability of a producer of goods to dispose, in opportune conditions, of quality and non-discriminatory prices, of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 used by the producer in the production of a good.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, producer means a producer of goods for export to the territory of another Party under preferential tariff treatment.
3. In relation to the materials used in the production of a good referred to in paragraph 1:
a. are those used by the producer in the production of a good classified in the chapters of the Harmonized System listed in the annex to this article; Y
b. its use is required by the rule of origin established in the annex to article 5-03 for that good.
4. The annex to this article may be modified at any time by agreement between the Parties.
Article 5-22: Procedure.
1. For the purposes of Article 5-21, the CIRI will carry out an investigation procedure that may be initiated at the request of a Party or at the request of the Commission. This procedure may not begin before receipt of the supporting documentation.
2. In the course of this procedure, the Committee will evaluate the evidence submitted to it together with the application.
Article 5-23: Opinion and notification to the Commission.
1. The CIRI will issue an opinion to the Commission within the following periods, counted from the date of initiation of the investigation procedure:
a. 30 days, in case there is an unjustified interruption in the supply of materials; either
b. 90 days, in all other cases.
2. The CIRI will rule:
a. on the inability of the producer to dispose of materials in the terms indicated in paragraph 1 of article 5-21; Y
b. when the disability referred to in subparagraph a) is established, on the amounts and terms of the waiver required in the use of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 of article 5-21, so that a good can receive preferential tariff treatment.
3. The CIRI will immediately forward its opinion to the Commission.
Article 5-24: Meeting and decision of the Commission.
1. The Commission will meet as soon as possible once the CIRI opinion has been received.
2. When the incapacity referred to in paragraph 1 of article 5-21 is established, the Commission will issue a resolution in the terms of paragraph 3 within a period of no more than ten days from the Commission meeting for these purposes.
3. The resolution of the Commission will establish a waiver, in the amounts and terms agreed by the CIRI in its opinion, in the use of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 of article 5-21, with the modifications it deems appropriate.
4. The resolutions of the Commission will be valid for a maximum of one year from their issuance.
5. The Commission may extend, at the request of the interested Party and prior review by the CIRI, its resolution for an equal term if the causes that gave rise to it persist.
6. Any Party may request, at any time during its validity, the review of the resolution of the Commission.
Article 5-25: Referral to the Rules of Origin Committee.
1. If the CIRI does not issue the opinion referred to in article 5-23 within the terms mentioned therein, because there is not enough information or consensus on the case dealt with, it will forward it to the Committee of Rules of Origin.
2. The Rules of Origin Committee will have a period of 30 business days from the date of receipt of the request to gather more information and issue an opinion on the matter to the Commission.
3. The Rules of Origin Committee shall immediately forward its opinion to the Commission.
4. The Commission will meet and issue a resolution, under the terms of article 5-24, based on the formal request for investigation, the supporting documentation and the opinion of the Rules of Origin Committee.
5. If the Committee of Rules of Origin does not issue an opinion, the consultations referred to in article 17-05 (Consultations) will be considered concluded and, subject to the provisions of paragraphs 6 to 9, the provisions of in articles 17-06 (Intervention of the Commission, good offices, conciliation and mediation) to 17-16 (Suspension of benefits).
6. For the purposes of paragraph 5 and notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 3 of article 17-11, it shall be understood that the mission of the arbitral tribunal will be to issue a decision in the terms of paragraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 of article 5 -2. 3.
7. The final decision of the arbitral tribunal will be binding on the Parties and, if it decides on the waiver referred to in letter b) of article 5-23, it will be valid for a maximum of one year.
8. The complaining Party may avail itself of the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 of article 17-16 if the arbitral tribunal rules in its favor and the defendant Party does not comply with the final resolution within the term set by the arbitral tribunal.
9. The defendant Party may avail itself of the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5 of article 17-16.
Article 5-26: Regulation of operation.
1. No later than January 1, 1995, the Parties will agree on a regulation for the operation of the CIRI.
2. The regulation will include the operating rules of the CIRI and the conditions regarding delivery times, quantity, quality and prices of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 of article 5-21.
Article 5-27: Transitional provisions on regional content.
1. For purposes of calculating the regional content of a good that is subject to this requirement, for goods exported to the territory of another Party established in paragraph 3, an exporter or producer in the territory of a Party must comply with a regional content not less than:
a. 40% under the transaction value method or 33.33% under the net cost method, from January 1, 1995 to December 31, 1997; Y
b. 45% under the Transaction Value Method or 37.50% under the net cost method, from January 1, 1998 to December 31, 2000.
2. As of January 1, 2001, the percentage of regional content will be the one established in the annex to article 5-03.
3. The regional contents established in paragraph 1 apply to the goods exported to the territory of another Party listed in the annex to this article that are classified in the subheadings indicated in the same annex for that good.
Annex to Article 5-01
Net Cost
Section A - Definitions
For the purposes of this annex, the following shall be understood as:
allocation base : any of the following allocation bases used by the producer to calculate the percentage of the cost in relation to the good:
a. the sum of the cost of direct labor and the cost or value of the direct material of the good;
b. the sum of the cost of direct labor, the cost or value of the direct material and the direct costs and expenses of manufacturing the good;
c. direct labor costs or hours;
d. units produced;
and. machine hours;
F. amount of sales;
g. plant area; either
h. any other bases that are considered reasonable and quantifiable;
non-allowable costs: sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs, royalties, shipping and repackaging, and non-allowable interest costs;
for internal management purposes : any allocation procedure used for tax filing, financial statements or reports, internal control, financial planning, decision making, pricing, cost recovery, cost control management, or performance measurement.
Section B - Calculation of Net Cost
1. The net cost will be calculated according to the following formula:
CN = CT - CNA
where:
CN = net cost.
TC = total cost.
CNA = are non-allowable costs.
2. For purposes of determining the total cost:
a. when the producer of a good uses a cost and expense allocation method for internal management purposes to calculate the total cost for the good to allocate direct material costs, labor costs manufacturing direct and overhead costs and expenses, or portions thereof, and that method reasonably reflects direct material costs, direct labor costs, or direct and overhead manufacturing costs and expenses incurred in production of the property, that method shall be considered a method of reasonable allocation of costs and expenses, and may be used to allocate the costs to the property;
b. The producer of the good may determine a reasonable amount for costs and expenses that have not been allocated to the good, as follows:
i) for the cost or value of direct materials and direct labor costs, based on any method that reasonably reflects the direct material and direct labor used in the production of the good; Y
ii) in relation to the direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, the producer of the good may choose one or more allocation bases that reflect a relationship between the direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses and the good, in accordance with the provisions of the literals e) and f) ;
c. the producer of the good may use any method of reasonable allocation of costs and expenses, which will be used throughout its financial year or fiscal period;
d. The following concepts will not be part of the total cost:
i) the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to the good;
ii) the costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the producer's company, which constitutes a discontinued operation;
iii) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of accounting principles;
iv) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good;
v) costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure; Y
vi) the profits obtained by the producer of the good regardless of whether they were retained by the producer or paid to other persons, such as dividends and taxes paid on these profits, including taxes or capital gains;
and. In relation to each base chosen, the producer may calculate a percentage of the cost for each good produced, in accordance with the following formula:
BA
PC = ------------ x100
BTA
where
PC = percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good.
BA = allocation base for the good.
BTA = total base allocation for all goods produced by the producer of the good;
F. The costs or expenses for which an allocation base is chosen are allocated to a good according to the following formula:
CAB = AC x PC
where
CAB = costs or expenses assigned to the good.
CA = costs or expenses that will be assigned.
PC = percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good;
g. in the determination of the net cost, when the costs or expenses mentioned in subparagraph d) are included in the total cost assigned to the good, the percentage of the cost or expense used to assign that cost or expense to the good will be used to determine the amount of the excluded costs or expenses that will be subtracted from the total assigned cost;
h. Any cost or expense allocated in accordance with any reasonable cost allocation method used for internal administration purposes will not be considered reasonably allocated when it can be shown from sufficient evidence that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
3. For purposes of determining non-admissible interest costs, the producer of the good:
a. For the calculation of non-admissible interest, only loans contracted with a fixed or variable interest rate higher than the highest interest rate of the debt obligations issued by the central or federal government, plus 10 percentage points, will be considered;
b. will calculate the interest rate accrued in the period chosen by the producer in accordance with paragraph 4, by applying the following formula:
IPP
TID = ---------- x 100
MPP
where
TID = interest rate accrued in the period.
IPP = amount of interest accrued in the period.
MPP = amount of loans that accrue interest in the period;
For the purposes of this literal, the amount of the loans that accrue interest and the amount of interest accrued, will be those that correspond to the loans in accordance with the provisions of literal a) ; and in the event that the accrued interest does not correspond to the entire period chosen by the producer, only the proportional part of the amount of the loan will be considered with respect to the period in which the interest accrued;
c. Calculate the non-admissible interest rate using the following formula, based on the determination of the accrued interest rate established in literal a):
TIN = TID - (TOG + 10)
where
TIN = non-admissible interest rate
TID = interest rate accrued in the period
TOG = interest rate on debt obligations issued by the central or federal government;
d. Calculate the non-admissible interest cost using the following formula:
CIN = TIN x MPP
where
CIN = non-allowable interest costs
TIN = non-admissible interest rate
MPP = amount of loans that accrue interest in the period
For purposes of this literal, the amount of the loans that accrue interest in the period will be determined in accordance with the provisions of literal b).
4. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of the good based on the net cost method, the producer of the good may average the calculation with respect to the good, and other identical or similar goods, produced in a single plant by the producer;
a. in a month;
b. during any period within the producer's fiscal year greater than one month.
5. For the purposes of paragraph 4, the producer of the good will consider all the units of the good produced during the chosen period. The producer may not vary the period once chosen.
6. When the producer of a good has calculated the regional content value of the good according to the net cost method on the basis of estimated costs, including standard costs, budget projections or other similar procedures, before or during the period chosen in accordance with paragraph 4, the producer must make the calculation based on the actual costs incurred during that period with respect to the production of the good.
Annex to Article 5-03
Specific Rules of Origin
Section A - General interpretative note
1. The specific rule or set of rules that applies to a heading, subheading, or tariff item is set forth next to the heading, subheading, or tariff item.
2. The rule applicable to a tariff fraction shall have priority over the rule applicable to the heading or subheading that comprises the tariff fraction.
3. A change of classification requirement applies only to non-originating materials.
4. Any reference to weight in the rules for goods included in chapters 01 to 24 of the Harmonized System, means net weight unless otherwise specified in the Harmonized System.
5. For any reference to a regional content value requirement in the specific rules of origin, the provisions of Article 5-15 and Article 5-27 shall be taken into account.
6. When a specific rule is defined at an eight-digit level, the provisions of the appendix to this annex will apply.
Section B - Specific rules of origin
Chapter VI
Customs procedures
Section A - Customs procedures for origin
Article 6-01: Definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
competent authority: the authority that, under the laws of each Party, is responsible for the administration of its customs and tax laws and regulations;
Identical Goods: Goods that are the same in all respects, including their physical characteristics, quality, and goodwill. Small differences in appearance do not prevent them from being considered identical;
preferential tariff treatment: the application of the tariff rate corresponding to an originating good in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program.
2. Except for what is defined in this article, the definitions established in article 5-01 (Definitions) are incorporated into this chapter.
Article 6-02: Declaration and certification of origin.
1. The certificate of origin referred to in the annex to this article, will serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party, qualifies as originating. This certificate may be modified by agreement between the Parties.
2. Each Party shall require its exporters to complete and sign a certificate of origin in respect of the export of a good for which an importer may claim preferential tariff treatment.
3. Each Party shall provide that:
a. when an exporter is not the producer of the good, fill out and sign the certificate of origin based on the declaration of origin referred to in the annex to this article; Y
b. the declaration of origin that covers the exported good is completed and signed by the producer of the good and voluntarily provided to the exporter.
4. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin completed and signed by the exporter cover:
a. a single importation of one or more goods; either
b. several imports of identical goods to be carried out within a period established by the exporter in the certificate of origin, which shall not exceed the period established in paragraph 5.
5. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin be accepted by the competent authority of the importing Party within a period of one year from the date of its signature.
Article 6-03: Obligations regarding imports.
1. Each Party shall require the importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party, that:
a. declare in writing, in the import document based on a valid certificate of origin, that the good qualifies as originating;
b. have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time of making that declaration;
c. provide a copy of the certificate of origin when requested by your competent authority; Y
d. submit a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding duties, when the importer has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which his import declaration is based contains incorrect information. If you make the aforementioned declaration spontaneously in accordance with the legislation of each Party, you will not be penalized.
2. Each Party shall provide that when the importer does not comply with any of the requirements established in paragraph 1, preferential tariff treatment shall be denied to the good imported from the territory of the other Party for which preference has been requested.
3. Each Party shall provide that, when preferential tariff treatment has not been requested for a good imported into its territory that it has qualified as originating, the importer of the good may request the refund of the tariffs paid in excess, in accordance with the legislation of each Party. Party, for not having granted preferential tariff treatment to the good, provided that the request is accompanied by:
a. a written statement stating that the good qualified as originating at the time of importation;
b. have the certificate of origin in their possession that covers the imported goods and provide it to the competent authority when required;
c. any other documentation related to the importation of the goods as required by the competent authority.
Article 6-04: Obligations regarding exports.
1. Each Party shall provide that the exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin deliver a copy of the certificate or declaration of origin to its competent authority when requested.
2. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or a producer who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin and has reason to believe that such certificate or declaration contains incorrect information, shall promptly notify in writing any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate or declaration of origin to all persons to whom the certificate or declaration has been delivered, as well as in accordance with the legislation of each Party to the competent authority of the exporting Party, in which case they may not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certification or declaration.
3. Each Party shall provide that the false certification or declaration of origin made by an exporter or by a producer in the sense that a good to be exported to the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating, has the same legal consequences, with the modifications required by the circumstances, than those that would be applied to an importer who makes false declarations or manifestations in contravention of its customs laws and regulations.
4. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall notify the competent authority of the importing Party of the exporter's or producer's notification referred to in paragraph 2.
Article 6-05: Exceptions.
Provided that they are not part of two or more imports that are made or planned with the purpose of evading compliance with Articles 6-02 and 6-03, the certificate of origin will not be required for imports of goods in the following cases:
a. imports for commercial purposes of goods whose customs value does not exceed an amount equivalent to 1,000 US dollars or its equivalent in national currency, but it may be required that the invoice contain a declaration by the importer or exporter that the good qualifies as originating;
b. imports for non-commercial purposes of goods whose customs value does not exceed an amount equivalent to 1,000 US dollars or its equivalent in national currency; Y
c. in the importation of a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement to present the certificate of origin.
Article 6-06: Accounting records.
Each Party shall provide that:
a. An exporter or a producer who completes and signs a certificate or declaration of origin retains for a minimum of five years after the date of signing the certificate or declaration of origin, all records and documents relating to the origin of the good, including those referring to :
i) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the good that is exported from its territory;
ii) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials used in the production of the good that is exported from its territory; Y
iii) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory;
b. In accordance with the verification process established in Article 6-07, the exporter or producer provides the competent authority of the importing Party with the records and documents referred to in subparagraph a). When the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or producer, the exporter or producer may request the records and documents from the producer or supplier of the materials so that, with the latter's authorization, they may be delivered through him to the competent authority that carries out the check;
c. an importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good that is imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party, keeps for a minimum of five years from the date of importation, the certificate of origin and all other documentation related to importation required by the importing Party.
Article 6-07: Procedures to verify the origin.
1. The importing Party may request information regarding the origin of a good from the exporting Party through the competent authority.
2. To determine whether a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating, each Party may, through its competent authority, verify the origin of the good by:
a. written questionnaires addressed to exporters or producers in the territory of the other Party; either
b. verification visits to an exporter or a producer in the territory of the other Party, with the purpose of examining the records and documents referred to in article 6-06 that prove compliance with the rules of origin and inspecting the facilities used in the production of the good and, where appropriate, those used in the production of a material.
3. The exporter or producer who receives a questionnaire in accordance with subparagraph a) of paragraph 2, will answer and return the questionnaire within a period not exceeding 30 days from the date it is received. During this period, the exporter or producer may request an extension in writing from the importing Party, which in its case shall not exceed 30 days.
4. In the event that the exporter or producer does not return the questionnaire within the corresponding term, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment prior resolution in the terms of paragraph 11.
5. The importing Party that carries out a verification through a questionnaire will have a period of 45 days from the receipt of the response to the questionnaire to send the notification referred to in paragraph 6, if it deems it appropriate.
6. Before carrying out a verification visit in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph b) of paragraph 2, the importing Party shall be obliged, through its competent authority, to notify in writing its intention to carry out the visit at least with 30 days in advance. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer to be visited, to the competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit will take place and, if requested by the latter, to the Embassy of that Party in the territory of the Party. importer. The competent authority of the importing Party shall obtain the written consent of the exporter or the producer whom it intends to visit.
7. The notification referred to in paragraph 6 will contain:
a. the identification of the competent authority making the notification;
b. the name of the exporter or producer you intend to visit;
c. the date and place of the proposed verification visit;
d. the object and scope of the proposed verification visit, making specific mention of the good or goods subject to verification to which the certificate(s) of origin refer;
and. the names, personal data and positions of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; Y
F. the legal basis for the verification visit.
8. Any modification to the information referred to in subparagraph e) of paragraph 7, shall be notified in writing to the exporter or producer and to the competent authority of the exporting Party before the verification visit. Any modification of the information referred to in paragraphs a), b), c), d) and f) of paragraph 7, will be notified in the terms of paragraph 6.
9. If within 30 days after notification of the verification visit proposed under paragraph 6 is received, the exporter or producer does not provide written consent for the verification visit, the importing Party may deny tariff treatment. preferential to the good or goods that would have been the object of the verification visit.
10. Each Party shall permit the exporter or producer, whose good or goods are the subject of a verification visit, to designate two witnesses to be present during the visit, provided that the witnesses intervene only in that capacity. If there is no designation of witnesses by the exporter or the producer, this omission will not result in the postponement of the visit.
11. Within 120 days following the conclusion of the verification, the competent authority will provide a written resolution to the exporter or producer whose good or goods have been subject to verification in which it determines whether or not the good qualifies as originating, which will include the findings of fact and the legal basis for the determination.
12. When the verification carried out by a Party establishes that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, the importing Party may suspend the preferential tariff treatment of the goods. identical products that that person exports or produces, until they prove that they comply with the provisions of Chapter V (Rules of Origin).
13. Each Party shall provide that, when it determines that a certain good imported into its territory does not qualify as originating in accordance with the tariff classification or the value applied by that Party to one or more materials used in the production of the good, and this differs from the tariff classification or the value applied to the materials by the Party from whose territory the good has been exported, the decision of that Party shall not take effect until it notifies in writing both the importer of the good and the person who has filled and signed the certificate of origin that protects it.
14. The Party shall not apply a ruling made under paragraph 13 to an import made before the date the ruling takes effect, provided that the competent authority of the Party from whose territory the good was exported has issued a ruling or a advance judgment on the tariff classification or value of materials, on which a person may rely in accordance with its laws and regulations.
15. When a Party denies preferential tariff treatment to a good pursuant to a ruling made in accordance with paragraph 13, that Party shall postpone the effective date of the denial for a period not to exceed 90 days, provided that the importer of the good good or the exporter or producer who has completed and signed the certificate or declaration of origin that protects it, accredits having relied in good faith, to its own detriment, on the tariff classification or value applied to the materials by the customs authority of the Party of whose territory the good was exported.
16. Each Party will maintain the confidentiality of the information collected in the origin verification process in accordance with the provisions of its legislation.
Article 6-08: Review and challenge.
1. Each Party shall grant the same rights to review and challenge resolutions for determination of origin and advance criteria, provided for an importer in its territory, to an exporter or a producer of the other Party that:
a. fill out and sign a certificate or declaration of origin that covers a good that has been the subject of a determination of origin according to paragraph 11 of article 6-07; either
b. received advance judgment pursuant to section 6-10.
2. The rights referred to in paragraph 1 include access to at least one instance of administrative review, independent of the official or agency responsible for the resolution subject to review, and access to a level of judicial or quasi-judicial review of the resolution or decision made at the final level of administrative review, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 6-09: Penalties.
Each Party shall establish or maintain criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this chapter.
Article 6-10: Advance criteria.
1. Each Party shall provide that, through its competent authority, prior written criteria be granted expeditiously prior to the importation of a good into its territory. The anticipated criteria will be issued to the importer in its territory or to the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by them regarding whether the goods qualify as originating according to the established rules of origin. in chapter V (Rules of origin).
2. The anticipated criteria will deal with:
a. if the non-originating materials used in the production of a good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification indicated in the annex to article 5-03 (Specific Rules of Origin);
b. if the good meets the regional content value requirement established in Chapter V (Rules of Origin);
c. if the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code, to calculate the transaction value of the good or materials used in the production of a good with respect to which an advance criterion is requested, it is adequate, to determine if the good complies with the requirement of regional value content according to chapter V (Rules of origin);
d. whether the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party for the reasonable allocation of costs in accordance with the annex to Article 5-01 (Net cost) is adequate to determine whether a good meets the value content requirement regional according to chapter V (Rules of origin);
and. if the country of origin marking carried out or proposed for a good satisfies the provisions of article 3-12 (Country of Origin Marking); Y
F. Other matters that the Parties agree.
3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance criteria upon publication thereof, including:
a. information reasonably required to process a request;
b. The power of its competent authority to request additional information at any time from the person requesting the advance judgment during the application evaluation process;
c. a period of 120 days for the competent authority to issue the advance ruling once it has obtained all the necessary information from the person requesting it; Y
d. the obligation to fully explain, founded and motivated to the applicant the reasons for the anticipated judgment when it is unfavorable for the applicant.
4. Each Party shall apply the advance criteria to imports into its territory from the date of issuance of the criterion or from a later date indicated therein, unless the advance criterion is modified or revoked in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 6.
5. Each Party shall grant to any person who requests an advance judgment, the same treatment, the same interpretation and application of the provisions of Chapter V (Rules of Origin) referring to the determination of origin, that it has granted to any other person to the that has issued an early judgment, when the facts and circumstances are identical in all substantial aspects.
6. The anticipated criterion may be modified or revoked by the competent authority in the following cases:
a. when it was founded on some error:
i) in fact;
ii) in the tariff classification of a good or a material;
iii) whether the good meets the regional value content requirement;
b. when it is not in accordance with an interpretation agreed between the Parties or a modification with respect to article 312 (Marking of country of origin) or chapter V (Rules of origin);
c. when the circumstances or facts that support it change; either
d. in order to comply with an administrative or judicial decision.
7. Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance ruling takes effect on the date it is issued or on a later date established therein and may not be applied to imports of a good made before those dates, unless that the person to whom it has been issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 7, the Party issuing the advance judgment shall postpone the effective date of the modification or revocation for a period not to exceed 90 days, when the person to whom it has been issued the advance criterion has been based on that criterion in good faith and to its detriment.
9. Each Party shall provide that, when considering the regional value content of a good for which an advance ruling has been issued, its competent authority shall assess whether:
a. the exporter or producer complies with the terms and conditions of the advance judgment;
b. the exporter's or producer's operations are consistent with the circumstances and substantial facts that support that criterion; Y
c. the supporting data and calculations used in applying the method to calculate value or allocate cost are correct in all material respects.
10. Each Party shall provide that when its competent authority determines that any of the requirements set forth in paragraph 9 has not been met, the competent authority may modify or revoke the advance judgment, as the circumstances warrant.
11. Each Party shall provide that, when the competent authority of a Party decides that the advance judgment has been based on incorrect information, the person to whom it was issued shall not be penalized, if he demonstrates that he acted with reasonable care and good faith when stating the facts and circumstances that motivated the anticipated judgment.
12. Each Party shall provide that, when advance ruling is issued to a person who has falsely stated or omitted material facts or circumstances on which the advance ruling is based, or has failed to act in accordance with the terms and conditions thereof, the authority authority that issues the anticipated criteria can apply the measures that the circumstances warrant.
13. The validity of an early judgment will be subject to the permanent obligation of the holder of the early judgment to inform the competent authority of any substantial change in the facts or circumstances on which it relied to issue that judgment.
Article 6-11: Customs Procedures Committee.
1. The Parties establish a Customs Procedures Committee made up of representatives of each of them that will meet at least twice a year, as well as at the request of any of them.
2. It will correspond to the Committee:
a. try to reach agreements on:
i) the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter;
ii) tariff classification and valuation issues related to origin determination resolutions;
iii) the procedures for the request, approval, issuance, modification, revocation and application of the anticipated criteria;
iv) modifications to the certificate or declaration of origin referred to in article 6-02;
v) any other matter referred to it by a Party; Y
b. examine the proposals for administrative or operational modification related to this section on customs matters that may affect the flow of trade between the Parties.
Section B - Customs Administration.
Article 6-12: General principles.
1. The Parties acknowledge:
a. that their competent authorities need to strengthen their cooperation ties;
b. that, to the extent possible, it is convenient to stimulate coordination practices between their competent authorities, defining the fields of action, procedures, terms and scope of assistance, as well as intensifying relations between them in order to exchange experiences that allow for improvement and harmonize applicable customs systems and procedures based on a principle of reciprocity; Y
c. that it is convenient to strengthen the commercial exchange between them through mechanisms that expedite the transit of goods and customs clearance operations, without prejudice to the application of controls aimed at avoiding illegal trade, unfair international trade practices and other policies that cause trade distortions.
2. In particular, the Parties shall endeavor to facilitate the customs clearance of originating goods.
3. The Parties shall endeavor not to diminish the degree of compliance of the customs facilitation measures agreed upon by them relating to this section upon the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 6-13 : Cooperation and mutual assistance.
1. In relation to subparagraph a) of paragraph 1 of Article 6-12, the Parties will give priority to the areas of harmonization of procedures, information technology and training.
2. The Parties shall endeavor to organize on a cost-recovery basis training programs in customs matters that include:
a. training for officials directly involved in customs procedures; Y
b. user training.
Article 6-14: International transit of goods.
The Parties will simplify, to the extent of their possibilities, and make the users aware of the procedures for international transit of goods, the required documentation, the conditions required for the transport units, the hours of operation of the customs, the information on the authorized means of communication, access and infrastructure of the customs of the Parties.
Article 6-15: Dispatch of goods.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authority carries out the immediate clearance of goods from the other Party that enter its territory. For these purposes, as far as possible, automated controls of residence time and selective or random criteria for review, weighing, and physical verification will be used.
2. The Parties will seek the elimination or simplification of documents for internal transit and will allow importers to request the change of customs regime in accordance with the legislation of the importing Party.
3. Each Party shall inform the other Party of the procedures that facilitate and expedite the dispatch of goods, including the requirements for their entry into the territory of the Party, for the reception, unloading and storage in accordance with the import and export regimes of goods, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
4. The dispatch related to the import and export of goods may be carried out through automated verification systems according to selectivity or randomness criteria. The competent authorities of the Parties may establish internally, under the conditions and terms established by them, the modalities of physical or documentary verification and direct dispatch in companies.
5. The Parties shall establish a common format for the import or export of goods. While the date of its entry into force has not been agreed, each Party will continue to use the declaration or petition provided by its legislation.
Article 6-16: Internment of transport units.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authority applies expedited procedures that facilitate the temporary entry of transport units.
2. The procedures referred to in paragraph 1 shall be, to the extent possible, computerized, uniform, and shall contemplate registration in a register of transport units and companies of each Party. Registration in this registry will allow the entry of transport units into the territory of the Parties, subject to the other conditions established by the Customs Coordination Committee. Their period of stay will be 30 days from the date of their entry into the territory of the importing Party.
3. The competent authorities of the Parties shall use a common format for the temporary importation of transport units.
4. For the purposes of this article and article 6-14, the following shall be understood as:
a. transport units: trailers, semi-trailers and special cargo transport equipment; Y
b. special cargo transport equipment: those trailers or semi-trailers exclusively used for the transport of certain goods, such as liquids, gases, refrigerated goods or vehicles.
Article 6-17: Fairs and exhibitions.
The Parties will provide facilities in all customs procedures and services for holding fairs, exhibitions or other events of a similar nature.
Article 6-18: Samples or samples.
Each Party will grant facilities for the entry into its territory of samples or samples and will prepare instructions for samples or samples in which it will include the procedure and the commercial, banking or customs documentation necessary to identify the samples or samples subject to importation.
Article 6-19: Passenger baggage.
Each Party shall simplify customs procedures and formalities, in accordance with its legislation, for the entry into its territory of passenger goods and baggage.
Article 6-20: A Use of electronic information systems.
1. Each Party, taking into account its possibilities, will implement systems for the electronic transmission of information for customs management.
2. Each Party shall establish rules for the operation of electronic information transmission systems that include:
a. use of user codes and access codes;
b. probative value of data and records;
c. confidentiality of information;
d. responsibility of the officials who operate the system and of the users; Y
and. the information storage system.
Article 6-21 : Exchange of information.
The Parties shall exchange, through their competent authorities, information and experience, to the extent of their possibilities, on:
a. customs classification and valuation;
b. rules of origin;
c. documents and requirements for import and export;
d. import and export statistics, in terms of the legislation of each Party;
and. goods subject to non-tariff measures; Y
F. customs regimes and procedures.
Article 6-22: Customs Coordination Committee.
The Parties establish a Customs Coordination Committee made up of the representative of each Party as established in the annex to this article, or the persons designated by them. The Committee shall be in charge of the development, application and administration of this section.
Article 6-23: Functions of the Customs Coordination Committee.
1. The Customs Coordination Committee will have the following functions:
a. propose uniform guidelines for the improvement of customs procedures;
b. propose uniform formats for official customs documents;
c. seek the establishment of mechanisms that allow the exchange of information and experiences on the application of customs procedures;
d. inform the Commission of any customs procedure that is incompatible with the provisions of this section; Y
and. report annually to the Commission on its activities.
2. The Committee will meet at least once a year, and at the request of any Party, within 30 days following the date of the request.
Annex to article 6-02
The Parties shall establish, no later than January 1 , 1995, a common format for the "certificate of origin" and the "declaration of origin", which may be modified by agreement of the Parties.
Annex to article 6-22
For purposes of Article 6-22, the representative of the Parties is:
a. in the case of Costa Rica, the Director General of Customs or his successor; Y
b. in the case of Mexico, the General Customs Administrator or his successor.
 
Chapter VII
Safeguard measures
Article 7-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
competent authority: the competent authority as provided in the annex to this article;
direct competitor good: that which, not being identical or similar to the one being compared, is essentially equivalent for commercial purposes, because it is dedicated to the same use and is interchangeable with it;
identical good: that which coincides in all its characteristics with the good being compared;
Similar good: that which, although it does not coincide in all its characteristics with the good that is being compared, presents some identical ones, especially in its nature, use, function and quality;
Serious prejudice: a general and significant impairment of a domestic industry;
domestic industry: the producer or producers of identical, similar or directly competitive goods that operate within the territory of a Party and constitute a significant proportion of the total domestic production of those goods. This significant proportion may not be less than 35%.
Article 7-02: General provisions.
The Parties may apply to imports of goods carried out in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program safeguard measures whose application will be based on clear, strict criteria and with a defined temporality. The Parties may adopt safeguard measures of a bilateral or global nature.
Article 7-03: Bilateral measures.
1. The Parties may adopt and apply bilateral measures up to 24 months after the customs duty for the good in question under the Tariff Elimination Program reaches zero, if the import volume of one or several goods benefited by the Program of Tariff Reduction increases at a rate and under such conditions that it causes serious damage to the national production of identical, similar or direct competitive goods.
2. Bilateral measures may only be applied when they are strictly necessary to offset the serious injury caused by the imports referred to in paragraph 1.
3. The bilateral measures will be temporary and of a tariff type. The customs duty that is determined in no case may exceed the lesser of:
a. the customs tariff in force against third countries for that good on the date of adoption of the bilateral measure; Y
b. the customs duty corresponding to the good the day before the entry into force of the Tariff Reduction Program.
4. The measures may be adopted for a single occasion and applied for a period of up to one year and may be extended for a single time and for up to an equal and consecutive period.
5. Upon concluding the application of the bilateral measure, the tariff rate that will apply to the good in question will be the one that corresponds to it on that date according to the Tariff Elimination Program.
6. The Party that decides to initiate a procedure that could result in the adoption of a bilateral measure, will notify the other Party in writing and request consultations in accordance with the provisions of Article 7-05.
7. The Party that intends to apply a bilateral measure shall grant the affected Party mutually agreed compensation, which shall consist of additional tariff concessions whose effects on the trade of the exporting Party are equivalent to the impact of the measure. If the Parties fail to agree on compensation, the Party that intends to apply the bilateral measure will be empowered to apply it and the Party affected by that measure may suspend tariff concessions that have trade effects equivalent to those of the measure adopted.
8. The compensation referred to in paragraph 7 will be determined at the stage of consultations prior to the application of bilateral measures.
Article 7-04: Global measures.
1. The Parties retain their rights and obligations to apply safeguard measures in accordance with Article XIX of the GATT.
2. When a Party decides to adopt a safeguard measure in accordance with Article XIX of the GATT, it may only apply it to the other Party when imports from that Party, considered individually, represent a substantial part of total imports and contribute significantly to serious prejudice to the importing Party. For this determination, the following criteria will be taken into account, among others:
a. it will be considered that the originating imports of the other Party are substantial, if they are included within the imports of the main supplying countries, of the good subject to the procedure whose exports represent 80% of the total imports of that good in the importing Party;
b. imports originating in a Party shall not normally be considered to be a significant contributor to serious injury if their growth rate during the period in which the injurious increase of such imports occurred is substantially less than the growth rate of imports from all sources during the same period;
c. Changes in the Party's share in total imports and their volume will also be taken into account for the determination of significant participation in serious damage.
3. In no case may the importing Party apply the measures set forth in paragraph 2 without prior written communication to the other Party and without prior consultations. For this purpose, all notification and procedural requirements set forth in this chapter shall be met.
4. The Party that intends to apply a global measure grant to the affected Party mutually agreed compensation, in the form of concessions that have commercial effects equivalent to the impact of that measure. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation, the Party proposing to apply the global measure will be empowered to apply it, and the affected Party may impose measures that have trade effects equivalent to those of the adopted measure.
5. The compensation referred to in article 7-03 will be determined at the stage of consultations prior to the application of global measures.
Article 7-05: Procedure.
1. Each Party shall establish clear and strict procedures for the adoption and application of safeguard measures, in accordance with this Chapter.
2. To determine the origin of the application of a safeguard measure, the competent authority of the importing Party will carry out the pertinent investigation.
3. The Party that decides to initiate an investigation to adopt safeguard measures will publish the initiation of the same in the corresponding official dissemination bodies and will notify the exporting Party in writing the day after the publication.
4. For the purposes of determining serious prejudice, the competent authorities will evaluate all the factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that are related to the affected industry, in particular the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the good in question. , in absolute and relative terms, the part of the domestic market absorbed by the increase in imports, changes in the level of sales, domestic prices, production, productivity, utilization of installed capacity, market share, profits and losses, and employment.
5. To determine the origin of the safeguard measures, a direct causal relationship will also be demonstrated between the increase in imports of the good in question and the serious damage to the domestic industry.
6. If there are factors other than the increase in imports from the other Party that simultaneously harm the domestic industry, the damage caused by those factors cannot be attributed to the aforementioned imports.
7. If as a result of this investigation the competent authority determines, based on objective evidence, that the assumptions set forth in this chapter are met, the importing Party may initiate consultations with the other Party.
8. The consultation procedure does not oblige the Parties to reveal information that has been provided confidentially, the disclosure of which may impede compliance with the laws of the Party that regulate the matter or harm commercial interests. Notwithstanding this, the importing Party that intends to apply the safeguard measure shall provide the other Party with a non-confidential summary of the confidential information.
9. The period for prior consultations will begin on the day following the receipt by the exporting Party of the notification requesting the initiation of consultations. The prior consultation period will be 45 days unless the Parties agree on a shorter period.
10. The notification referred to in paragraph 9 will be made through the competent national authority and will contain sufficient information to support the application of the measures, including:
a. the names and available addresses of the national producers of identical or similar goods or direct competitors representative of the national production, their participation in the national production of that good and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of that sector;
b. a clear and complete description of the good subject to the procedure, the tariff subheading in which it is classified and the current tariff treatment, as well as the description of the identical, similar or direct competitive good;
c. import data for each of the three most recent calendar years that provide the basis that the good is being imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute terms or relative to domestic production;
d. the data on the total national production of the identical, similar or directly competitive good corresponding to the last three most recent calendar years;
and. data demonstrating serious injury caused by imports to the sector in question in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5;
F. an enumeration and a description of the presumed causes of the injury, and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports of that good in either relative or absolute terms of national production is the cause thereof;
g. where appropriate, the criteria and objective information that demonstrates that the assumptions established in this chapter are met for the application of a global measure to the other Party; Y
h. information on the tariff measures that are intended to be adopted and their duration.
11. The measures provided for in this chapter may only be adopted once the prior consultation period has concluded.
12. During the consultation period, the exporting Party will make all the observations it deems pertinent, particularly regarding the admissibility of the proposed measures.
13. If the importing Party determines that the reasons that gave rise to the application of the safeguard measures subsist, it shall notify the competent authorities of the other Party, at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the validity of those measures, its intention to extend them, and provide information to support this decision, including evidence that the causes that led to the adoption of the safeguard measure persist. The notification, the prior consultations on the extension and the respective compensation will be carried out in the terms provided in this chapter.
Annex toarticle 7-01
For the purposes of this chapter, the competent authority shall mean:
a. in the case of Costa Rica, the Ministry of Foreign Trade or its successor; Y
b. in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development or its successor.
Chapter VIII
Provisions regarding countervailing duties
Article 8-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
investigation: an investigation procedure on unfair international trade practices;
Interested party: the complainant producers, importers, exporters of the goods under investigation, as well as any national or foreign person who has a direct interest in the investigation in question, and includes the government of the Party whose goods are subject to investigation. an investigation on subsidies;
definitive resolution: the resolution of the competent authority that determines whether or not the imposition of definitive countervailing duties is appropriate;
initiation resolution: the resolution of the competent authority that formally declares the initiation of an investigation;
preliminary resolution: the resolution of the competent authority that determines the continuation of an investigation and, where appropriate, whether or not the imposition of provisional countervailing duties is appropriate;
direct export subsidies: those classified as prohibited subsidies in the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures of the GATT of 1994.
Article 8-02: General principle.
The Parties reject all unfair international trade practices and recognize the need to eliminate export subsidies and other internal policies that cause trade distortions.
Article 8-03: Direct export subsidies.
1. Neither Party shall grant new direct subsidies for the export of its goods to the territory of the other Party after the entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Each Party shall eliminate direct export subsidies, existing on a good on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, exported to the territory of the other Party, when the customs duty that the importing Party applies to the exporting Party on that well under the Tariff Elimination Program, reach the level of zero.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, each Party shall eliminate direct subsidies for the export of its goods to the territory of the other Party on January 1 , 1999.
4. Notwithstanding what is established in paragraphs 2 and 3, and only during the period in which direct export subsidies remain in force, the Parties may impose countervailing duties on direct export subsidies when the importing Party of benefited goods With these subsidies, consider that their granting has unfavorable effects on your trade. The procedure against direct export subsidies will be governed in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 8 to 10 of this article.
5. For the purposes of paragraph 4, there may be unfavorable effects on the trade of the importing Party, when the subsidized exports have as a consequence, due to the direct export subsidy received:
a. a significant change in market share unfavorable to the identical or similar good of the importing Party;
b. significant price reduction or suppression of the importing Party's identical or similar good, or loss of sales in the same market; either
c. a significant and sustained increase in the growth rate of subsidized imports.
6. It shall not be concluded that there are unfavorable effects on the trade of the importing Party, if the exporting Party reasonably demonstrates with the information available that the subsidy has not produced the effects referred to in subparagraphs a), b) or c) of paragraph 5.
7. The importing Party shall offer its cooperation, to the extent possible, to the exporting Party for the purpose of providing it with information.
8. Each Party may request in writing that the other Party hold consultations on the provisions of this article. Consultations will be held and concluded within 30 days of receipt of the request.
9. If the Parties do not reach an agreement regarding the direct export subsidy in question and the exporting Party does not suspend its granting within 30 days from the conclusion of the consultations, the importing Party may impose countervailing duties. in the amount necessary to eliminate the unfavorable effect on their trade, which in no case will exceed the total amount of the direct export subsidy granted to those goods.
10. The exporting Party will have a period of 60 days from the start of the consultations to present to the importing Party evidence that the direct export subsidies have not produced the unfavorable effects on the importing Party's trade referred to. refer to literals a), b) or c) of paragraph 5.
Article 8-04: Principles for the application of national legislation.
1. Each Party shall uniformly, impartially and reasonably apply its legislation on unfair international trade practices in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Chapter, with the principles of the GATT, the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VI of the GATT and of the GATT Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
2. The Parties will carry out the investigations through the competent national public agencies, agencies or entities and will not apply, in their bilateral relationship, any international instrument negotiated with third countries that implies asymmetric, non-reciprocal treatment and that deviates from the provisions in this chapter.
Article 8-05: Obligation to terminate an investigation.
1. The importing Party shall terminate an investigation:
a. with respect to an interested party, when its competent authority determines that:
i) the dumping or subsidy margin is de minimis; either
ii) there is insufficient evidence of dumping, subsidy or injury; either
b. when its competent authority determines that the volume of the dumped or subsidized imports, or the damage is negligible.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, it will be considered that:
a. the dumping margin is de minimis when it is less than 2% expressed as a percentage of the export price;
b. the subsidy margin is de minimis when it is less than 1.5% ad valorem; Y
c. the volume of the dumped or subsidized imports or the injury is negligible if the volume of the imports represents less than 1% of the domestic market or if it represents less than 3% of the importing Party's total imports of the identical or similar goods .
3. For the purposes of subparagraph c) of paragraph 2, the domestic market shall be understood as apparent national consumption understood as the sum of national production plus total imports minus exports of identical or similar goods.
Article 8-06: Proof of damage.
Each Party will carry out the damage test as a prerequisite for the imposition of countervailing duties.
Article 8-07 : Accumulation.
For the purposes of establishing the existence of damage, threat of damage or appreciable delay in the creation of a production, the determination of the effects of imports from several countries and that are simultaneously subject to investigation in the importing Party, shall not be accumulated. imports from the other Party when:
a. the dumping or subsidy margin is de minimis, or the volume of imports from the other Party is insignificant, in accordance with the provisions of Article 8-05; either
b. the growth rate of the volume of imports of the other Party under investigation and its share in the domestic market, does not show any indication of a sustained increase during the investigated period or the real probability that it will increase in the immediate future; their sales in the national market are isolated and sporadic and, due to the nature of the investigated good, as well as the specific characteristics of the national market, the presence of these imports does not have any identifiable influence on domestic prices or on the factors that influence prices. the prices of the national good and the conditions of the national industry that produces an identical or similar good.
Article 8-08: Regional damage.
1. For the purposes of this article, an isolated market shall be understood, with respect to the production of a specific good, as the division that, in exceptional circumstances, is made by a Party of its territory into two or more competing markets for the purposes of considering the production of each market as a distinct output if:
a. the producers in that market sell all or nearly all of their production of that good in that market; Y
b. Simultaneously, the producers of the good located elsewhere in the territory do not satisfy the demand in that market to a substantial degree.
2. It may be considered that there is injury even when a significant portion of the total national production is not injured, provided that there is a concentration of dumped or subsidized imports in an isolated market and those imports cause injury to the producers of all or almost all of the production of that market.
3. When the imposition of provisional or final compensatory duties is determined, importers whose affected goods are destined for a market outside the isolated market in question may request the investigating authority not to impose these compensatory duties.
4. Once the request and the evidence that proves the facts described in paragraph 3 have been submitted, importers may choose to pay the compensatory fee or guarantee payment thereof. The investigating authority will decide what is relevant within 130 business days following receipt of the request. At any time, the investigating authority may order any procedure in order to ascertain the veracity of the importers' statements.
5. If in the corresponding resolution the investigating authority confirms the compensatory quota, the guarantees that have been granted will become effective. If in that resolution the compensatory duty was revoked, in favor of the interested importer, the guarantees will be canceled or, where appropriate, the amounts that have been paid will be returned.
6. The resolution of the investigating authority in the terms of paragraph 4 shall be published in the official publication of the importing Party and the interested importers shall be personally notified.
Article 8-09: Publication of resolutions.
The Parties will publish in their official dissemination bodies the resolutions on the matter, those that declare the administrative investigation concluded due to commitments by the foreign exporter or, where appropriate, by the government of the exporting Party, or by holding conciliatory hearings, as well as the resolutions by which the complaints are dismissed or the denouncements of the complainants are accepted.
Article 8-10: Notifications and deadlines.
1. The competent authorities of each Party shall carry out all reasonable actions within their reach to identify and locate those interested in the investigation in order to guarantee the exercise of the right to legitimate defense and shall notify the resolutions in writing directly to the interested parties of whom it is aware, to the government of the other Party, in the case of a subsidy investigation, and to the competent authority of the other Party.
2. The notification of the initiation resolution shall be sent by the most expeditious means of postal mail available to the competent authorities of each Party within a period of five business days following the day of its publication in the official body of dissemination of the Part. The notification will include the following information:
a. deadlines for submitting reports, declarations and other documents;
b. the place where the complaint and other documents presented during the investigation can be inspected; Y
c. the name, address, and telephone number of the office where additional information can be obtained.
3. With the notification referred to in paragraph 2, a copy of the respective publication in the official publication of the Party conducting the investigation shall be sent, as well as a copy of the written complaint and the public version of its annexes.
4. The competent authorities of each Party shall grant the interested parties a minimum response period of 30 business days from the official publication of the initiation of the investigation in order for them to appear to state what is right to them. The same term will be granted for the same effects to the interested parties as of the official publication of the preliminary resolution.
5. The initial, preliminary or final resolutions will contain, when appropriate, at least the following:
a. the name of the applicant or other petitioner;
b. the indication of the imported good subject to investigation and its tariff classification;
c. the elements and evidence used to determine the existence of dumping or subsidy, damage and its causal relationship;
d. the factual and legal considerations that led the investigating authority to initiate an investigation or impose a countervailing duty; Y
and. any legal reasoning, data, fact or circumstance that is recorded in the administrative file, on which the resolution in question is based and motivates.
Article 8-11: Rights and obligations of the interested parties.
The Parties shall ensure that interested parties have the same rights and obligations in an investigation.
Article 8-12: Conciliatory hearings.
In the course of the investigation, any interested party may request the competent authority to hold conciliatory hearings in order to reach a satisfactory solution.
Article 8-13: Preliminary resolution.
1. Within a period of 130 days, but in no case before 45 days, counted from the publication of the initiation resolution, the competent authority will issue a preliminary resolution. The preliminary resolution will determine if it is appropriate to continue with the investigation and, if applicable, the imposition and amount of the provisional countervailing duties.
2. With the exception of confidential information, when the preliminary resolution determines the imposition of countervailing duties, in addition to the corresponding data indicated in paragraph 5 of article 8-10, it will include:
a. the normal value of the good subject to investigation, its export price, the dumping or subsidy margin and its incidence in the export price obtained by the investigating authority; as well as a description of the methodology that was followed to determine them;
b. a description of the damage or threat of damage to the national production and the explanation of the analysis of each one of the factors that have been taken into account; Y
c. where appropriate, the amount of the provisional compensatory quota.
Article 8-14: Retroactive application of countervailing duties.
The retroactive application of countervailing duties shall be subject to the provisions of Article 10 of the Agreement on the Application of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and Article 20 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures of the GATT 1994.
Article 8-15: Clarifications.
1. Once a provisional or definitive compensatory quota has been issued, the interested parties may request the competent authority to decide whether a particular asset is subject to the compensatory quota imposed or to clarify any aspect of the corresponding resolution.
2. In the procedure to determine if an asset is subject to the compensatory duty imposed, the corresponding substantive and procedural provisions set forth in this chapter for an investigation in accordance with the provisions of article 8-04 will be observed.
Article 8-16: Import of parts or components.
The importation of parts or components of goods subject to provisional or final countervailing duties intended for assembly operations in the territory of a Party; the assembly of these parts or components in a third country to export them as finished goods, or the export of goods with relatively minor physical differences with respect to what is subject to provisional or final countervailing duties in order to avoid payment thereof, will cause the importation of these parts, components or goods is subject to the payment of the corresponding compensatory quota.
Article 8-17: Review of quotas.
1. The definitive compensatory quotas may be reviewed by the competent authority, annually at the request of the interested party and at any time ex officio, in the event of a change in circumstances. Likewise, any producer, importer or exporter who, without having participated in the investigation, accredits his legal interest, may request the review of a countervailing duty.
2. The review may have the effect of ratifying, modifying or eliminating the corresponding fees.
3. In the final countervailing duty review procedure, the substantive and procedural provisions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in accordance with the provisions of article 8-04.
Article 8-18: Automatic elimination of definitive countervailing duties.
Definitive countervailing duties will be eliminated automatically when, after five years from their effective date or from the date of the last review, they have not been reviewed in accordance with the provisions of article 8-17.
Article 8-19: Sending copies.
Each interested party will timely send to the other interested parties copies of each of the reports, documents and evidence that it submits to the investigating authority in the course of the investigation, excluding confidential information.
Article 8-20: Information meetings.
1. The investigative authority of the importing Party, upon request of the interested parties, will hold information meetings in order to disclose all pertinent information on the content of the preliminary and final resolutions.
2. Regarding preliminary resolutions, the request referred to in paragraph 1 may be submitted at any time during the investigation. In the case of final resolutions, the request shall be submitted within five days following its publication in the official dissemination body of the Party. In both cases, the competent authority will carry out the information gathering within a period of 15 days from the presentation of the request.
3. In the information meetings referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the interested parties will have the right to review the technical reports, the methodology, the spreadsheets and any other element on which the corresponding resolution has been based, with the exception of of confidential information.
Article 8-21: Public hearings.
1. The competent authority will hold, ex officio or at the request of a party, a public hearing in which the interested parties may appear and question their counterparts regarding the information or evidence that the investigating authority deems appropriate.
2. The competent authority will notify the holding of the public hearing 15 working days in advance.
3. The competent authority will give the interested parties the opportunity to present arguments after the public hearing, even if the period for the presentation of evidence had ended. The allegations will consist of the written presentation of conclusions related to the information and argumentation provided in the investigation.
Article 8-22: Access to confidential information.
Within the constitutional framework of each Party, the independent advisers or lawyers of the parties in the investigation may have access to confidential information of their counterparts for the exclusive purpose of defending their interests, subject to a strict confidentiality commitment, the violation of which will be sanctioned according to to the legislation of each Party.
Article 8-23: Access to non-confidential information.
The competent authority of each Party will give interested parties timely access to the non-confidential information contained in the administrative files of any other investigation, within the term provided by the legislation of each Party, but in no case later than 60 days from of the definitive resolution of these investigations in accordance with the provisions of its internal legal system. If other administrative or judicial appeals have been filed against the final resolution, the Parties will grant such access to non-confidential information in accordance with their domestic legal system.
Article 8-24: Refund of amounts paid in excess.
If a compensatory duty lower than the provisional compensatory duty is determined in a final resolution, the competent authority of the importing Party shall refund the amounts paid in excess.
Article 8-25: Settlement of disputes.
When the final decision of an arbitral tribunal, rendered in accordance with Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement) declares that the application of a countervailing duty by a Party is incompatible with any provision of this chapter, the importing Party shall cease to apply the countervailing duty. in question to the respective assets of the complaining Party.
Chapter IX
General principles on trade in services
Article 9-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
company: any legal person, constituted or organized under the laws of the Party, whether or not for profit and privately or governmental property, as well as other organizations or economic units that are constituted or, in any case, duly organized under that legislation, such as branches, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures or other associations;
enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party and having its domicile in the territory of that Party; and a branch located in the territory of a Party that carries out business activities therein;
federal, central or state governments: which includes non-governmental organizations that exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated by those governments;
measure: any measure adopted by a Party whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, administrative decision or provision, requirement or authorized practice, or in any form;
service provider of a Party: a person of the Party who intends to provide or provides a service;
quantitative restrictions: a non-discriminatory measure that imposes limitations on:
a. the number of service providers, whether through a quota, monopoly or an economic necessity test, or by any other quantitative means; either
b. the operations of any service provider, whether through a quota, monopoly or an economic necessity test, or by any other quantitative means;
specialized air services: aerial mapping; aerial surveying; aerial photography; forest fire control; Firefighting; aerial advertising; gliders towing; skydiving services; aerial services for construction; air transport of logs; scenic flights; training flights; aerial inspection and surveillance and aerial spraying;
professional services: services that require higher specialized university education for their provision and the exercise of which is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft.
Article 9-02: Scope of application.
1. This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains on trade in services carried out by service providers of the other Party, including those relating to:
a. the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a service;
b. the purchase, use or payment of a service;
c. access to, and use of, distribution and transportation systems in connection with the provision of a service;
d. access to, and use of, public telecommunications networks and services;
and. the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party;
F. the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, trade in services is defined as the supply of a service:
a. from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;
b. in the territory of a Party to a consumer of another Party;
c. through the presence of companies providing services of one Party in the territory of another Party;
d. by natural persons of a Party in the territory of another Party.
3. This chapter does not apply to:
a. air services, including national and international air transport, with and without a fixed itinerary, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:
i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;
ii) specialized air services; Y
iii) computerized reservation systems;
b. financial services;
c. subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance; neither
d. government services or functions such as, but not limited to, law enforcement, rehabilitation services, income security or insurance, social security or insurance, social welfare, public education, public training, health and care for children.
4. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a. impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of another Party who seeks to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor to confer any right on that national, with respect to that income or employment; neither
b. impose any obligation or grant any right to a Party, with respect to government purchases made by a Party or a State enterprise.
5. For purposes of this Chapter, "measures that a Party adopts or maintains" shall mean measures adopted or maintained by:
a. the federal, central and state governments, if applicable; Y
b. non-governmental organizations that exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated to them by those governments.
6. Regarding the non-governmental organizations mentioned in subparagraph b) of paragraph 5 that exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated to them in accordance with the legislation of each Party, the federal or central government will take the measures reasonable within their power to bring such agencies into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
7. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the measures related to the services contemplated in its annexes only to the extent and terms stipulated in those annexes.
Article 9-03: Most favored nation treatment.
1. Each Party shall accord to services and service providers of another Party treatment no less favorable than that accorded, in similar circumstances, to services and service providers of any other country.
2. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be interpreted in the sense of preventing a Party from conferring advantages to adjacent countries, in order to facilitate exchanges, limited to contiguous border areas, of services that are produced or consumed locally.
Article 9-04: National treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant to the services and service providers of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted in similar circumstances to its own services or service providers.
2. Treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1 means, with respect to a state, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded by that state, in like circumstances, to service providers of the Party to which that belong.
Article 9-05: Local presence.
No Party shall require a service provider of another Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of business, or to reside in its territory, as a condition of providing a service.
Article 9-06: Consolidation of measures.
1. No Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of its existing measures with respect to Articles 9-03 to 9-05. Any amendment to any of these measures will not decrease the degree of compliance of the measure as it was in effect immediately prior to the amendment.
2. The Parties, within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of this Agreement or, if that occurs later, the date of entry into force of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), shall draw up a list of federal and central measures that do not conform to articles 9-03 to 9-05.
3. For state measures that do not conform to articles 9-03 to 9-05, the term to prepare the list will be no more than two years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
4. The Parties are not required to list municipal measures.
Article 9-07: Quantitative restrictions.
1. Each Party will have one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement to prepare a list of quantitative restrictions that, not including municipal governments, it maintains at the federal or central and state levels.
2. Periodically, at least once every two years, the Parties shall endeavor to negotiate to liberalize or eliminate:
a. existing quantitative restrictions that you maintain:
i) a Party at the federal or central level, according to the list referred to in paragraph 1; either
ii) a state as indicated by a Party on the list referred to in paragraph 1; Y
b. quantitative restrictions that a Party has adopted after the entry into force of this Agreement.
3. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any quantitative restrictions, other than those at the municipal government level, that it adopts after the entry into force of this Agreement, and shall indicate the restriction in the list referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 9-08 : Future liberalization.
Through future negotiations to be convened by the Commission, the Parties will deepen the liberalization achieved in the different service sectors, with a view to achieving the elimination of the remaining restrictions listed in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 9-06.
Article 9-09 : Liberalization of non-discriminatory measures.
Each Party shall prepare a list of its commitments to liberalize quantitative restrictions, requirements for the granting of authorizations, permits or licenses and other non-discriminatory measures.
Article 9-10: Procedures.
The Parties shall establish procedures for:
a. for a Party to notify another Party and include in its relevant lists:
i) federal or central measures, in accordance with paragraph 2 of article 9-06;
ii) State measures, in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 9-06;
iii) non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions, in accordance with Article 9-07;
iv) the modifications to the measures referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of article 9-06; Y
v) the measures according to article 9-09;
b. holding future negotiations aimed at perfecting the global liberalization of services between the Parties, in accordance with Article 9-08.
Article 9-11: Disclosure of confidential information.
Nothing in this chapter shall impose an obligation on any Party to provide confidential information the disclosure of which would constitute an obstacle to compliance with laws or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or could harm the legitimate business interests of public or private companies.
Article 9-12: Granting of permits, authorizations and licenses.
In order to ensure that any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the requirements and procedures for the granting of permits, authorizations and licenses to nationals of another Party does not constitute an unnecessary barrier to trade, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that those measures:
a. are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as the capacity and aptitude to provide a service;
b. are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of a service; Y
c. do not constitute a disguised restriction on the cross-border provision of a service.
Article 9-13: Recognition of titles and granting of professional licences.
1. When a Party recognizes or revalidates, unilaterally or by agreement with another country, titles obtained in the territory of another Party or of any country that is not a Party:
a. nothing in Article 9-03 shall be construed to require that Party to recognize or revalidate degrees obtained in the territory of that other Party; Y
b. the Party will provide the other Party with an adequate opportunity to demonstrate that the titles obtained in the territory of that other Party will also be recognized or revalidated, or to negotiate or celebrate an arrangement or agreement that has equivalent effects.
2. Each Party, within a period of two years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, shall eliminate any requirement of nationality or permanent residence that it maintains for the recognition of titles and the granting of licenses for the professional practice to professional service providers of another Party. Where a Party fails to comply with this obligation with respect to a particular sector, the other Party may, in the same sector and for as long as the non-compliant Party maintains its requirement, maintain, as the sole remedy, an equivalent requirement indicated in the list referred to in Article 9-06 or reinstate by notification to the non-compliant Party:
a. any of those requirements at the federal or central level that it has eliminated in accordance with this article; either
b. any such state-level requirements that would have been in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. The annex to this article establishes procedures for the recognition of titles and granting of licenses that govern professional service providers.
Article 9-14: Commercial practices.
1. The Parties recognize that certain commercial practices of service providers, other than those referred to in subparagraph c) of paragraph 1 of Article 9-19, may limit competition and, therefore, restrict trade in services.
2. Each Party, at the request of another Party, shall enter into consultations with a view to eliminating the practices referred to in paragraph 1. The Party to which the request is made shall consider it fully and with understanding and shall cooperate in facilitating the non-confidential information that is available to the public and that is related to the matter in question. That Party shall also provide other information at its disposal, subject to its law and subject to the conclusion of a satisfactory agreement on the safeguarding of the confidentiality of such information by the requesting Party.
Article 9-15: Denial of benefits.
Each Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of another Party, prior notification and consultation, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out significant business activities in the territory of that Party. another Party, and which, in accordance with the laws of each Party, is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party.
Article 9-16: Exceptions.
Provided that the measures listed below are not applied in a way that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where similar conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade in services, nothing in this chapter shall be construed in the sense of preventing a Party from adopting or applying measures:
a. necessary to protect morality and public order;
b. necessary to protect the life and health of people, animals or to preserve plant species in its territory, or for the implementation of rules and regulations of international agreements, to which the Party is a party for the conservation of the environment;
c. imposed for the protection of national or artistic, historical or archaeological treasures;
d. necessary for fiduciary reasons; either
and. necessary to ensure compliance with laws or regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those for the prevention of deceptive or fraudulent practices.
Article 9-17: Exceptions for security reasons.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a. impose an obligation on a Party to provide information the disclosure of which, in its opinion, would be contrary to its essential security interests;
b. prevent a Party from adopting any measure it deems necessary for the protection of its essential security interests; either
c. prevent a Party from adopting measures in fulfillment of its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.
Article 9-18: Technical cooperation.
The Parties will establish, within a period of 24 months after the entry into force of this Agreement, a system to provide service providers with information regarding their markets in relation to:
a. the commercial and technical aspects of the provision of services;
b. the possibility of obtaining technology in terms of services; Y
c. all those aspects that the Commission identifies, in terms of services.
Article 9-19: Future jobs.
1. The Commission will determine the procedures for establishing the necessary disciplines related to:
a. urgent safeguard measures;
b. trade distorting subsidies; Y
c. monopoly service providers.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the work of the relevant international organizations will be taken into account.
Article 9-20: Relationship with multilateral agreements on services.
1. The Parties undertake to apply to each other the provisions contained in the multilateral agreements on services to which the Parties are party.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, in the event of any inconsistency between those agreements and this Agreement, the Agreement shall prevail over the former.
Annex toarticle 9-13
Professional services
1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this annex, the following shall be understood as:
specialized higher education: all academic training that has culminated in obtaining a degree awarded by an educational center, at the university or professional technical level;
professional exercise: the provision of any service or act of each profession that requires government authorization;
professional services: services that require specialized higher education for their provision and the exercise of which is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft.
2. Objective.
The purpose of this annex is to establish the rules to be observed by the Parties to reduce and gradually eliminate, in their territory, the barriers to the provision of professional services.
3. Coverage.
This annex will apply to all measures related to the criteria for the mutual recognition or revalidation of titles and the granting of licenses for professional practice.
4. Development of professional standards and criteria.
a. The Parties acknowledge that the process of mutual recognition or revalidation of titles and granting of licenses for professional practice in their territory will be based on raising the quality of professional services through the establishment of standards and criteria for recognition or revalidation. titling and licensing, while protecting consumers and safeguarding the public interest.
b. The Parties shall encourage relevant bodies, inter alia, competent government agencies and professional associations and colleges to:
i) develop such criteria and standards; Y
ii) formulate and present recommendations on the mutual recognition or revalidation of titles and granting of licenses for the professional practice of the professional service providers of the Parties.
c. The elaboration of criteria and norms referred to in literals a) and b) may consider the following elements: education, exams, experience, conduct and ethics, professional development and updating, renewal or updating of certificates and licenses, field of action, knowledge local law and consumer protection, as well as any other that the relevant agencies deem necessary.
d. In order to put into practice the provisions of subparagraphs a) to c), the Parties undertake to provide, within a period not exceeding 12 months from the entry into force of this Agreement, the detailed and necessary information for mutual recognition or revalidation of titles and granting of licenses for professional practice, including that corresponding to: academic courses, guides and study materials, rights, exam dates, hours, locations, affiliation with societies and/or professional associations. This information includes federal, central, state or provincial legislation, administrative directives and measures of general application and those developed by governmental and non-governmental bodies.
5. Review.
a. Based on the review of the recommendations received by the Parties and if they are consistent with the provisions of the Agreement, each Party will encourage the competent authority to adopt those recommendations.
b. The Parties shall periodically review, at least once every three years, the application of the provisions of this Annex.
Chapter X
Temporary entry of business persons
Article 10-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
labor certification: the procedure carried out by the competent administrative authority aimed at determining whether a foreign individual from a Party who intends to temporarily enter the territory of another Party displaces national labor in the same labor branch or significantly harms the labor conditions of the same ;
temporary entry: the entry of a business person of a Party into the territory of another Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;
immigration measure: any measure, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision or administrative provision or requirement, in immigration matters;
national: as defined in the annex to this article for the Parties stipulated therein;
business person: the national of a Party who participates in the trade of goods or provision of services, or in investment activities;
recurring practice: a practice carried out by the migration authorities of a Party on a repetitive basis during a representative period prior to and immediately after its execution;
in force: as defined in the annex to this article for the Parties stipulated therein.
Article 10-02: General principles.
The provisions of this chapter reflect the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity, and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose. Likewise, they reflect the need to guarantee the security of the borders and to protect the work of their nationals and permanent employment in their respective territories.
Article 10-03: General obligations.
1. Each Party shall apply the measures related to this Chapter in accordance with Article 10-02, in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or damage in trade in goods and services, or in investment activities included in this Treaty.
2. The Parties shall endeavor to develop and adopt common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the application of this Chapter.
3. The Parties may modify their immigration measures, as long as these modifications do not alter the commitments made in this chapter.
Article 10-04: Temporary entry authorization.
1. In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including those contained in the annex to this article, each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of business persons who comply with the other applicable measures, related to public health and safety, as well as with the relating to national security.
2. Each Party may deny the issuance of a migration document that authorizes employment to a business person, when their temporary entry adversely affects:
a. the solution of any labor conflict that exists in the place where they are employed or will be employed; either
b. the employment of any person involved in that conflict.
3. When a Party denies the issuance of an immigration document authorizing employment, in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party:
a. inform the affected business person in writing of the reasons for the refusal; Y
b. promptly notify the Party whose national is refused entry in writing of the reasons for the refusal.
4. Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees caused by the processing of applications for temporary entry to the approximate cost of the processing services provided.
5. The temporary entry of a business person does not authorize professional practice.
Article 10-05: Availability of information.
1. In addition to the provisions of Article 15-02 (Publication), each Party:
a. provide another Party with the information that allows it to know the measures related to this Chapter; Y
b. no later than 12 months after the date of entry into force of the Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its territory and in that of another Party, a consolidated document explaining the requirements for temporary entry under to this chapter, so that they can be known by business persons of another Party.
2. Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to another Party, in accordance with its legislation, information regarding the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this Chapter, to persons of the other Party to whom such authorizations have been issued. immigration documentation.
Article 10-06: Committee on Temporary Entry.
1. The Parties establish a Committee on Temporary Entry, composed of representatives of the Parties, including immigration officials.
2. The Committee will meet at least once every 18 months to review:
a. the application and administration of this chapter;
b. the elaboration of measures that further facilitate the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity; Y
c. proposals for modifications or additions to this chapter.
Article 10-07: Settlement of disputes.
1. The Parties may not initiate the procedures provided for in article 17-06 (Intervention of the Commission, good offices, conciliation and mediation), with respect to a refusal to authorize temporary entry in accordance with this chapter, nor with respect to any particular case. included in article 10-03, except that:
a. the matter refers to a recurring practice; Y
b. the affected person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him or her with respect to that particular matter.
2. The remedies mentioned in subparagraph b) of paragraph 1 will be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution in 12 months from the start of the administrative procedure and the resolution has not been delayed for reasons attributable to the person business affected.
Article 10-08: Relationship with other chapters.
Except as provided in this chapter and in chapters I (Initial provisions), II (General definitions), XV (Publication, notification and guarantees of hearing and legality), XVII (Dispute resolution) and XIX (Final provisions), no provision of this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures.
Annex toArticle 10-01
Specific Definitions by Party
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:


business activity: those legitimate activities of a commercial nature created and operated in order to obtain profits in the market. It does not include the possibility of obtaining employment, or salary or remuneration from a Costa Rican or Mexican source;
national: with respect to Mexico, a national or citizen, in accordance with the current provisions of articles 30 and 34 of the Political Constitution of the United Mexican States; with respect to Costa Rica, a national or citizen, in accordance with the current provisions of articles 13 to 18 of its Political Constitution; Y
in force: the binding quality of the legislative precepts of the Parties at the time of entry into force of this Agreement.
Annex to the article10-04
Temporary entry of business persons
Section A - Business Visitors
1. Each Party will authorize the temporary entry of the business person who, at the prior request of a company registered in the Bilateral Register of the Parties for section A, intends to carry out an activity expressly mentioned in appendix A.1, without requiring employment authorization, provided that, in addition to complying with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry, it exhibits:
a. proof of nationality of a Party;
b. documentation proving the prior request of a company established in the territory of a Party;
c. documentation proving that you will undertake those activities and stating the purpose of your entry; Y
d. proof of the international character of the proposed business activity and that the person does not intend to enter the local labor market.
2. Each Party shall stipulate that a business person can meet the requirements indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 1, when he demonstrates:
a. that the main source of remuneration for that activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; Y
b. that the principal place of business and where most of the profits are obtained are outside this territory.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, each Party will normally accept a declaration as to the principal place of business and the place of obtaining profits. When a Party requires additional verification, a letter from the employer registered in the Bilateral Register of Companies stating these circumstances will normally be considered sufficient proof.
4. Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of a business person who intends to carry out a business activity other than those indicated in Appendix A.1, in terms no less favorable than those provided for in the current provisions of the measures indicated in Appendix A.3, provided that the business person also complies with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.
5. Neither Party may:
a. require as a condition to authorize temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1, prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests, or other procedures of similar effect; Y
b. impose or maintain any numerical restriction on temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1 or 4.
6. Notwithstanding paragraph 5, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain a visa or equivalent document prior to entry. Before imposing the visa requirement, the Party shall consult with the Party whose persons would be affected, in order to avoid the application of the requirement. When a visa requirement exists in a Party and at the request of the Party whose business persons are subject to it, they shall consult with each other with a view to eliminating it.
Section B - Investors
1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and provide the corresponding documentation to the business person who intends to establish, develop, manage or provide key technical advice or services, in supervisory, executive functions or those involving essential skills, to carry out or manage an investment in which the person or their company has committed, or is in the process of committing, a significant amount of capital, provided that the person also complies with the immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.
2. Neither Party may:
a. require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither
b. impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, a Party may examine, at a peremptory time, the investment proposal of a business person to assess whether the investment complies with the applicable legal provisions.
4. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document.
Section C - Personnel transfers within a company
1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to the business person employed by a company listed in the Bilateral Register of Parties for section C, who intends to perform managerial, executive or specialized knowledge functions in that company. or in one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, provided that that person and that company comply with the current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. Each Party may require that the person have been employed by the company continuously for one year within the three years immediately preceding the filing date of the application.
2. Neither Party may:
a. require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither
b. impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document. Before imposing the visa requirement, the Party shall consult with the other Party whose business persons would be affected, in order to avoid applying the requirement. When a visa requirement exists in a Party and at the request of the Party whose business persons are subject to it, they shall consult with each other with a view to eliminating it.
Definitions.
For the purposes of this annex, the following shall be understood as:
employment authorization: for the purposes of paragraph 1 of section A, the written permission granted by the competent administrative authority of a Party to an individual national of another Party in which he is authorized to obtain employment in salaried activities in the territory of the Authorizing Party;
business-essential expertise: for the purposes of paragraph 1 of section C, that an individual has business-essential expertise if he or she has special knowledge of the good or service that the business provides in international markets, or has a high degree of knowledge about the processes and procedures of the company;
be in the process of committing a significant amount of capital: for the purposes of paragraph 1 of section B, that a person or a company is in the process of committing a significant amount of capital where the funds are irrevocably directed towards the investment in such a way that it is irreversible;
supervisory functions: for the purposes of paragraph 1 of section B, those functions in which the individual has supervisory responsibilities for a significant part of the operations of a company and does not involve the supervision of low-level employees;
executive functions: for the purposes of paragraphs 1 of sections B and C, those assigned functions within an organization, under which the individual essentially has the following responsibilities:
a. direct the administration of the organization or a relevant component or function thereof;
b. establish the policies and objectives of the organization, component or function;
c. exercise wide latitude in making decisions that are at your discretion; Y
d. receive general supervision or direction only from the highest level executives, the Board of Directors or the Council of Administration of the organization or the shareholders of the same;
managerial functions: for the purposes of paragraph 1 of section C, those assigned functions within an organization, under which the individual has essentially the following responsibilities:
a. manage the organization or an essential function within it;
b. supervising and controlling the work of other professional employees, supervisors or administrators;
c. have the authority to hire and fire or recommend these actions, as well as others, with respect to the management of the personnel that is directly supervised by the individual and perform functions at a higher level within the organizational hierarchy or with respect to the function under their charge; Y
d. perform actions at their discretion with respect to the daily operation of the function over which the individual has authority;
functions involving essential skills: for the purposes of paragraph 1 of section B, that an individual performs functions involving essential skills when they are an individual with specialized knowledge or own skills that are essential to the effective operation of the business. The individual must be employed in a position of high responsibility that requires independent judgment, creativity, training, or supervision of other employees and must not be employed to perform routine work that can be performed by skilled labor. He must have a high degree of preparation and experience in the operation of the company.
Appendix A.1
Business Visitors
I. Definitions.
For the purposes of this appendix, it shall be understood as:
tourist bus operator: the natural person required for the operation of the vehicle during the tourist trip, including relief personnel who accompany or join him later;
transport operator: the natural person, who is not a tour bus operator, required for the operation of the vehicle during the trip, including relief personnel who accompany or join him later;
territory of another Party: the territory of a Party other than that of the Party from which temporary entry is sought.
II. Activities.
Research and design.
- technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out research independently or for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
Cultivation, manufacturing and production.
- purchasing and production personnel, at the managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
Commercialization.
- researchers who carry out research or analysis, including market analysis, independently or for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
- Trade fair and promotional staff attending trade conventions.
Sales.
- buyers who make acquisitions for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
Distribution.
- Customs brokers who provide advisory services regarding facilitating the import or export of goods.
- transport operators that carry out operations to transport goods or passengers to the territory of a Party from the territory of another Party, or carry out loading and unloading operations of goods or passengers from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party, without carrying out loading or unloading operations, in the territory of the Party to which entry is requested, of goods that are in that territory or of passengers boarding in it.
Post-sale services.
- installation, repair, maintenance and supervisory personnel who have the specialized technical knowledge essential to fulfill the seller's contractual obligation and who provide services, or train workers to provide such services, pursuant to a warranty or other contract of services related to the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company located outside the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, during the term of the warranty or service contract.
General services.
- managerial and supervisory personnel involved in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
- public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions.
- tourism personnel (tour and travel agents, tour guides or tour operators) attending or participating in conventions.
- translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company located in the territory of the other Party.
- tour bus operators entering the territory of a Party:
a. with a group of passengers on a tour bus trip that started in the territory of another Party and is going to return to it;
b. to pick up a group of passengers on a tour bus tour that will terminate and take place for the most part in the territory of another Party; either
c. with a group of passengers on a tourist bus whose destination is in the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, and that returns without passengers or with the group to transport it to the territory of another Party.
Appendix A.3
Immigration measures in force
1. In the case of Costa Rica:
- General Law on Migration and Immigration, 1986, with its reforms.
- Regulation of the General Law of Migration and Aliens, 1989, with its reforms.
2. In the case of Mexico:
- General Population Law, 1974, with its amendments and its Regulations.
Chapter XI
Standardization measures
Article 11-01: Definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms presented in the sixth edition of ISO/IEC Guide 2: 1991, "General Terms and their Definitions in Relation to Standardization and Related Activities", shall have the same meaning when used in this chapter. , unless defined differently here.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
risk assessment: assess the potential damage to human, animal and plant health and safety or the environment could be caused by any good or service that is traded between the Parties;
make compatible: bring to the same level, different standardization measures but with the same scope, approved by different standardization bodies, so that they are identical, equivalent, or have the effect of allowing goods and services to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose. same purpose, so that goods and services are allowed to be traded between the Parties;
certification mark of conformity: a protected mark applied or issued under the rules of a certification system that indicates, with an appropriate level of confidence, that a good or process conforms to, or complies with, a specified technical regulation or standard or another specific normative document;
standardization measures: standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment processes;
standard: the document approved by a recognized institution, which provides for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or related processes and production methods, or for related services or methods of operation, and the observance of which is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a related good, service, process or production method;
international standard: a standardization measure, or other guide or recommendation, adopted by an international standardization body and made available to the public;
legitimate objectives: which include the guarantee of safety and the protection of human, animal and plant life and health, the environment and the prevention of practices that may mislead consumers, including matters related to the identification of goods or services, considering, among other aspects, when appropriate, fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure type or scientific justification;
standardization body: a body whose standardization activities are recognized by the governments of the Parties;
international standardization body: a standardization body, open to the participation of the relevant bodies of at least the signatory countries of the GATT Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Codex Alimentarius Commission , the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML), or any other body designated by the Parties;
reasonable period: that period of time determined by the competent institution of that Party for the interested parties to make the necessary changes or take the necessary measures in light of the existing circumstances;
conformity assessment procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine that the relevant requirements established by technical regulations or standards are met, including sampling, testing, inspection, evaluation, verification, assurance of conformity, accreditation, certification, registration or approval, used for those purposes, but does not mean an approval process;
approval process: the registration, notification or any other mandatory administrative process to obtain a permit in order for a good or service to be commercialized or used for defined purposes or according to established conditions;
administrative refusal: actions taken by a public administration body of the importing Party, in the exercise of its powers, to prevent a shipment from entering its territory or the provision of services, for technical reasons;
technical regulation: a document that establishes the characteristics of the goods, services or their processes and related production methods, including the applicable administrative provisions, and compliance with which is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging or labeling requirements applicable to a related good, service, process or production method; Y
service: which does not include:
a. air services, including national and international air transport, with and without a fixed itinerary, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:
i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;
ii) specialized air services; Y
iii) computerized reservation systems;
b. financial services;
c. subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance; neither
d. government services or functions such as, but not limited to, law enforcement, rehabilitation services, income security or insurance, social security or insurance, social welfare, public education, training public health and care for children.
Article 11-02: Scope of application.
The provisions of this chapter apply to the standardization, metrology and measures related to all of them of each Party that may affect, directly or indirectly, reciprocal trade in goods and services between them. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures found in section B of chapter IV (Phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures).
Article 11-03: Scope of obligations.
Each Party shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter and shall adopt the necessary measures to guarantee its compliance by any competent authority regardless of whether or not it is within the scope of the central or federal government, as well as the measures in that regard that are within its reach with respect to non-governmental standardization bodies duly accredited in its territory.
Article 11-04: Reaffirmation of international rights and obligations.
The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations related to standardization measures emanating from GATT and all other international treaties and laws related to safety, protection of human, animal and plant life, protection of their environment and practices that avoid mislead consumers, of which the two Parties are parties.
Article 11-05: Obligations and basic rights.
1. Neither Party shall develop, adopt, maintain or apply any standardization measure that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to reciprocal trade. To that end, each Party shall ensure that its standardization measures do not restrict trade more than is required to achieve its legitimate objectives in its territory, taking into account the risks that failure to achieve them would create.
2. Standardization measures of a Party shall not be considered to create unnecessary obstacles to trade when:
a. the demonstrable purpose of those measures is to achieve the legitimate objectives of that Party; Y
b. function in such a way that they do not exclude the goods and services of the other Party that fulfill their legitimate objectives.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each Party may set the level of protection it deems appropriate in the pursuit of its legitimate objectives.
4. Pursuant to paragraph 3, each Party may develop, apply and maintain the standardization measures that allow guaranteeing its level of protection, as well as the measures that guarantee the application and compliance with those measures, including the relevant approval procedures.
5. Each Party shall grant to goods and services originating from the territory of the other Party, national treatment and no less favorable than that granted to similar goods and services originating from any other country.
Article 11-06: Use of international standards.
1. Each Party shall use, as a basis for its own standardization measures, current international standards, or those of imminent adoption, or their relevant elements, except when those standards do not constitute an effective or adequate means to achieve its legitimate objectives; among others, due to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Standardization measures of a Party that conform to an international standard shall be presumed to be consistent with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 5 of Article 11-05.
3. In the pursuit of its legitimate objectives, each Party may adopt, maintain or apply any standardization measure that achieves a higher level of protection than would have been obtained if the measure were based on an international standard due, inter alia, to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature.
Article 11-07: Compatibility and equivalence.
1. The Parties recognize the central role that standardization measures play in strengthening, promoting and protecting legitimate objectives, and will therefore work together, in accordance with this Chapter.
2. The Parties will make their respective technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures compatible, to the greatest extent possible, without reducing the level of protection of their legitimate objectives without prejudice to the rights conferred by this chapter on a Party and taking into account account international standardization activities or parameters.
3. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall adopt reasonable measures within its power to promote the compatibility of the specific standardization measures that exist in its territory, with the standardization measures that exist in the territory of the other Party, taking into account account international standardization activities or parameters.
4. The importing Party shall accept as equivalent to its own technical regulation the one adopted or maintained by the exporting Party when the latter proves to the satisfaction of the former that its technical regulation adequately meets the legitimate objectives of the importing Party. For the purposes of this accreditation, the importing Party shall cooperate with the exporting Party. The importing Party shall communicate in writing to the exporting Party, at its request, the reasons for non-acceptance of a technical regulation.
5. Each Party, whenever possible, shall accept the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, even when those procedures differ from its own, provided that those procedures:
a. provide satisfactory assurance that the relevant good or service complies with applicable technical regulations or standards developed or maintained in the territory of that Party; Y
b. that this guarantee is equivalent to the one offered:
i) in the proceedings carried out by the Party; either
ii) in proceedings carried out in its territory and whose result it accepts.
6. In relation to paragraph 5, the Party shall review, if applicable, the pertinent normalization measure.
7. In accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 5 and 6, prior to the acceptance of the results of a conformity assessment procedure, and in order to strengthen confidence in the continuing integrity of each of those results, the Parties may consult on matters such as the technical capacity of conformity assessment bodies, taking into account verified compliance with relevant international standards and recommendations.
Article 11-08: Conformity assessment.
1. The Parties accept the convenience of achieving reciprocal recognition of their conformity assessment systems, including, among others, the bodies accredited by the corresponding competent authority, in order to facilitate reciprocal trade in goods and services and undertake to work to achieve this end.
2. In addition to what is established in paragraph 1, and recognizing the existence of differences in their conformity assessment procedures in their respective territories, the Parties shall make their respective conformity assessment systems and procedures compatible to the greatest extent possible. conformity so that they are mutually recognized in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
3. For the mutual benefit of the Parties and reciprocally, each Party through its competent authorities or the institutions designated by them:
a. evaluate and recognize the national accreditation system of the other Party; Y
b. shall accredit, approve, license or recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party on terms no less favorable than those granted to such bodies in its territory.
4. Each Party shall give favorable consideration to requests submitted by the other Party to negotiate agreements on mutual recognition of the results of the Parties' conformity assessment procedures.
5. When it is required to carry out a procedure for the evaluation of conformity with technical regulations or standards, each Party shall have the obligation to:
a. not adopt or maintain stricter conformity assessment procedures and not apply them more strictly than is necessary to be certain that the good or service conforms to the applicable technical regulation or standard, taking into account the risks that it may create non-conformity;
b. initiate and complete that procedure in the most expeditious manner possible;
c. establish a non-discriminatory order for processing applications;
d. publish the normal duration of each of these procedures or communicate, at the applicant's request, the approximate duration of the procedure;
and. ensure that the competent authority or the institutions designated by it:
i) upon receipt of an application, promptly examine all necessary documentation for completeness and accurately and fully inform the applicant of any deficiencies;
(ii) as soon as possible, convey to the applicant the results of the conformity assessment procedure in an accurate and complete manner, so that the applicant can take any corrective action;
iii) when the application is deficient, continue with the procedure to the extent possible, if requested by the applicant; Y
iv) report, at the applicant's request, the status of their application and the reasons for any delay;
F. limit to what is necessary, and in accordance with its law, the information that the applicant must submit to assess conformity and to determine the relevant rights;
g. grant to the confidential information that derives from the procedure or that is presented in connection with it:
i) the same treatment as information regarding a national good or service; Y
(ii) in any case, treatment that protects the legitimate business interests of the applicant in accordance with the law of that Party;
h. ensure that the amount of any duty charged for assessing the conformity of a good or service that is exported from the other Party is not greater than any duty charged for assessing the conformity of an identical or similar domestic good or service, taking into account the costs of communication, transportation, consular fees and other related costs;
Yo. ensure that the location of the facilities where the conformity assessment procedures are carried out does not cause unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative;
j. where possible, ensure that the procedure is carried out at the manufacturing facility of the good and that a mark of conformity is given, where appropriate;
k. limit the procedure, in the case of a good or service that has been modified after the determination of the assessment of conformity with the technical regulations or applicable standards, to what is necessary to determine that said good or service continues to comply with those regulations or standards; Y
he. limit to what is reasonable any requirement related to samples of a good and ensure that the selection of samples does not cause unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative in accordance with the sampling procedures used and approved internationally.
6. Each Party shall apply the provisions of paragraph 5 to its approval procedures, with any modifications required.
7. At the request of another Party, each Party shall adopt reasonable measures within its power to facilitate access to its territory or when it is intended to carry out conformity assessment activities.
Article 11-09: Notification, publication and delivery of information.
1. In addition to the provisions of Articles 15-02 (Publication) and 15-03 (Notification and provision of information), each Party shall notify the other Party of the standardization measures that it intends to establish before their entry into force and shall not after their nationals.
2. When proposing the adoption or modification of any standardization measure, each Party:
a. publish a notice and notify the other Party in writing of its intention to adopt or modify that measure, in order to allow interested persons to become familiar with the proposal, at least 60 days in advance of its adoption or modification, except in the cases of any measure related to standardization related to perishable goods, in which case the Party, in the best possible way, will publish the notice and simultaneously notify the other Party and its national producers, at least 30 days in advance of the adoption or reform of these measures;
b. In said notice and notification, it will identify the good or service to which the measure will be applied, and will include a brief description of its objective and motivation;
c. provide a copy of the proposed measure to the other Party and to any interested person who requests it and, where possible, identify provisions that deviate substantially from relevant international standards;
d. without discrimination, allow the other Party and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, discuss and take into account those comments, and the results of the discussions; Y
and. expeditiously publish the adopted measure or in some other way make it available in its territory to interested persons so that they can become familiar with it.
3. When there is no relevant or imminent international standard for a proposed standardization measure, or that standardization measure is not substantially the same as an international standard, and when the standardization measure may have a significant effect on trade of the other Party, each Party:
a. publish a notice and deliver a written notice of the type required in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2, at an appropriate initial stage; Y
b. The provisions of subparagraphs c) and d) of paragraph 2 shall be observed.
4. With respect to technical regulations other than those issued by the central or federal government, each Party:
a. ensure that a notice is published and the other Party is notified in writing of its intention to adopt or modify that regulation at an appropriate early stage;
b. ensure that the notice and notification identifies the good or service to which the technical regulation will apply and will include a brief description of the purpose and motivation of that regulation;
c. ensure that a copy of the proposed regulation is provided to the other Party and to any interested person who requests it;
d. shall take reasonable steps within its power to ensure that upon adoption of the technical regulation, it is promptly published or otherwise made available in its territory to interested persons in the Party to become familiar with it.
5. Each Party shall annually notify the other Party about its plans and standardization programs.
6. When a Party considers it necessary to address an urgent problem related to its legitimate objectives, it may omit any of the steps established in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 provided that, when adopting the standardization measure:
a. immediately notify the other Party, in accordance with the requirements established in subparagraph b) of paragraph 2, including a brief description of the urgent problem;
b. deliver a copy of the measure to the other Party and interested persons who so request a copy of the measure;
c. allow, without discrimination, the other Party and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, discuss and take into account those comments, as well as the results of the discussions; Y
d. publish the measure expeditiously, or make it available in its territory to interested persons so that they can become familiar with it.
7. The Parties shall allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of their standardization measures and the date they come into force, so that there is time for interested persons to adjust to these standardization measures, except when it is necessary to make addressing one of the urgent problems identified in paragraph 6.
8. Where a Party allows non-government persons from its territory to be present during the standardization process, it shall also allow non-government persons from the other Party's territory to be present.
9. Each Party shall designate a government authority as responsible for the application of the notification provisions of this chapter at the central or federal level, and shall notify the other Party within three months of the entry into force of this chapter. Treaty. When a Party designates two or more government authorities for this purpose, it shall inform the other Party, without ambiguity or exceptions, of the scope of responsibilities of those authorities.
10. When a Party administratively rejects a shipment or supply of services due to non-compliance with a measure related to standardization, it shall promptly inform the person holding the shipment or the service provider in writing of the technical justification for the rejection. .
11. Once the information referred to in paragraph 10 has been generated, it shall be sent immediately to the information center or centers for standardization measures located in the territory of that Party, which in turn will notify the center. or information centers of the other Party.
Article 11-10: Information centers.
1. Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one information center within its territory capable of answering all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing the relevant documentation regarding:
a. any standardization measure adopted or proposed in its territory at the level of its central or federal, state, or municipal government;
b. the membership and participation of that Party, and of and its competent authorities at the central or federal, state, or municipal level in international or regional standardization bodies and conformity assessment systems, in bilateral or multilateral agreements, within the scope of application of the chapter, as well as the provisions of those systems and agreements;
c. the location of notices published pursuant to this chapter or where such information may be obtained;
d. the location of information centers; Y
and. the Party's risk assessment processes, the factors it takes into consideration in conducting the assessment, and the establishment, pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article 11-05, of the levels of protection it deems appropriate.
2. When a Party designates more than one information center:
a. inform the other Party, unambiguously and completely, about the scope of responsibilities of each of these centers; Y
b. will ensure that any request sent to the wrong information center is forwarded, expeditiously, to the correct information center.
3. Each Party shall take reasonable measures within its power to ensure that there is at least one information center within its territory capable of answering all questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as to provide the pertinent documentation or the information from where such documentation can be obtained related to:
a. any standard or conformity assessment process adopted or proposed by non-governmental standards bodies in its territory; Y
b. membership and participation in international and regional standardization bodies and conformity assessment systems of relevant non-governmental bodies in their territory.
4. Each Party shall ensure that when the other Party or interested persons request copies of the documents in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, they are provided at the same price as for internal sale, in addition to the shipping cost.
Article 11-11: Limitations on the provision of information.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose an obligation on the Parties to communicate any information the disclosure of which they consider contrary to their essential security interests, or which would harm the legitimate business interests of certain companies.
Article 11-12: Metrological standards.
The Parties will make their national metrological standards compatible, to the greatest extent possible, based on the international standards in force at that time, when the former constitute, or create, unnecessary obstacles to trade, in accordance with the annex to this article.
Article 11-13: Protection of health.
1. Medicines, medical equipment and instruments, pharmaceutical goods and other inputs for human, animal and plant health; foods; toxic goods and substances; material goods, radioactive sources and equipment; Sources and equipment emitting ionizing radiation that are subject to registration within the territory of a Party, will be, where appropriate, registered, recognized or evaluated by the competent authority of that Party based on a single national system of a central or federal nature. mandatory observance.
2. The certificates that support compliance with the standards and technical regulations of the companies that produce or condition the goods referred to in paragraph 1 will be accepted only if they have been issued by the competent authorities of the central or federal government of the Parties.
3. The Parties will establish a mutual technical cooperation system that will work on the following:
a. identify specific needs in:
i) the application of good manufacturing practices in the preparation and approval of medicines for human, animal and plant use;
ii) the application of good laboratory practices in the analysis and evaluation systems established in the pertinent international standards and guides in force; Y
iii) the development of common identification and nomenclature systems for auxiliary goods for health and medical instruments;
b. standardize the requirements related to labeling and strengthen, among others, the standardization and surveillance systems in relation to warning labeling;
c. establish training and training programs and organize, among others, a common system of training, continuing education, training and evaluation of sanitary officials and inspectors;
d. develop a system of mutual accreditation for verification units and testing laboratories;
and. update the regulatory legal frameworks; Y
F. Strengthen formal communication systems to monitor and regulate the exchange of goods related to human, animal and plant health.
4. In order to carry out the activities indicated in paragraph 3, the Parties shall establish, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 4 of article 11-17, a technical subcommittee in charge of monitoring and organizing these activities, in order to guide and recommend to the Parties when they so request.
Article 11-14: Risk assessment.
1. Pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 11-05, each Party may carry out risk assessments within its territory when it deems appropriate. In doing so, you will ensure that you take into account risk assessment methods developed by international organizations, and that your technical regulations and standards are based on a risk assessment.
2. When conducting a risk assessment in its territory, each Party shall take into consideration all relevant scientific evidence, available technical information, intended end use, production processes or methods, operation, inspection, quality, sampling or testing or environmental conditions.
3. When a Party conducts a risk assessment pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article 11-05, once it has established its level of security protection that it deems appropriate, it shall avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions between similar goods and services at the level of protection it deems appropriate, if those distinctions:
a. have the effect of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against goods or services of the other Party;
b. they constitute a disguised restriction on reciprocal trade; either
c. They discriminate between similar goods or services for the same use, in accordance with the same conditions that the level of risk poses and that grant similar benefits.
4. When the Party carrying out a risk assessment concludes that the scientific evidence or other information available is insufficient to complete that assessment, it may provisionally adopt a measure based on the pertinent information available. Once sufficient information has been presented to it to complete the risk assessment, the Party shall complete its assessment as soon as possible, review and, where appropriate, modify that measure in light of that assessment.
Article 11-15: Management of toxic and dangerous substances.
1. For the control, handling and acceptance of toxic or dangerous substances or residues, the Parties shall apply the provisions, guides or recommendations of the Basel Convention, the Charter of the United Nations, the London Guidelines on Chemical Substances Object of International Commerce and relevant international agreements to which the Parties are party.
2. When any good or toxic or dangerous substance requires a permit or registration for its handling or transportation, it will be issued by the competent authority at the central or federal level.
Article 11-16: Labeling.
1. The labeling requirements of the goods and services that are part of the scope of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions established therein. Each Party shall apply its relevant labeling requirements within its territory.
2. The Parties shall develop common labeling requirements. The proposals made by each Party will be evaluated by the Subcommittee for Standardization Measures in Labeling, Packaging and Packaging, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of article 11-17.
3. The Subcommittee for Standardization Measures in Labeling, Packaging and Packaging may work and formulate recommendations on, among others, the following areas:
a. a common system of symbols and pictograms for the Parties;
b. definitions and terminology;
c. presentation of information, including language, measurement systems, ingredients, and sizes; either
d. other related matters.
Article 11-17: Committee for Standardization Measures.
1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee for Standardization Measures, hereinafter referred to as the Committee.
2. The functions of the Committee will include, among others:
a. follow up on the application, compliance and administration of this chapter, including the progress of the sub-committees and working groups established pursuant to paragraph 4 and the operation of the information centers established pursuant to paragraph 1 of article 11 -10;
b. facilitate the process through which the Parties will make their standardization and metrology measures compatible;
c. provide a forum for Parties to consult on issues related to standardization and metrology measures;
d. promote that the competent institutions in the matter take into consideration the events on standardization measures at the governmental, non-governmental, regional and multilateral levels, including those of the GATT;
and. develop the necessary procedural mechanisms to achieve the recognition of conformity assessment bodies; Y
F. report annually to the Commission on the application of this chapter.
3. The Committee:
a. It will be made up of an equal number of representatives of the competent government institutions of each Party. Each Party shall establish its procedures for the selection of its representatives;
b. shall meet, unless the Parties agree otherwise:
i) at least once a year;
ii) when requested by any Party; Y
iii) in case of emergency, expeditiously and as soon as possible;
c. It will establish its regulations and make its decisions by consensus.
4. When the Committee considers it appropriate, it may establish the subcommittees and working groups that it deems pertinent and determine their scope of action and mandate. Each subcommittee and working group will be made up of representatives of each Party and may determine its work program, taking into account relevant international activities and, when deemed necessary, include or consult with:
a. representatives of non-governmental organizations, such as standardization bodies, or private sector chambers and associations;
b. representatives of higher academic research and scientific centers;
c. technical experts; Y
d. representatives of government institutions.
5. In addition to paragraph 4, the Committee shall establish the Subcommittee on Health Standardization Measures, Subcommittee on Labeling, Packaging, and Standardization Measures, and any other subcommittees and working groups it deems appropriate to review, among others, the following topics:
a. identification and nomenclature of goods and services subject to standardization measures;
b. technical regulations and quality and identity standards;
c. programs for the approval of goods and for surveillance after its sale;
d. principles for the accreditation and recognition of test facilities, inspection agencies and conformity assessment bodies;
and. implementation and development of a uniform system for the classification and reporting of hazardous chemicals, and chemical hazard communication;
F. programs to ensure compliance with current provisions, including training and inspection by personnel responsible for regulation, analysis, and compliance verification;
g. the application and promotion of good laboratory practices;
h. the application and promotion of good manufacturing practices;
Yo. criteria for the evaluation of potential damage to the environment due to the use of goods or provision of services;
j. analysis of procedures for the simplification of import requirements for specific goods and services;
k. risk assessment methodologies;
he. guidelines for testing chemical substances, including those of an industrial type and those for agricultural, pharmaceutical and biological use; Y
m. Means that facilitate consumer protection, including with regard to compensation.
6. Each Party shall adopt the necessary measures so that government representatives, other than the central or federal government of a Party, participate in the work of the Committee when deemed necessary.
Article 11-18: Technical cooperation.
1. At the request of a Party, the other Party may, to the best of its ability:
a. provide that Party with advice, information or technical assistance on mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen the measures related to the standardization of that Party, its activities, processes and systems on the matter; Y
b. provide that Party with information on its technical cooperation programs related to standardization measures in areas of particular interest.
2. Each Party shall encourage the cooperation of its standards bodies, as appropriate, in standardization activities. For example, by obtaining membership in international standardization bodies.
Article 11-19: Expenses.
Each Party shall endeavor, to the extent possible, to allocate the necessary resources for the operation and due compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, it may charge a reasonable amount, when so required, for the services rendered in connection with the application of this chapter, without this constituting an act of discrimination between the nationals of the Parties.
Article 11-20: Technical consultations.
1. When a Party has doubts about the interpretation or application made by the other Party, it may alternatively resort to the Committee or the dispute settlement mechanism of the Treaty. The Parties may not use both channels simultaneously.
2. When a Party decides to go to the Committee, it will notify it in writing so that it can consider the matter. The Committee may refer it to a subcommittee or working group, or to another competent forum, in order to obtain advice or non-binding technical recommendations.
3. The Committee will consider any matter that is referred to it in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, as expeditiously as possible and, in the same way, will inform the Parties of any advice or technical recommendation that it prepares or receives in relation to to that matter. Once the Parties receive from the Committee a technical advice or recommendation that they have requested, they will send to the Committee a written response in relation to that technical advice or recommendation, in a period determined by the Committee.
4. In accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, in the event that the technical recommendation issued by the Committee does not resolve the existing difference between the Parties, they may invoke the dispute settlement mechanism of the Treaty. If the Parties so agree, the consultations carried out before the Committee shall constitute consultations for the purposes of Article 17-05 (Consultations).
5. The Party that asserts that a standardization measure of another Party is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter shall bear the burden of proof of that inconsistency.
Annex to the article11-12
Article 11-12 does not confer rights or obligations on Costa Rica until the third year after the entry into force of this Agreement.
Chapter XII
Public Sector Procurement
Section A - Scope of application and national treatment
Article 12-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
goods of another Party: goods originated in the territory of the other Party, in accordance with the provisions of Article 12-05;
scheduled purchase: the purchase in respect of which an entity listed in annexes 2 or 3 to article 12-02 publishes a purchase notice in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of article 12-11 and subsequently invites suppliers who have manifested interest in the purchase to confirm your interest in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 12-11;
construction services contract: a contract for the performance by any means of civil works or construction;
entity: an entity included in annexes 1, 2 and 3 to article 12-02;
technical specification: a specification that establishes the characteristics of the goods or processes and related production methods, or the characteristics of services or their related methods of operation, including the applicable administrative provisions. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process or method of production or operation;
international standard: "international standard" as defined in Article 11-01 (Definitions);
tendering procedures: open tendering procedures, selective tendering procedures or restricted tendering procedures;
open tendering procedures: the procedures in which all interested suppliers can submit offers;
restricted tendering procedures: the procedures by which an entity communicates individually with suppliers, only in the circumstances and in accordance with the conditions described in article 12-16;
selective bidding procedures: the procedures in which, under the terms of article 12-12, the suppliers whom the entity invites to do so may submit bids;
supplier: a person who has provided or may provide goods or services in response to an entity's invitation to bid;
locally established supplier: which includes a natural person residing in the Party's territory, a company organized or established under the Party's law, and a branch or representative office located in the Party's territory;
services: includes construction service contracts, unless otherwise specified.
Article 12-02: Scope of application.
1. This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to purchases:
a. of a central or federal government entity indicated in annex 1 to this article; a government company indicated in annex 2 to this article; or a state or municipal government entity indicated in annex 3 to this article in accordance with the provisions of article 12-24;
b. of goods, in accordance with annex 4 to this article; of services, in accordance with annex 5 to this article; or construction services, in accordance with annex 6 to this article; Y
c. when it is estimated that the value of the contract to be awarded equals or exceeds the value of the following thresholds, calculated and adjusted in accordance with the inflation rate of the United States of America as provided in annex 7 to this article, for the case of:
i) central or federal government entities, US$50,000 for contracts for goods, services or any combination thereof, and US$6.5 million for construction service contracts;
ii) government companies, US$250,000 for contracts for goods, services or any combination thereof, and US$8 million for construction service contracts; Y
iii) state or municipal government entities, the value of the applicable thresholds as provided in annex 3 to this article, in accordance with the provisions of article 12-24.
2. Paragraph 1 shall be subject to the transition mechanisms established in annex 8 to this article and to the general notes indicated in annex 9 to this article.
3. Subject to paragraph 4, where a contract to be awarded by an entity is not subject to this chapter, its provisions may not be construed to cover the components of any good or service of that contract.
4. None of the entities of the Parties shall conceive, prepare or structure a purchase contract in such a way as to avoid the obligations of this chapter.
5. Purchases include acquisitions by methods such as purchase, lease, or rental, with or without a purchase option. Purchases do not include:
a. non-contractual agreements or any form of government assistance, including cooperative agreements, transfers, loans, capital transfers, guarantees, tax incentives and government supply of goods and services granted to individuals or to state or municipal governments; Y
b. the acquisition of services from fiscal agencies or deposits, liquidation and administration services for regulated financial institutions, or public debt sale and distribution services.
6. The provisions contained in this chapter establish the general principles that the entities of each Party must observe in their purchasing procedures.
7. The Parties shall ensure that the measures applied by their entities are in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 12-03: Valuation of contracts.
1. Each Party shall ensure that, in determining whether a contract is covered by this Chapter, its entities apply the provisions of paragraphs 2 through 7 to calculate the value of that contract.
2. The value of the contract will be estimated at the time of publication of the call, which will be carried out in accordance with article 12-11.
3. When calculating the value of a contract, entities will take into account all forms of remuneration, including bonuses, rights, commissions and interest.
4. In addition to the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 12-02, an entity may not choose a valuation method or divide purchases into independent contracts in order to evade the obligations contained in this chapter.
5. When an individual requirement results in the award of more than one contract or the contracts are awarded in separate parts, the basis for valuation will be:
a. the actual value of successive contracts of the same nature entered into during the preceding fiscal year or in the preceding 12 months, adjusted where possible for expected changes in quantity and value in the following 12 months; either
b. the estimated value of successive contracts of the same nature entered into during the fiscal year or in the 12 months following the initial contract.
6. In the case of lease or rental contracts, with or without a purchase option, or contracts in which a total price is not specified, the basis for valuation will be:
a. in the case of contracts signed for a specific period, the calculation will be made on the basis of the total value of the contract during its period of validity; either
b. In the case of contracts for an indefinite term, the base will be the estimated monthly payment multiplied by 48.
If the entity is not certain whether a contract is for fixed or indefinite terms, it will calculate the value of the contract using the method indicated in subparagraph b).
7. When the bidding conditions include clauses that allow the quotation of optional or alternative goods or services, the basis for valuation will be the total value of the maximum purchase allowed, including all possible optional purchases.
Article 12-04: National treatment and non-discrimination.
1. With respect to the measures included in this Chapter, each Party shall grant to the goods of the other Party, to the suppliers of those goods and to the service providers of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable granted to:
a. its own goods and suppliers; Y
b. the goods and suppliers of another Party.
2. With respect to the measures included in this Chapter, neither Party may:
a. give a supplier established in its territory treatment less favorable than that accorded to another supplier established in its territory by reason of the degree of foreign affiliation or ownership; either
b. discriminate against a supplier established in its territory on the grounds that the goods or services offered by that supplier for a particular purchase are goods or services of the other Party.
3. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to measures relating to customs duties or other charges of any kind on or in connection with importation, the method of collection of such duties and charges, or other import regulations, including restrictions and formalities.
4. The Parties shall not establish representation or local presence requirements that are intended to discriminate in favor of national suppliers.
Article 12-05: Rules of origin.
For the purposes of public sector purchases covered by this Chapter, neither Party shall apply rules of origin to goods imported from the other Party that are different from or incompatible with the rules of origin contained in Chapter V (Rules of Origin).
Article 12-06: Denial of benefits.
A Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of the other Party after prior notification and consultation, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out important business activities in the territory of any Party and is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party country.
Article 12-07: Prohibition of special compensatory conditions.
Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not take into account, request or impose special compensatory conditions in the qualification and selection of suppliers, goods or services, in the evaluation of offers or in the award of contracts. For the purposes of this article, special compensatory conditions are understood to be those that an entity imposes or takes into account before or during the purchase procedure to promote local development or improve balance of payments accounts, through local content requirements. , licensing of technology, investment, countertrade or similar requirements.
Article 12-08: Technical specifications.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specification that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.
2. Each Party shall ensure that, where applicable, any technical specifications stipulated by its entities:
a. is defined in terms of performance criteria rather than descriptive or design features; Y
b. is based on international standards, national technical regulations, recognized national standards or building codes.
3. Each Party shall ensure that the technical specifications stipulated by its entities do not require or make reference to a certain brand or trade name, patent, design or type, specific origin, or producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or understandable manner to describe the purchase requirements and provided that, in such cases, words such as "or equivalent" are included in the bidding conditions.
4. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not solicit or accept, in a manner that has the effect of preventing competition, advice that could be used in preparing or adopting any technical specification with respect to a particular purchase from a person who may have commercial interest in that purchase.
Section B - Tender Procedures
Article 12-09: Tender procedures.
1. Entities will make their purchases through open, selective or restricted tenders. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 12-16, the entities of each Party may opt for open or selective bidding procedures, provided that the chosen procedure guarantees the maximum possible competition.
2. Each Party shall ensure that the bidding procedures of its entities:
a. are applied in a non-discriminatory manner; Y
b. are consistent with this article and with articles 12-11 through 12-16.
3. In this regard, each Party shall ensure that its entities:
a. do not provide any supplier with information about a particular purchase in a way that has the effect of preventing competition or conferring an advantage on a specific supplier; Y
b. provide all suppliers equal access to information regarding a purchase during the period prior to the issuance of any call or bidding conditions.
Article 12-10: Qualification of suppliers.
1. Pursuant to Article 12-04, in the qualification of suppliers during the bidding procedure, no entity of a Party may discriminate between suppliers of the other Party or between national suppliers and suppliers of the other Party.
2. The qualification of suppliers carried out by an entity will be consistent with the following:
a. The conditions for the participation of suppliers in the bidding procedures will be published sufficiently in advance, so that the suppliers have adequate time to start and, to the extent that is compatible with the efficient operation of the contracting process, finish the procedures. qualification procedures;
b. the conditions for participating in the bidding procedures, such as financial guarantees, technical qualifications and the information necessary to prove the financial, commercial and technical capacity of the suppliers, as well as the verification that the supplier satisfies those conditions, will be limited those essential to ensure compliance with the contract in question;
c. the financial, commercial and technical capacity of a supplier shall be determined on the basis of its global activity, including both its activity carried out in the territory of the Party of the supplier, and its activity in the territory of the Party of the purchasing entity, if any;
d. An entity may not use the qualification process, including the time it takes, to exclude suppliers of another Party from a list of suppliers or not consider them for a given purchase;
and. an entity shall recognize as qualified suppliers those suppliers of another Party that meet the conditions required to participate in a specific purchase;
F. An entity shall consider for a given purchase those suppliers of another Party that request to participate in the purchase and that have not yet been qualified, provided that sufficient time is available to complete the qualification procedure;
g. An entity that maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers will ensure that suppliers can request their qualification at all times, that all qualified suppliers who request it are included in the list within a reasonably short period of time, and that all suppliers those included in the list are notified of the cancellation of the list or their removal from the list;
h. when, after the publication of the call in accordance with the provisions of article 12-11, a supplier that has not yet been qualified requests to participate in a certain purchase, the entity will initiate the qualification procedure without delay;
Yo. An entity will communicate to any provider that has requested its qualification, the decision on whether it has been qualified; Y
j. When an entity rejects a qualification request or ceases to recognize a supplier's qualification, at the supplier's request the entity will promptly provide pertinent information on the reasons for its action.
3. Each Party:
a. it will ensure that each of its entities uses a single qualification procedure, however the procedure for evaluating suppliers will vary according to the nature of the aspects to be analyzed; when the entity establishes the need to resort to a different procedure and, at the request of the other Party, is prepared to demonstrate that need, it may use additional qualification procedures; Y
b. It will try to reduce to a minimum the differences between the rating procedures of its entities.
4. Nothing in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall prevent an entity from excluding a provider for reasons such as bankruptcy or misrepresentation.
Article 12-11: Invitation to participate.
1. Except as provided in article 12-16, in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 5, an entity shall publish an invitation to participate for all purchases, in the corresponding publication indicated in the annex to this article.
2. The invitation to participate will take the form of a call that will contain the following information:
a. a description of the nature and quantity of the goods or services to be purchased, including any future purchase options and, if possible:
i) an estimate of when those options may be exercised; Y
ii) in the case of successive contracts of the same nature, an estimate of when subsequent calls may be issued;
b. an indication of whether the tender is open or selective;
c. if relevant, the date to begin or conclude the delivery of the goods or services to be purchased;
d. when applicable, the address to which the request must be sent to be invited to bid or to qualify on the list of suppliers and the deadline for receipt of the request;
and. the address to which the offers will be sent and the deadline for their receipt;
F. The address of the entity that will award the contract and that will provide any information necessary to obtain specifications and other documents;
g. a statement of any conditions of an economic or technical nature and of any financial guarantees, information and documents required from suppliers;
h. the amount and form of payment of any amount to be paid for the bidding conditions; and
Yo. the indication of whether the entity calls for the presentation of offers for the purchase, lease or rent, with or without a purchase option.
3. In the case of selective bidding, the invitation to participate will contain, in addition to the provisions of paragraph 2, the deadlines indicated for the submission of requests for admission to the bidding, when this does not imply the use of a list of suppliers. .
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, an entity indicated in annex 2 to article 12-02 or in annex 3 to article 12-02 may use as an invitation to participate a scheduled purchase call, which will contain the information in paragraphs 2 and 3 to the extent that it is available to the entity, but which shall include, as a minimum, the following information:
a. a description of the object of the purchase;
b. the deadlines set for the receipt of offers or for the presentation of requests to be invited to bid;
c. the address from which documentation related to the purchase may be requested;
d. an indication that interested suppliers should express to the entity their interest in the purchase; Y
and. the identification of an information center in the entity where additional information can be obtained.
5. An entity that uses a scheduled purchase call as an invitation to participate will subsequently invite all suppliers that have expressed interest in the purchase by submitting a request referred to in subparagraph b) of paragraph 4, to confirm their interest. , based on the information provided by the entity that will include, at least, the information stipulated in paragraphs 2 and 4.
6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, an entity indicated in annex 2 to article 12-02 or in annex 3 to article 12-02 may use a call regarding the qualification system as an invitation to participate. An entity that makes use of such a call will offer in a timely manner, in accordance with the considerations referred to in paragraph 8 of article 12-15, information that allows all suppliers that have expressed an interest in participating in the purchase to have a real possibility to assess your interest. The information will normally include the data required for the call referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3. The information provided to an interested supplier will be provided without discrimination to all other interested parties.
7. In the case of selective bidding procedures, an entity that establishes or maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers will insert annually, in the appropriate publication referred to in the annex to this article, a notice containing the following information:
a. a listing of all current lists, including their headings, in relation to the goods or services or categories of goods or services purchased through the lists;
b. the conditions that suppliers must meet to be included in the lists and the methods according to which the entity in question will verify each of those conditions; Y
c. the period of validity of the lists and the formalities for its renewal.
8. When, after the publication of an invitation to participate, but before the expiration of the period set for the opening or receipt of offers, as stated in the calls or in the bidding conditions, the entity considers it necessary to make modifications or reissue the call or the bidding conditions, the entity will ensure that the same diffusion is given to the call or to the new or modified bidding conditions as was given to the original documentation. Any material information provided to one supplier regarding a particular purchase will be simultaneously provided to the other interested suppliers, sufficiently in advance to allow all interested parties appropriate time to review the information and to respond.
9. An entity will indicate in the calls referred to in this article that the purchase is covered by this chapter.
Article 12-12: Selective bidding procedures.
1. In selective bidding procedures, the entity will publish an invitation to participate in accordance with article 12-11.
2. In order to guarantee optimal effective competition between the suppliers of the Parties in the selective bidding procedures, an entity may directly invite, for each purchase, the largest number of national suppliers and suppliers of the other Party that is compatible with efficient operation of the purchasing system.
3. An entity may limit, in accordance with objective criteria and for fully justified reasons, the number of offers to be considered when the analysis of all those received could substantially affect the efficient operation of the purchasing system, as long as the provisions are not breached. of article 12-04.
4. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 5, an entity that maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers may select those who will be directly summoned to bid on a specific purchase. In the selection process, the entity will give equal opportunities to the suppliers included in the list.
5. Subject to the provisions of subparagraphs f) and h) of paragraph 2 of article 12-10, an entity will allow a supplier that requests to participate in a certain purchase, submit an offer and take it into account. The number of additional suppliers authorized to participate will only be limited for reasons of efficient operation of the purchasing system.
6. When an entity does not summon or admit a provider to the tender, at the latter's request, it will promptly provide relevant information on the reasons for its action.
Article 12-13: Deadlines for bidding and delivery.
1. An entity:
a. by setting a deadline, it will provide suppliers of the other Party with sufficient time to prepare and submit bids before the closing of the bid;
b. In setting a deadline, in accordance with its own reasonable needs, it will take into account factors such as the complexity of the purchase, the anticipated degree of subcontracting, and the time normally required to transmit offers by mail both from foreign locations and within the national territory; Y
c. when establishing the deadline for the receipt of offers or requests for admission to the tender, it will duly consider publication delays.
2. An entity shall provide that:
a. in open bidding procedures, the term for the receipt of an offer is not less than 40 days from the date of publication of a call, in accordance with the provisions of article 12-11;
b. in selective bidding procedures that do not imply the use of a permanent list of qualified suppliers, the deadline for submitting a request for admission to the bidding process is not less than 25 days from the date of publication of a call, from in accordance with the provisions of article 12-11, and the term for the receipt of offers is not less than 40 days from the date of publication of a call; Y
c. in selective bidding procedures that imply the use of a permanent list of qualified suppliers, the term for the receipt of offers is not less than 40 days from the date of the first invitation to bid, but when this last date does not coincides with the publication of a call referred to in article 12-11, no less than 40 days must elapse between publication and receipt of offers.
3. An entity may reduce the periods provided in paragraph 2 in accordance with the following:
a. when a call has been published as provided in paragraphs 3 or 5 of article 12-11, within a period of not less than 40 days and not more than 12 months, the 40-day term for the receipt of offers may be reduced to not less than 24 days;
b. In the case of a second publication or a subsequent publication related to successive contracts of the same nature, in accordance with literal a) of paragraph 2 of article 12-11, the 40-day term for the receipt of offers may be reduced to no less than 24 days;
c. When, for reasons of urgency duly justified by the entity and which it could not have foreseen, the established deadlines cannot be observed, in no case will these deadlines be less than ten days from the date of publication of a call in accordance with article 12-11; either
d. when one of the entities indicated in annex 2 to article 12-02 or in annex 3 to article 12-02 uses as an invitation to participate a call referred to in paragraph 6 of article 12-11, the entity and the selected suppliers may set, by mutual agreement, the deadlines; however, in the absence of an agreement, the entity may set terms sufficiently long to allow the due submission of offers, which in no case shall be less than ten days.
4. An entity shall take into account factors such as the complexity of the purchase, the anticipated degree of subcontracting, and the time realistically required for delivery in scheduling the goods or services in accordance with its reasonable needs. production, dispatch and transportation of the goods from the different places of supply.
Article 12-14: Bidding conditions.
1. When entities provide bidding conditions to suppliers, the documentation will contain all the necessary information that allows them to duly present their offers, including the information that must be published in the call referred to in paragraph 2 of article 12-11, except for the information required under literal h), paragraph 2 of that article. The documentation will also include:
a. the address of the entity to which the offers should be sent;
b. the address where requests for additional information should be sent;
c. the date and time of the closing of the reception of offers and the term during which they will be validated;
d. the persons authorized, other than the participating suppliers, to attend the opening of the offers and the date, time and place of that opening;
and. a description of any conditions of an economic or technical nature and of any financial guarantees, information and documents required from suppliers;
F. a full description of the goods or services to be purchased and any other requirements, including technical specifications, certificates of conformity, and necessary drawings, drawings and instructions;
g. the criteria on which the award of the contract will be based, such as the price and any other factor that will be considered in the evaluation of the offers; The cost elements that will be taken into account when evaluating the prices of the offers will include, where appropriate, aspects such as transportation, insurance and inspection expenses and, in the case of goods or services of the other Party, the rights of customs and other import charges, taxes and currency of payment;
h. the terms of payment; and
Yo. any other stipulations or conditions.
2. An entity:
a. provide the bidding conditions at the request of a supplier participating in open bidding procedures or requesting to participate in selective bidding procedures, and will promptly respond to any reasonable request for clarification thereof; Y
b. will promptly respond to any reasonable request for relevant information from a supplier participating in the tender, provided that such information does not give that supplier an advantage over its competitors in the contract award procedure.
Article 12-15: Presentation, reception and opening of offers and awarding of contracts.
1. The entity will use procedures for the presentation, reception and opening of offers and the awarding of contracts that are consistent with the following:
a. Bids will normally be submitted in writing, either directly or by post;
b. When bids transmitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile or other means of electronic transmission are admitted in the invitation to participate, the bid submitted shall include all the information necessary for its evaluation, in particular the final price proposed by the supplier and a statement that the provider accepts all the clauses and conditions of the call;
c. Offers submitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile or other means of electronic transmission will be confirmed within the term set in the call or in the bidding conditions, sending the original document of the offers or a signed copy of the telex, telegram, telefacsimile or message electronic;
d. the content of the telex, telegram, telefacsimile or electronic message will prevail in case there is a difference or contradiction between it and any other documentation received after the term for the receipt of offers has expired;
and. it will not be allowed to present offers by telephone;
F. Applications to participate in a selective bidding may be submitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile and, when permitted, by other means of electronic transmission; Y
g. The opportunities to correct involuntary formal errors, such as arithmetic errors or others that do not affect the essence of the offer, which are granted to suppliers during the period between the opening of the offers and the award of the contract, may not be used. in such a way that they discriminate between providers.
For purposes of this paragraph, "electronic transmission means" include those through which the recipient can produce a printed copy of the offer at the place of destination of the transmission.
2. No entity will penalize a supplier for causes exclusively attributable to the entity.
3. All the offers requested by an entity in the open or selective bidding procedures will be received and opened in accordance with the procedures and under the conditions that guarantee the regularity of the opening of the offers. The entity will keep the information corresponding to the opening of the offers. The information will remain available to the participants with legitimate interest and to the competent authorities of the Party to be used, if required, in accordance with article 12-17, article 12-19 or chapter XVII, (Dispute Resolution).
4. An entity shall award contracts in accordance with the following:
a. In order for an offer to be considered for the award, it must comply, at the time of opening, with the requirements stipulated in the call or in the bidding conditions and come from suppliers that meet the conditions of participation;
b. If the entity receives an offer that is abnormally lower in price than the others submitted, the entity may check with the supplier to ensure that the supplier satisfies the conditions for participation and is or will be able to comply with the terms of the contract;
c. unless for reasons of public interest it decides not to award the contract, the entity will award it to the supplier that it has considered capable of performing the contract and whose offer is the lowest price or the most advantageous in accordance with the specific evaluation criteria established in the call or in the bidding conditions;
d. the awards will be made in accordance with the criteria and requirements established in the bidding conditions; Y
and. The clauses that allow the quotation of optional or alternative goods or services will not be used in order to circumvent this chapter.
5. No entity of a Party may condition the award of a contract on the fact that a supplier has previously been assigned one or more contracts by an entity of that Party or on the supplier's previous work experience in the territory of that Party.
6. An entity:
a. upon express request, it will promptly inform the participating providers of the decisions on the awarded contracts and, if requested, do so in writing; Y
b. at the express request of a supplier whose offer has not been chosen, it will provide the relevant information to that supplier about the reasons why its offer was not chosen, the characteristics and advantages of the selected offer and the name of the winning supplier.
7. Within a reasonable period of time after the award of the contract, an entity shall insert a notice in the appropriate publication referred to in the annex to article 12-11 containing the following information:
a. a description of the nature and quantity of the goods or services that are the subject of the contract;
b. the name and address of the entity that awards the contract;
c. the award date;
d. the name and address of each selected provider;
and. the value of the contract; Y
F. the tendering procedure used.
8. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 7, an entity may withhold certain information about the contract award when its disclosure:
a. could impede compliance with laws or be contrary to the public interest;
b. harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person; either
c. out to the detriment of fair competition between suppliers.
9. Subparagraphs b) and c) of paragraph 8 shall not apply when information is requested in matters of public interest.
Article 12-16: Restricted bidding.
1. An entity of a Party may, in the circumstances and in accordance with the conditions described in paragraph 2, use restricted bidding procedures and accordingly deviate from the provisions of Articles 12-09 through 12-15, provided that restricted bidding procedures are not used to avoid the maximum possible competition or in a way that constitutes a means of discrimination between suppliers of the other Parties or of protection of national suppliers.
2. An entity may use restricted tendering procedures in the following circumstances and under the following conditions, as appropriate:
a. in the absence of offers in response to an open or selective call for tenders or when the offers submitted have resulted from collusion or do not comply with the essential requirements of the bidding conditions, or when the offers have been formulated by suppliers that do not comply with the conditions of participation provided in accordance with this chapter, provided that the initial purchase requirements are not materially changed in the award of the contract;
b. when the goods or services can only be supplied by a specific provider without there being other alternatives or reasonable substitutes because they are works of art or for reasons related to the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights, or reserved information or when for technical reasons there is no competition;
c. to the extent strictly necessary when, for reasons of extreme urgency due to events that the entity cannot foresee, it would not be possible to obtain the goods or services on time through open or selective bidding;
d. in the case of additional deliveries from the initial supplier either as replacement parts or continuing services for existing materials, services or facilities, or as an expansion of existing materials, services or facilities, when a change of supplier would require the entity to acquire equipment or services that do not meet the requirement to be interchangeable with existing equipment or services, including software, to the extent that the initial purchase of the software was covered by this chapter;
and. when an entity acquires prototypes or a first good or service that are manufactured at its request in the course and for the execution of a specific research, experimentation, study or original manufacturing contract. Once the contracts of this class have been fulfilled, the purchase of goods or services that are made as a result of them will be adjusted to articles 12-10 to 12-15. The original development of a first good may include its production in limited quantity in order to take into account the results of field trials and to demonstrate that the good lends itself to mass production meeting acceptable quality standards, but does not include series production to determine commercial viability or to recover research and development costs;
F. for goods purchased in a commodity market whose price is quoted in an international market;
g. for purchases made under exceptionally favorable conditions that are only offered at very short notice, but does not include purchases made under ordinary conditions from regular suppliers. Exceptionally favorable conditions are understood to be those that are substantially advantageous for the purchasing entity in relation to normal market conditions, such as extraordinary disposals made by companies that are not normally suppliers or the disposal of assets of persons in liquidation or under administration. judicial;
h. for contracts to be awarded to the winner of an architectural design competition, provided that the competition is:
i) organized in accordance with the principles of this chapter, including in relation to the publication of the invitation to qualified suppliers to bid;
ii) organized in such a way that the design contract is awarded to the winner; Y
iii) submitted to an independent jury; and
Yo. when an entity requires consulting services related to aspects of a confidential nature, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to compromise confidential information of the public sector, cause serious economic damage or, similarly, be contrary to the public interest.
3. The entities will justify the reasons on which they base the use of restricted bidding and will prepare a written report on each contract they have awarded in accordance with paragraph 2. Each report will contain the name of the procuring entity, the value and the class of goods or services procured, the country of origin, and a statement of the circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 2 that justified the use of restricted bidding. The entity will keep each report in a file in which the complete documentation related to the contract will be added. These will be available to the competent authorities of the Party to be used, if required, in accordance with the provisions of Article 12-17, Article 12-19 or Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement).
Section C - Challenge Procedures
Article 12-17: Challenge procedures.
1. In order to promote fair, open, and impartial procurement procedures, each Party shall adopt and maintain administrative challenge procedures for purchases covered by this Chapter, in accordance with the following:
a. each Party shall establish a procedure for suppliers to challenge the different aspects of the purchasing process which, for the purposes of this article, begins from the moment an entity has defined its purchase requirement and continues until the contract is awarded;
b. Before initiating a challenge procedure, a Party may encourage the supplier to seek a solution to its complaint with the procuring entity;
c. each Party shall ensure that its entities give timely and impartial consideration to any complaint or challenge regarding purchases covered by this chapter;
d. whether or not a supplier has attempted to resolve its complaint with the entity, or after it has failed to reach a successful resolution, neither Party may preclude the supplier from initiating a challenge proceeding or seeking other available remedy;
and. a Party may request a supplier to notify the entity of the initiation of a challenge procedure;
F. a Party may limit the period within which a supplier can initiate the challenge procedure, but in no case shall this period be less than ten business days from the moment the supplier knows or is considered to have known the basis for the complaint. complain;
g. each Party shall establish or designate a specialized reviewing authority with no substantial interest in the outcome of the purchases to receive challenges and issue the resolutions and, where appropriate, the pertinent recommendations;
h. upon receiving the challenge, the reviewing authority will proceed to investigate it expeditiously;
Yo. the reviewing authority will limit its considerations to the challenge itself;
j. the reviewing authority will issue a resolution to resolve the challenge, which may include directives to the entity to re-evaluate the offers, terminate the purchase process or the contract, or submit it again to the contest;
k. generally, entities will follow the recommendations of the reviewing authority;
he. each Party shall empower its review authority to make further written recommendations to an entity, at the conclusion of the challenge proceeding, regarding any phase of its purchasing process that was found to be problematic during the challenge investigation, including recommendations for changes in the entity's purchasing procedures, so that they are consistent with this chapter;
m. the reviewing authority will notify in a timely manner and in writing the result of its inquiries, resolutions and recommendations regarding the challenges, and will make them available to the Parties and interested persons;
no. each Party shall specify in writing and make generally available all of its challenge procedures; Y
either. In order to verify that the procurement process was carried out in accordance with this chapter, each Party shall ensure that each of its entities maintains complete documentation relating to each of its purchases, including a written record of all communications that affect substantially the purchasing process, for a period of at least three years from the date the contract was awarded.
2. A Party may request the initiation of the challenge procedure only after the call has been published or, in case of not being published, after the bidding conditions are available. When a Party establishes this requirement, the term of ten business days referred to in subparagraph f) of paragraph 1, will begin to run no earlier than the date on which the call has been published or the bidding conditions are available.
Section D - General Provisions
Article 12-18: Exceptions.
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any action or refraining from disclosing information that it considers necessary to protect its essential security interests in connection with the purchase of arms, ammunition, or war materiel. , or any other essential contracting for national security or for national defense purposes.
2. As long as these measures are not applied in such a way that they constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where the same conditions exist or that they imply a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in the meaning of preventing a Party from establishing or maintaining the measures:
a. necessary to protect morality, public order or safety;
b. necessary to protect human, animal or plant life and health;
c. necessary to protect intellectual property; either
d. related to goods or services provided by disabled people, charitable institutions or prison labor.
Article 12-19: Provision of information.
1. In addition to what is established in Article 15-02 (Publication), each Party shall promptly publish any law, regulation, jurisprudence, administrative resolution of general application and any procedure, including model contractual clauses, related to public sector procurement. included in this chapter, by inserting them in the pertinent publications referred to in the annex to article 12-11.
2. Each Party:
a. explain to the other Party, upon request, its public sector procurement procedures;
b. ensure that its entities, upon request from a supplier, promptly explain their public sector procurement practices and procedures; Y
c. shall designate, no later than the entry into force of this Agreement, one or more information centers for:
i) facilitate communication between the Parties; Y
ii) answer, upon request, all reasonable questions from the other Party in order to provide relevant information on aspects covered by this chapter.
3. A Party may request additional information on the award of the contract that may be necessary to determine if a purchase was made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter with respect to offers that have not been selected. For this purpose, the Party of the purchasing entity will provide information on the relative characteristics and advantages of the winning offer and the price of the contract. When disclosure of this information may prejudice competition in future tenders, the requesting Party may not disclose the information except after consulting with and obtaining the consent of the Party that provided the information.
4. Each Party shall provide to the other Party, upon request, the information available to that Party or its entities on its entities' covered purchases and on individual contracts awarded by its entities.
5. No Party may disclose confidential information the disclosure of which would harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person or would be detrimental to fair competition between suppliers, without the formal authorization of the person who provided such information to the Party.
6. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a Party to provide confidential information the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest.
7. With a view to ensuring effective supervision of purchases covered by this Chapter, each Party shall collect statistics and provide the other Party with an annual report in accordance with the following requirements, unless the Parties otherwise agree:
a. statistics on the estimated value of the contracts awarded, both below and above the value of the applicable thresholds, broken down by entity;
b. statistics on the number and total value of contracts above the value of the applicable thresholds, broken down by entities, by categories of goods and services established in accordance with the classification systems developed under this chapter and by country of origin of the goods and purchased services;
c. Statistics on the total number and value of contracts awarded under Article 12-16, broken down by entity, by category of goods or services, and by country of origin of the goods and services purchased; Y
d. Statistics on the number and total value of contracts awarded in accordance with the exceptions to this chapter established in annexes 8 and 9 to article 12-02, broken down by entity.
8. Each Party may organize by state or municipality any portion of the report referred to in paragraph 7 that corresponds to the entities indicated in Annex 3 to Article 12-02.
Article 12-20: Technical cooperation.
1. The Parties shall cooperate, to achieve a greater understanding of their public sector procurement systems, with a view to achieving the greatest access to public sector procurement opportunities for suppliers of any of them.
2. Each Party will provide the other and its suppliers, on a cost recovery basis, information regarding training and orientation programs related to its public sector procurement systems and access without discrimination to any program it carries out.
3. The training and orientation programs referred to in paragraph 2 include:
a. training of public sector personnel directly involved in public sector procurement procedures;
b. training of suppliers interested in taking advantage of public sector purchasing opportunities;
c. the explanation and description of specific aspects of each Party's public sector procurement system, such as its challenge mechanism; Y
d. information regarding public sector procurement market opportunities.
4. Each Party shall establish, no later than the entry into force of this Agreement, at least one contact point to provide information on the training and orientation programs referred to in this article.
Article 12-21: Joint participation programs for micro, small and medium industry.
1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will establish the Micro, Small and Medium Industry Committee, made up of representatives of each Party. The Committee will meet by mutual agreement of the Parties, but not less than once a year, and will report annually to the Commission on the efforts of the Parties to promote public sector procurement opportunities for their micro, small, and medium-sized industries.
2. The Committee shall work to facilitate the following activities of the Parties:
a. the identification of available opportunities for the training of the personnel of micro, small and medium-sized industries in terms of public sector purchasing procedures;
b. the identification of micro, small and medium-sized industries interested in becoming business partners of micro, small and medium-sized industries in the territory of the other Party;
c. the development of databases on micro, small and medium-sized industries in the territory of each Party to be used by entities of the other Party that wish to make purchases from smaller-scale companies;
d. consultations regarding the factors that each Party uses to establish its eligibility criteria for any program for micro, small, and medium-sized industries; Y
and. carrying out activities to deal with any related matter.
Article 12-22: Rectifications or modifications.
1. A Party may modify its coverage under this chapter only in exceptional circumstances.
2. When a Party modifies its coverage under this chapter:
a. notify its national section of the Secretariat and the other Parties of the modification;
b. it will incorporate the change to the corresponding annex; Y
c. will propose to the other Party appropriate compensatory adjustments to its coverage, in order to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that existing before the modification.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may make exclusively formal rectifications and minor amendments to its schedules in Annexes 1 to 6, 8 and 9 to Article 12-02, provided that it notifies the other Party of those rectifications. and its national section of the Secretariat, and no Party expresses its objection to the proposed rectifications within a period of 30 days. In those cases, it will not be necessary to propose compensation.
4. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, a Party may carry out reorganizations of its public sector entities covered by this Chapter, including programs for the decentralization of the purchases of those entities or the corresponding public functions cease to be carried out by any public sector entity, whether or not included in this chapter. In those cases, it will not be necessary to propose compensation. Neither Party may carry out such reorganizations or programs in order to evade compliance with the obligations of this chapter.
5. Each Party may resort to the dispute resolution procedure in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII, (Dispute Resolution), when it considers that:
a. the adjustment proposed in accordance with subparagraph c) of paragraph 2 is not adequate to maintain a level comparable to that of the mutually agreed coverage; either
b. a minor rectification or amendment in accordance with paragraph 3 or a reorganization in accordance with paragraph 4 does not meet the requirements stipulated in those paragraphs and, as a consequence, requires compensation.
Article 12-23: Alienation of entities.
1. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from disposing of an entity covered by this chapter.
2. If, through the public offering of shares of an entity contained in Annex 2 to Article 12-02, or through other methods, the entity ceases to be subject to central or federal governmental control, the Party may remove that entity from its list in that annex and remove the entity from the coverage of this chapter, after notifying the other Party and its national section of the Secretariat.
3. When a Party objects to the withdrawal of the entity because it considers that the entity in question remains subject to central or federal government control, that Party may resort to the dispute settlement procedure pursuant to Chapter XVII, (Dispute Settlement).
Article 12-24: Future negotiations.
1. With a view to achieving the further liberalization of their respective public sector procurement markets, the Parties shall begin negotiations when so determined by the Commission.
2. In those negotiations, the Parties shall review all aspects of their public sector procurement practices for the purposes of:
a. evaluate the operation of their public sector procurement systems;
b. seek to expand the coverage of the chapter by incorporating:
i) other parastatal companies, decentralized entities and public companies; Y
ii) purchases subject in some way to legislative or administrative exceptions; Y
c. review the value of the thresholds.
3. Prior to such review, the Parties shall consult with their state or municipal governments with a view to reaching commitments, on a voluntary and reciprocal basis, for the incorporation into this chapter of purchases by state or municipal government entities and companies.
Annex 1 to the article12-02
Central or federal government entities
Costa Rican Roster
1. Presidency of the Republic
2. Ministry of the Presidency
3. Ministry of the Interior and Police
4. Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship
5. Ministry of Public Security
6. Ministry of Finance
7. Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
8. Ministry of Economy, Industry and Commerce
9. Ministry of Public Works and Transport
10. Ministry of Public Education
11. Ministry of Labor and Social Security
12. Ministry of Health
13. Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports
14. Ministry of Justice and Grace
15. Ministry of Housing and Human Settlements
16. Ministry of National Planning and Economic Policy
17. Ministry of Science and Technology
18. Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Mines
19. Ministry of Foreign Trade
20. Judiciary
21. Supreme Court of Elections
22. Legislative Assembly of the Republic of Costa Rica
23. Comptroller General of the Republic
24. Defender of the Inhabitants of the Republic
Mexico Roster
1. Ministry of the Interior
- National Center for Municipal Studies
- Qualifying Commission for Publications and Illustrated Magazines
- National Population Council
- General Archive of the Nation
- National Institute of Historical Studies of the Mexican Revolution
- Board of Assistance for Social Reincorporation
- National Center for Disaster Prevention
- National Council of Radio and Television
- Mexican Commission for Aid to Refugees
2. Ministry of Foreign Relations
- Mexican Section of the International Boundary and Water Commission Mexico-USA
- Mexican Section of the International Boundary and Water Commission Mexico-Guatemala
3. Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
- National Banking Commission
- National Value Comission
- National Insurance and Bond Commission
- National Institute of Statistics, Geography and Informatics
4. Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulic Resources
- Mexican Institute of Water Technology
- National Institute of Forestry and Agricultural Research
- Support for Agricultural Marketing Services (Aserca)
5. Ministry of Communications and Transportation (including the Mexican Institute of Communications and the Mexican Institute of Transportation)
6. Secretariat of Commerce and Industrial Development
7. Ministry of Public Education
- National Institute of Anthropology and History
- National Institute of Fine Arts and Literature
- Radio Education
- Center for Engineering and Industrial Development
- National Council for Culture and the Arts
- National Sports Commission
8. Ministry of Health
- Administration of the Patrimony of Public Charity
- National Center for Blood Transfusion
- General Management of Biologicals and Reagents
- Center for the Development of Health Infrastructure
- Institute of Human Communication Dr. Andrés Bustamante Gurría
- National Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine
- National Institute of Orthopedics
- National Council for the Prevention and Control of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (Conasida)
9. Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare
- Federal Labor Defense Attorney
10. Secretariat of Agrarian Reform
- Agrarian Training Institute
11. Secretariat of Fisheries
- National Fisheries Institute
12. Office of the Attorney General of the Republic
13. Ministry of Energy, Mines and Parastatal Industry
- National Commission for Nuclear Safety and Safeguards
- National Commission for Energy Saving
14. Ministry of Social Development
15. Ministry of Tourism
16. Secretariat of the Comptroller General of the Federation
17.National Defense Secretariat
18. Secretary of the Navy
Annex 2 to the article12-02
Parastatal companies, decentralized entities and public companies
Costa Rican Roster
1. Melico Salazar Popular Theater
2. Road Safety Council
3. Central American School of Livestock
4. National Theater Company
5. Costa Rican Center for Film Production
6. Technical Council of Medical Assistance and Medical Social
7. Technical Council of Civil Aviation
8. Pig Development Board
9. Center for the Promotion of Exports and Investments
10. Experiment Stations
11. National Meteorological Institute
12. Administrative Board of National Printing
13. National Center for Women's Development
14. Administrative Board of the National Archive
15. Administrative Board of the Juan Santamaría Cultural Historical Museum
16. Administrative Board of the National Registry
17. National Youth Movement
18. Board of Construction, Facilities and Acquisition of Goods
19. Museum of Costa Rican Art
20. National Museum
21. National Seed Office
22. Administrative Board of the National Symphony Orchestra
23. Agricultural Production Increase Program
24. Board of Directors of the National Theater
25. University College of Alajuela
26. University College of Cartago
27. University College of Puntarenas
28. National Commission for Indigenous Affairs
29. National Council for Rehabilitation and Special Education
30. National Council for Scientific and Technological Research
31. Costa Rican Tourism Institute
32. Institute of Agrarian Development
33. Costa Rican Coffee Institute
34. Mixed Institute of Social Aid
35. National Institute of Learning
36. Technical Institute of Costa Rica
37. Rice Office
38. National Children's Board
39. International Agricultural Marketing Program
40. National Groundwater and Irrigation Drainage Service
41. National Electricity Service
42. National Radio and Television System
43. State Distance University
44. University of Costa Rica
45. National University
46. ​​Cementos del Pacífico SA
47. National Power and Light Company
48. National Production Council
49. Administrative Board of the General Directorate of Communications
50. Editorial Costa Rica
51. Heredia Public Services Company
52. Fertilizers from Central America
53. Costa Rican Institute of Electricity
54. Costa Rican Railway Institute
55. Costa Rican Institute of Pacific Ports
56. Quepos Port Administrative Board
57. Port Administrative Board and Economic Development of the Atlantic Slope
58. Cartago Electric Service Administrative Board
59. San José Social Protection Board
60. Costa Rican Radiographic
61. Costa Rican Oil Refinery
62. Anglo Costa Rican Bank
63. Central Bank of Costa Rica
64. Agricultural Credit Bank of Cartago
65. Bank of Costa Rica
66. National Bank of Costa Rica
67. Popular Bank and Community Development
68. National Commission on Loans for Education
69. Costa Rican Development Corporation
70. National Fund for Agricultural Contingencies
71. Municipal Development-Consulting Institute
72. National Insurance Institute
73. National Institute for Cooperative Development
74. National Institute of Housing and Urbanism
75. Housing Mortgage Bank
76. National Geological Institute
77. Minera Nacional S.A.
78. Institute on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence
79. National Board of the Blind
80. Occupational Health Council
81. Livestock and Animal Health Program
82. Tobacco Defense Board
Mexico Roster
Printing and Publishing
1. National Graphic Workshops
2. Producer and Importer of Paper SA de CV (PIPSA)
Communications and Transportation
3. Airports and Auxiliary Services (ASa)
4. Federal Roads and Bridges of Income and Related Services (Capufe)
5. Mexican Postal Service
6. National Railways of Mexico (Ferronales)
7. Telecommunications of Mexico (Telecom)
Industry
8. Petróleos Mexicanos (Pemex) (Does not include fuel and gas purchases)
- Pemex Exploration and Production
- Permex Refining
- Permex Gas and Basic Petrochemicals
- Permex Petrochemicals
9. Federal Electricity Commission (CFE)
10. Mineral Resources Board
Commerce
11. Compañía Nacional de Subsistencias Populares (Conasupo) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.)
12. Bodegas Rurales Conasupo, SA de CV
13. Distribuidora e Impulsora de Comercio SA de CV (Diconsa)
14. Leche Industrializada Conasupo, SA de CV (Liconsa) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
15. Federal Consumer Attorney's Office
16. National Industrial Development Laboratories
17. National Market Information Service
Social Security
18. Institute of Security and Social Services for State Workers (ISSSTE)
19. Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS)
20. National System for the Comprehensive Development of the Family (DIF) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.)
21. Assistance Services of the Secretary of the Navy
22. Social Security Institute for the Mexican Armed Forces
23. National Indigenous Institute (INI)
24. National Institute for Adult Education
25. Youth Integration Centers
26. National Institute of Senescence
Others
27. Administrative Committee of the Federal School Construction Program (CAPFCE)
28. National Water Commission (CNa)
29. Commission for the Regularization of Land Tenure
30. National Council of Science and Technology (Conacyt)
31. Notimex, SA de CV
32. Mexican Institute of Cinematography
33. National Lottery for Public Assistance
34. Sports Betting
35. National Commission for Arid Zones
36. National Commission for Free Textbooks
37. National Human Rights Commission
38. National Council for Educational Promotion
Annex 3 to the article12-02
State or municipal government entities
1. Province of San Jose
- Saint Joseph
- Escazu
- Homeless
- Puriscal
- Tarrazu
- Aserri
- Blackberry
-Goicoechea
- Saint Ana
- Alajuelita
- crowned
-Acosta
- Tibas
- Moravian
- Mountains of Oca
- Turrubares
- Dota
-Curridabat
- Perez Zeledon
- Leon Cortes
2. Province of Alajuela
-Alajuela
- San Ramon
- Greece
- Saint Matthew
- Athens
- Orange tree
- Palmares
- Poás
- Orotine
- Saint Charles
- Alfaro Ruiz
-Valverde Vega
- The chiles
-Upala
- Guatuso
- White Rocks
3. Province of Cartago
- Carthage
- Paradise
- The Union
- Jimenez
- Turrialba
-Alvarado
- Oreamuno
- The Guarco
- Cervantes
- Tucurrique
4. Province of Heredia
- Heredia
- Barva
- Santo Domingo
- Saint Barbara
- San Rafael
- San Isidro
- Belen
- Flowers
- Saint Paul
- Sarapiqui
5. Province of Guanacaste
- Liberia
-Nicoya
- Santa Cruz
- bagaces
- Cheek
- reeds
- Abangares
- Tilaran
-Nandayure
- The cross
- Hojancha
- Colorado
6. Province of Puntarenas
- Puntarenas
- Spread
- Buenos Aires
- Mountains of Gold
- bear
-Aguirre
- Golfito
- Coto Brus
- Parrita
- Runners
- doodle
- Cobano
- Lepanto
- Large paddock
7. Province of Limon
- Lemon
- Pococí
-Siquirres
- Talamanca
- Morning
- Guacimo
8. Other institutions
- National Union of Local Governments
- League of Municipalities of Heredia
- League of Municipalities of Western Alajuela
- League of Municipalities of Guanacaste
Annex 4 to the article12-02
List of goods
Section A - General Provisions
1. This chapter applies to all property, except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 3.
2. In relation to Costa Rica, the assets of a strategic nature indicated in section B acquired by the Ministry of the Interior and the municipalities and the Ministry of Security are excluded from the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of article 12 -18.
3. In relation to Mexico, the strategic assets indicated in section B acquired by the Ministry of National Defense and the Ministry of the Navy are excluded from the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of article 12-18 .
Section B - List of certain assets
Armament
nuclear war material
fire control equipment
ammunition and explosives
guided missiles
Aircraft and Aircraft Structural Components
Aircraft components and accessories
Aircraft take-off, landing and ground handling equipment
space vehicles
Boats, small structures, pangas and floating docks
Vessels and maritime equipment
Annex 5 to the article12-02
Service List
Section A - General Provisions
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter IX (General principles on trade in services), this chapter shall apply to purchases of services from the moment each Party draws up its list of reservations in accordance with the agreed commitments and deadlines. in Chapter IX (General principles on trade in services). Until that time, the Parties will apply their legislation in force on the matter on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. No amendment to that legislation may be more restrictive.
2. The Parties shall develop a common classification system for services no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Annex 6 to the article12-02
Construction services
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter IX (General principles on trade in services), this Chapter shall apply to purchases of construction services from the moment each Party draws up its list of reservations in accordance with the commitments and deadlines agreed in Chapter IX (General principles on trade in services). Until that time, the Parties will apply their legislation in force on the matter on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. No amendment to that legislation may be more restrictive.
2. The Parties shall develop a common classification system for construction services no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Annex 7 to the article12-02
Indexing and conversion of threshold value
1. The calculations referred to in literal c), paragraph 1 of article 12-02, will be made in accordance with the following:
a. the inflation rate of the United States of America will be determined based on the producer price index for finished goods published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States of America;
b. the first adjustment for inflation, which will take effect on January 1, 1997, will be calculated based on the period from November 1, 1995, to October 30, 1996;
c. all subsequent adjustments will be calculated over biennial periods, beginning on November 1, and taking effect on January 1 of the year immediately following the end of the biennial period;
d. the inflationary adjustment will be estimated according to the following formula:
T0 x (1+π i )= T1;
T0 = ​​threshold value in the base period;
π i = accumulated inflation rate in the United States of America in the i-th biennial period; Y
T1 = new threshold value.
2. The exchange rate for determining the value of the thresholds, for the purposes of this chapter, will be the current value of the Costa Rican colon and the Mexican peso in relation to the US dollar as of the date of publication of the notice of the projected contract. The Parties will calculate and convert the value of the thresholds into their own currencies. It is understood that these calculations will be based on the official exchange rate of the Central Bank of Costa Rica and the Bank of Mexico.
Annex 8 to the article12-02
Transition mechanisms
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, annexes 1 to 8 of article 12-02 are subject to the following:
Mexico Roster
Pemex, CFE and construction for the non-energy sector
1. Mexico may reserve from the obligations of this chapter for one year as described in paragraph 2, the percentage defined in that paragraph of:
a. the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods and services and any combination thereof and the construction services acquired by Pemex during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in literal c), paragraph 1 of article 12 -02;
b. the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods and services and any combination thereof and the construction services acquired by CFE during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in literal c), paragraph 1 of article 12 -02;
c. the total value of the contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in literal c), paragraph 1 of article 12-02, excluding contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired by Pemex and CFE.
2. The years to which paragraph 1 applies and the percentages for those years are as follows:
3. The value of purchase contracts that are financed by loans from multilateral and regional financial institutions shall not be included in the calculation of the total value of purchase contracts in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2. Purchase contracts that are financed for these loans will not be subject to any of the restrictions indicated in this chapter.
pharmaceutical goods
4. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, this chapter shall not apply to purchases of medicines made by the Ministry of Health, the IMSS, the ISSSTE, the Ministry of National Defense and the Ministry of the Navy, which are not currently patented in Mexico or whose Mexican patents have expired. Nothing in this paragraph shall prejudice rights under Chapter XIV (Intellectual Property).
Annex 9 to the article12-02
General notes
Costa Rican Roster
1. This chapter does not apply to purchases made:
a. with a view to commercial resale by government stores;
b. in accordance with loans from regional or multilateral financial institutions to the extent that those instruments agree to different procedures; neither
c. between one and another entity of Costa Rica.
2. This chapter does not apply to the purchase of transportation services that are part of a purchase contract, or are related to it.
3. National security exceptions include purchases made in support of safeguarding nuclear materials or technology.
4. The provisions related to the selective bidding procedure will not be applied until Costa Rican legislation regulates and develops this procedure.
5. In literal c), paragraph 1 of article 12-15, the confirmations of the offers presented by the mechanisms authorized therein will be made, if applicable, by any of the means of legal representation.
6. Subparagraph f) of paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 of article 12-17 will not apply in the case of Costa Rica.
7. Challenge and appeal mechanisms:
a. To comply with the provisions of literal a), paragraph 1 of article 12-17 in the case of Costa Rica, suppliers may challenge the conditions established in the call or the bidding conditions for reasons of discrimination, defects in the procedure or for deeming that certain conditions illegitimately limit the freedom of competition or violate equal opportunities; or file an appeal when they consider that the adjudication act is substantially inconsistent with the legal system or that the legal procedure is flawed with absolute nullity;
b. The appeal to challenge the conditions established in the call or the bidding conditions, duly reasoned, will be filed with the reviewing authority within the first third of the term conferred for the receipt of offers. The reviewing authority will dictate its resolution within the second third of the indicated term;
c. The appeal against the adjudication act shall be filed, duly substantiated, before the reviewing authority within five business days following the date of publication referred to in paragraph 7 of article 12-15.
Mexico Roster
1. This chapter does not apply to purchases made:
a. with a view to commercial resale by government stores;
b. in accordance with lending from regional or multilateral financial institutions to the extent that such institutions impose different procedures, except for local content requirements; either
c. between one entity and another in Mexico.
2. This chapter does not apply to the purchase of transportation services that are part of or related to a purchase contract.
3. National security exceptions include purchases made in support of safeguarding nuclear materials or technology.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, Mexico may reserve purchase contracts for the obligations of this chapter, for an amount equivalent to 5% of its total annual purchases.
5. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of article 12-17, when investigating the challenge, the reviewing authority may delay the award of the proposed contract until the resolution of the challenge, except in cases of urgency or when the delay could be contrary to the public interest.
Annex to the article12-11
Publications for purchase calls in accordance with article 12-11
Costa Rican Roster
1. The Official Gazette "La Gaceta".
2. Costa Rica will endeavor to establish a specialized publication for the purposes of the purchase calls. When that publication is established, it will supersede the one referred to in paragraph 1.
Mexico Roster
The specialized section of the Official Gazette of the Federation.
Annex to the article12-19
Publications for measures according to article 12-19
Costa Rican Roster
1. The Official Gazette "La Gaceta".
2. Costa Rica will endeavor to establish a specialized publication for the purposes of the purchase calls. When that publication is established, it will supersede the one referred to in paragraph 1.
Mexico Roster
1. Official Gazette of the Federation.
2. Judicial Weekly of the Federation (only for jurisprudence.
Chapter XIII
Investment
Section A - Investment
Article 13-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
ICSID: International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes;
New York Convention: United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held in New York, June 10, 1958;
Inter-American Convention : Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, held in Panama on January 30, 1975;
ICSID Convention: the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded in Washington on March 18, 1965;
claim: the claim made by the disputing investor against a Party under the terms of section B of this chapter;
company: any legal person, constituted or organized under the legislation of a Party, whether or not for profit and privately or governmental property, as well as other organizations or economic units that are constituted or, in any case, duly organized under that legislation, such as branches, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures or other associations;
enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party and having its domicile in the territory of that Party; and a branch located in the territory of a Party that carries out business activities therein;
investment: all kinds of assets and rights of any nature, acquired with resources transferred to the territory of a Party, or reinvested in it, by investors of another Party, such as:
- shares and any other form of participation in the capital stock of companies constituted or organized in accordance with the legislation of the other Party;
- rights derived from all types of contributions made with the purpose of creating economic value (or obligations, credits and rights to any benefit that have economic value);
- movable and immovable property, as well as other real rights such as mortgages, pledge rights, usufruct and similar rights;
- rights in the field of intellectual property; Y
- rights to carry out economic and commercial activities granted by law or under a contract.
but does not include:
- a payment obligation of, nor the granting of a credit to, the State or a State company; neither
- pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:
a. commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of one Party to a national or company in the territory of another Party; either
b. the granting of credit in relation to a commercial transaction, whose expiration date is less than three years, such as trade financing;
disputing investor: an investor who submits a claim to arbitration under the terms of section B of this chapter;
investment of an investor of a Party: the investment owned or controlled by an investor of a Party made in the territory of another Party. In the case of a company, an investment is owned by an investor of a Party if that investor owns more than 49% of its share capital. An investment is controlled by an investor of a Party if that investor has the power to appoint a majority of its directors or otherwise direct its operations;
investor of a Party: a Party or a company of the same, or a national or company of that Party, that carries out the legal acts tending to materialize the investment, being in the process of committing a significant amount of capital or, in its case, makes or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party;
national of a Party: a natural person who is a national of a Party in accordance with its law;
Disputing Party: the Party against which a claim is made in arbitration under the terms of section B of this chapter;
disputing party: the disputing investor or the disputing Party;
disputing parties: the disputing investor and the disputing Party;
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 15, 1976;
Secretary General: Secretary General of ICSID;
transfers: international remittances and payments;
court: a court established under article 13-25;
accumulation tribunal: an arbitral tribunal established under article 13-28.
Article 13-02: Scope of application and extension of obligations.
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
a. investors of another Party, in everything related to their investment;
b. investments of investors of another Party made in the territory of the Party after the entry into force of this Agreement. However, it will also apply to investments made prior to its validity and that have the quality of foreign investment. It will not apply, however, to controversies or claims arising or resolved prior to its entry into force, or related to events that occurred prior to its entry into force, even if its effects remain even after it; Y
c. all investments of investors of a Party in the territory of another Party, in relation to article 13-06.
2. This chapter does not apply to:
a. the economic activities reserved to each Party, in accordance with their legislation in force on the date of signing this Agreement, which will be listed within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of this Agreement;
b. the measures adopted or maintained by a Party in the area of ​​financial services;
c. the measures adopted by a Party to restrict the participation of investments by investors of another Party in its territory for reasons of public order or national security.
3. This Chapter applies throughout the territory of the Parties and at any level or order of government notwithstanding any incompatible measures that may exist in the laws of those levels or orders of government.
Article 13-03: National treatment.
Each Party shall provide investors of another Party and the investments of investors of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors and to the investments of those investors.
Article 13-04: Most favored nation treatment.
1. Each Party shall provide to investors of another Party and to investments of investors of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it accords in similar circumstances, to investors and to investments of investors of another Party or of a country that is not a party, except as provided in paragraph
2. If a Party has granted special treatment to investors or their investments, coming from a country that is not a party, by virtue of bilateral investment treaties or agreements that establish free trade zones, customs unions, common markets, economic or monetary unions or other similar economic integration institutions, that Party shall not be obliged to grant the treatment in question to investors or to investments of investors of another Party.
Article 13-05: Treatment in case of losses.
Each Party shall grant investors of another Party, with respect to investments that suffer losses in its territory due to armed conflicts or civil strife, in the event of an act of God or force majeure (natural disasters), non-discriminatory treatment with respect to any measure that it adopts or maintains. in connection with those losses.
Article 13-06: Performance requirements.
1. No Party may impose or force compliance with the following requirements or commitments, in relation to any investment of an investor of another Party in its territory:
a. export a certain level or percentage of goods;
b. reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;
c. acquire or use or grant preference to goods produced in its territory or acquire goods from producers in its territory; either
d. relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with that investment.
2. No Party may condition the receipt of an incentive or the continued receipt thereof, to the fulfillment of the following requirements, in relation to any investment of an investor of another Party in its territory:
a. acquire or use or grant preference to goods produced in its territory or to purchase goods from producers in its territory;
b. reach a certain degree or percentage of national content; either
c. relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with that investment.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to any requirement other than those stated therein.
4. The provisions contained in:
a. Subparagraphs a), b) and c) of paragraph 1 and subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 do not apply in relation to the requirements for qualification of goods with respect to export promotion programs and foreign aid;
b. Subparagraphs b) and c) of paragraph 1 and subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 do not apply to purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise;
c. Subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 do not apply to the requirements imposed by an importing Party related to the necessary content of the goods to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.
5. Nothing in the provisions of this article shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to impose, in relation to any investment in its territory, requirements for the geographical location of productive units, for the generation of employment or labor training, or for carrying out of research and development activities.
6. In the event that, in the opinion of a Party, the imposition by another Party of any of the requirements indicated below negatively affects the flow of trade or constitutes a significant barrier to investment by an investor of another Party, the matter will be considered by the Commission:
a. restrict the sales in their territory of the goods that this investment produces, relating in any way those sales to the volume or value of their exports or to the earnings in foreign currency that they generate;
b. transfer to a person in their territory, technology, production process or other reserved knowledge, except when the requirement is imposed by a judicial or administrative court or competent authority to remedy an alleged violation of competition law or to act in a manner that it is not inconsistent with other provisions of this Agreement; either
c. act as the exclusive supplier of the goods it produces for a specific, regional or global market.
7. If the Commission finds that, in effect, the requirement in question adversely affects the flow of trade or constitutes a significant barrier to investment by an investor from another Party, it shall adopt the necessary measures to suppress the practice in question. The Parties shall consider these provisions as incorporated into this Agreement.
Article 13-07: Senior business management.
1. No Party may require that a company of a Party appoint individuals of any particular nationality to senior management positions in that company.
2. A Party may require that the majority of the members of the governing bodies of a company be of a particular nationality, provided that the result does not materially impair the investor's ability to exercise control of his investment.
Article 13-08: Reservations and exceptions.
1. Articles 13-03, 13-04, 13-06 and 13-07 do not apply to any inconsistent measure maintained or adopted by a Party, whatever the level or order of government, which shall be listed within a period no more than one year from the entry into force of this Agreement. The incompatible measure adopted by a Party may not be more restrictive than those existing at the time that measure is enacted.
2. The treatment granted by a Party in accordance with Article 13-04 does not apply to the treaties or sectors listed within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of this Agreement.
3. Articles 13-03, 13-04 and 13-07 do not apply to:
a. acquisitions made by a Party or by a State enterprise; either
b. subsidies or contributions, including government loans, guarantees and insurance granted by a Party or by a State enterprise, except as provided in paragraph 2 of article 13-05.
Article 13-09: Transfers.
1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to the investment of an investor of one Party in the territory of another Party to be made freely and without delay. Those transfers include:
a. profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administrative expenses, technical assistance, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;
b. goods derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;
c. payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or an investor's investment is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;
d. payments derived from compensation for expropriation concept; Y
and. payments that come from the application of the provisions related to the dispute resolution mechanism contained in section B of this chapter.
2. Each Party shall allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currencies at the prevailing market exchange rate on the date of the transfer.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, the Parties may prevent the making of transfers, through the equitable and non-discriminatory application of their legislation in the following cases:
a. bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;
b. issuance, trading and operations of securities;
c. criminal or administrative offenses;
d. reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments;
and. guarantee of compliance with sentences or awards rendered in a contentious process; either
F. Establishment of the necessary instruments or mechanisms to ensure the payment of income taxes by means such as withholding the amount related to dividends or other concepts.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, each Party shall have the right, in circumstances of exceptional or serious balance of payments difficulties, to temporarily limit transfers, in an equitable and non-discriminatory manner, in accordance with internationally accepted criteria. Limitations adopted or maintained by a Party pursuant to this paragraph, as well as their removal, shall be promptly notified to the other Party.
Article 13-10: Expropriation and compensation.
1. No Party may nationalize or expropriate, directly or indirectly, an investment of an investor of another Party in its territory, or take any measure equivalent to the expropriation or nationalization of that investment ("expropriation"), unless it is:
a. for reasons of public utility;
b. on non-discriminatory grounds;
c. with adherence to the principle of legality; Y
d. by compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4.
2. Compensation will be equal to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out ("expropriation date"), and will not reflect any change in value due to the intent to expropriate is known in advance of the expropriation date. The valuation criteria will include the declared fiscal value of tangible assets, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value.
3. The payment of the compensation will be made without delay and will be fully payable.
4. The amount paid shall not be less than the equivalent amount paid for compensation in a freely convertible currency in the international financial market, on the date of expropriation, and this currency would have been converted at the current market price on the date of expropriation. valuation date, plus the interest that would have been generated at a reasonable commercial rate for that currency, selected by the Party in accordance with international parameters, up to the date of payment.
Article 13-11: Special formalities and information requirements.
1. Nothing in Article 13-03 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of another Party, such as investments being constituted in accordance with to the Party's law, provided that such formalities do not materially impair the protection afforded by a Party under this Chapter.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 13-03 and 13-04, the Parties may require an investor of another Party or its investment in its territory to provide routine information regarding that investment exclusively for information or statistics. The Party will protect the information that is confidential, from any disclosure that could adversely affect the competitive situation of the investment or of the investor.
Article 13-12: Relationship with other chapters.
In case of incompatibility between a provision of this chapter and the provision of another, the provision of the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.
Article 13-13: Denial of benefits.
A Party, upon notice and consultation with another Party, may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of another Party that is an enterprise of that Party and to investments of that investor, if investors from a non-Party own or control the enterprise, within the meaning of the definition of "investment by an investor of a Party" in Article 13-01, and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is constituted or organized.
Article 13-14: Extraterritorial application of the legislation of a Party.
1. Each Party, in relation to the investments of its investors constituted or organized under the legislation of another Party, may not exercise jurisdiction or adopt any measure that has the effect of extraterritorial application of its legislation or the obstruction of trade between the Parties. , or between a Party and a country that is not a Party.
2. If a Party fails to comply with the provisions of paragraph 1, the Party where the investment was established may, at its discretion, adopt the measures and exercise the actions it deems necessary, in order to render the legislation or measure without effect. in question and the obstacles to trade resulting therefrom.
Article 13-15: Measures related to the environment.
1. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting, maintaining, or putting into effect any measure consistent with this chapter that it deems appropriate to ensure that investments in its territory comply with ecological or environmental legislation in that Party. .
2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by relaxing domestic measures applicable to health, safety, ecology or the environment. Consequently, neither Party shall eliminate or undertake to exempt from the application of those measures the investment of an investor, as a means to induce the establishment, acquisition, expansion or maintenance of the investment in its territory. If a Party believes that another Party has encouraged an investment in this way, it may request consultations with that Party.
Article 13-16: Promotion of investments and exchange of information.
1. With the intention of significantly increasing reciprocal investment participation, each Party shall prepare investment opportunity promotion documents and design mechanisms for their dissemination; likewise, each Party will maintain and improve financial mechanisms that make the investments of one Party in the territory of another Party viable.
2. Each Party shall disclose detailed information on opportunities to:
a. investment in its territory, which may be developed by investors from another Party;
b. strategic alliances between investors of each Party, through the investigation and compilation of interests and association opportunities;
c. investment in specific economic sectors of interest to each Party and its investors, according to the express request made by a Party.
3. The Parties agree to stay informed and updated regarding:
a. the investment opportunities referred to in paragraph 2, including the dissemination of available financial instruments that help increase investment in the territory of the Parties;
b. legislation that, directly or indirectly, affects foreign investment including, among others, exchange and fiscal regimes;
c. the behavior of foreign investment in their respective territories.
4. Nothing in paragraphs 1 to 3 shall impose any additional obligation on each Party in relation to the systems of registration, control, verification or investigation of investment opportunities or existing investment in its territory.
Article 13-17: Double taxation
The Parties, with the aim of promoting investments within their respective territories by eliminating obstacles of a tax nature and monitoring compliance with tax obligations through the exchange of tax information, agree to initiate negotiations leading to the conclusion of agreements to avoid double taxation, according to the calendar established between the competent authorities of the Parties.
Section B - Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party.
Article 13-18: Purpose.
This section establishes a mechanism for the settlement of disputes of a legal nature in investment matters that arise as a consequence of the violation of an obligation established in section A of this chapter, and that arise between a Party and an investor of another Party to from the entry into force of this Agreement, and which ensures equal treatment between investors of the Parties in accordance with the principle of international reciprocity, as well as the due exercise of the guarantee of hearing and defense within a legal process before a impartial arbitral tribunal.
Article 13-19: Claim by the investor of a Party on its own account or on behalf of a company.
1. Except as provided in the annex to this article and in accordance with this section, the investor of a Party may, on its own account or on behalf of a company of another Party that is a legal person owned or under its direct control or indirectly, to submit to arbitration a claim based on the fact that another Party or a company controlled directly or indirectly by that Party, has violated an obligation established in this chapter, provided that the investor or his investment has suffered losses or damages in by virtue of the violation or as a consequence of it.
2. The investor may not file a claim under this section if more than three years have elapsed from the date on which he knew or should have known of the alleged violation committed and of the losses or damages suffered.
3. When an investor files a claim on behalf of a company that is a legal person owned or under its direct or indirect control, and in parallel an investor that does not have control of a company files a claim on its own as result of the same acts, or two or more claims are submitted to arbitration under the same action taken by a Party, the consolidation tribunal established pursuant to Article 13-28 shall jointly consider those claims, unless that tribunal determines that the legal interests of a disputing party would be harmed.
4. An investment may not submit a claim to arbitration under this section.
Article 13-20: Settlement of disputes through consultation and negotiation.
The disputing parties will first try to settle the controversy through consultation or negotiation.
Article 13-21: Notification of the intention to submit the claim to arbitration.
The disputing investor shall notify the disputing Party in writing of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration, at least 90 days before the claim is formally filed. The notification will state the following:
a. the name and domicile of the disputing investor and, when the claim has been made on behalf of a company, the denomination or business name and domicile of the same;
b. the provisions of this chapter allegedly breached and any other applicable provision;
c. the facts on which the claim is motivated; Y
d. the repair requested and the approximate amount of the damages claimed, in the currency in which the investment was made.
Article 13-22: Conditions prior to the submission of a claim to the arbitration procedure.
1. The consent of the disputing parties to the arbitration procedure in accordance with this chapter shall be considered as consent to that arbitration to the exclusion of any other mechanism.
2. Each Party may require the prior exhaustion of its administrative remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under this chapter. However, if after six months from the moment the corresponding administrative resources were filed, the administrative authorities have not issued their final resolution, the investor may resort directly to arbitration, in accordance with the provisions of this section.
3. A disputing investor for its own account and an investor representing a company may submit a claim to the arbitration procedure in accordance with this section, only if:
a. in the case of the investor on his own account, he agrees to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures established in this section;
b. in the case of an investor representing a company, both the investor and the company agree to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures established in this section; Y
c. both the investor and a company from another Party, waive their right to initiate proceedings before any judicial court of any Party with respect to the measure allegedly in violation of the provisions of this chapter, except for the relief of administrative resources before the executing authorities themselves. of the allegedly infringing measure, provided for in the law of the disputing Party.
4. The consent and waiver required by this article shall be in writing, delivered to the disputing Party, and included in the submission of the claim to arbitration.
Article 13-23: Submission of the claim to arbitration.
1. Except as provided in the annex to this article and as long as six months have elapsed since the measures giving rise to the claim took place, a disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration in accordance with:
a. the ICSID convention, provided that the disputing Party and the investor Party are party to it;
b. the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, when either the disputing Party or the investor Party, but not both, are parties to the ICSID agreement;
c. the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, when the disputing Party and the investor Party are not party to the ICSID convention.
2. The rules of each of the arbitration procedures established in this chapter will be applicable except to the extent modified by this section.
Article 13-24: Consent to arbitration.
1. Each Party consents to submit claims to arbitration in accordance with the procedures and requirements indicated in this section.
2. The submission of a claim to arbitration by a disputing investor will imply having complied with the requirements indicated in:
a. Chapter II of the ICSID Convention and the Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the Parties;
b. Article II of the New York Convention, which requires a written agreement; Y
c. Article I of the Inter-American Convention, which requires an agreement.
Article 13-25: Number of arbitrators and method of appointment.
With the exception of the provisions of article 13-28, and without prejudice to the fact that the disputing Parties agree otherwise, the tribunal will be made up of three arbitrators. Each disputing Party shall appoint an arbitrator; the third arbitrator, who will be the president of the arbitral tribunal, will be appointed by the disputing Parties by mutual agreement, but will not be a national of one of the disputing parties.
Article 13-26: Composition of the tribunal in the event that a disputing Party does not appoint an arbitrator or an agreement is not reached on the appointment of the president of the arbitral tribunal.
1. The Secretary General shall appoint the arbitrators in the arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this section.
2. When a tribunal other than the one established in accordance with article 13-28, is not integrated within a period of 90 days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, the Secretary General, at the request of any of the disputing parties and, to the extent possible, after consulting them, shall appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed, but not the president of the tribunal, who shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3. In any case, the majority of the arbitrators may not be nationals of one of the disputing parties.
3. The Secretary General shall appoint the president of the tribunal from among the arbitrators from the list referred to in paragraph 4, ensuring that the president of the tribunal is not a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary-General shall designate, from the ICSID Panel of arbitrators, the president of the tribunal, provided that he is not a national of the disputing Party or of the investor's Party. contender.
4. As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall establish and maintain a list of 15 arbitrators as possible presidents of the arbitral tribunal, who meet the qualities established in the ICSID convention, who have experience in international law and in investment matters. The members of the list will be appointed by consensus regardless of their nationality for a period of two years, renewable if the Parties so agree by consensus. In the event of the death or resignation of a member of the list, the Parties by mutual agreement will designate another person to replace him in his functions for the rest of the period for which he was appointed.
Article 13-27: Consent for the appointment of arbitrators.
For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator based on Article 13-26.3, or on a basis other than nationality:
a. the disputing Party accepts the appointment of each member of a tribunal established under the ICSID convention or the Additional Facility Rules;
b. A disputing investor, whether on its own behalf or on behalf of a company, may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID convention or the Additional Facility Rules, only on the condition that the disputing investor and, if applicable, , the company that represents, express their consent in writing on the appointment of each of the members of the court.
Article 13-28: Accumulation of proceedings.
1. A consolidation tribunal established pursuant to this article shall be established in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of those Rules, except as provided in this section.
2. When an accumulation tribunal determines that the claims submitted to arbitration under Article 13-22 raise common issues of fact and law, the accumulation tribunal, in the interest of their fair and efficient resolution, and having heard the disputing parties, may assume jurisdiction, process and resolve:
a. all or part of the claims, jointly; either
b. one or more of the claims on the basis that it will contribute to the resolution of the others.
3. A disputing party that seeks consolidation to be determined under the terms of paragraph 2, shall request the Secretary General to set up a consolidation tribunal and shall specify in its request:
a. the name and address of the disputing parties against whom the accumulation agreement is sought;
b. the nature of the cumulation agreement requested; Y
c. the grounds on which the requested petition is based.
4. Within a period of 60 days from the date of the petition, the Secretary General will set up a consolidation tribunal made up of three arbitrators. The Secretary General shall appoint from the list of arbitrators referred to in paragraph 4 of article 13-26, the president of the accumulation tribunal, who shall not be a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the accumulation tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary General shall designate, from the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators, the president of that tribunal, who shall not be a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Part of the contending investor. The Secretary General will appoint the other two members of the consolidation tribunal from the list referred to in paragraph 4 of Article 13-26 and, when they are not available on that list, will select them from the list of ICSID arbitrators. If there are no arbitrators available on that list, the Secretary General will make the remaining appointments at his discretion, one of the members being a national of the disputing Party and the other national member of a Party of the disputing investors.
5. When an accumulation tribunal has been established, the disputing investor who has submitted a claim to arbitration, and has not been named in the application for accumulation made in accordance with paragraph 3, may request in writing the accumulation tribunal to include you in the joinder request made in accordance with paragraph 2, and specify in that request:
a. the name and domicile of the disputing investor and, where appropriate, the name or business name and domicile of the company;
b. the nature of the cumulation agreement requested; Y
c. the grounds on which the requested petition is based.
6. The accumulation court will provide, at the expense of the interested investor, a copy of the accumulation petition to the disputing investors against whom the accumulation agreement is sought.
7. A tribunal established under article 13-22 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, in respect of which an accumulation tribunal has assumed jurisdiction.
8. At the request of a disputing party, a consolidation tribunal may order, pending its decision pursuant to paragraph 2, that the proceedings of a tribunal established pursuant to article 13-22 be stayed, pending a ruling on the origin of the accumulation.
9. A disputing Party shall deliver to the Secretariat, within 15 days from the date it is received by the disputing Party:
a. a request for arbitration made pursuant to paragraph 1 of article 36 of the ICSID convention;
b. a notice of arbitration under Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; either
c. a notice of arbitration under the terms provided by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.
10. A Party to the dispute shall provide the Secretariat with a copy of the request made in the terms of paragraph 3:
a. within 15 days from the receipt of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing investor; either
b. within 15 days from the date of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing Party.
11. A disputing Party shall provide the Secretariat with a copy of a request made under the terms of paragraph 6 within 15 days from the date of receipt of the request.
12. The Secretariat will keep a public register of the documents referred to in paragraphs 9 to 11.
Article 13-29: Notification.
The disputing Party shall deliver to another non-disputing Party:
a. written notice of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration no later than 30 days after the date of submission of the claim to arbitration; Y
b. copy of all the communications presented in the arbitration procedure.
Article 13-30: Participation of a Party.
A Party may submit submissions to any tribunal established pursuant to this section on a question of interpretation of this Agreement, simultaneously notifying the disputing parties in writing of the content of such submission.
Article 13-31: Documentation.
1. A Party will have, covering the expenses that may be generated, the right to receive from the disputing Party a copy of:
a. evidence offered to any court established under this section; Y
b. written communications submitted by the disputing parties.
2. A Party receiving information pursuant to paragraph 1 shall treat the information as confidential as if it were a disputing Party.
Article 13-32: Seat of the arbitration procedure.
The seat of the arbitral proceeding shall be located in the territory of the disputing Party, unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, in which case any court established under this section shall conduct the arbitral proceeding in the territory of a Party that is a party to the New York Convention, which shall be elected in accordance with:
a. the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those rules or by the ICSID convention; either
b. the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those rules.
Article 13-33: Applicable law.
1. Any tribunal established pursuant to this section shall decide disputes submitted to it in accordance with this Agreement, the applicable rules of international law and, in addition, the law of the disputing Party.
2. The Commission's interpretation of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on any court established pursuant to this section.
Article 13-34: Interpretation of the annexes.
1. When a Party alleges as a defense that a measure allegedly in violation falls within the scope of a reservation or exception contained in any of the annexes, at the request of the disputing Party, any tribunal established pursuant to this section shall request the Commission for an interpretation. on that matter. The Commission, within a period of 60 days from the delivery of the request, will present its interpretation in writing to that court.
2. The Commission's interpretation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be binding on any tribunal established pursuant to this section. If the Commission does not submit an interpretation within 60 days, that court will rule on the matter.
Article 13-35: Provisional or precautionary measures.
A tribunal established under this section may apply to domestic courts, or order disputing parties, provisional measures of protection to preserve the rights of the disputing party or to ensure that the jurisdiction or jurisdiction of the tribunal is fully effective. That court may not order compliance with or suspension of the application of the presumably infringing measure referred to in article 13-19.
Article 13-36: Final award.
1. When a tribunal established under this section makes an award unfavorable to a Party, that tribunal may only award:
a. pecuniary damages and corresponding interests; either
b. the restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the disputing Party may pay pecuniary damages, plus the applicable interest, instead of the restitution.
2. When the claim is made by an investor representing a company based on article 13-19:
a. the award that provides for the restitution of the property will provide that the restitution be granted to the company;
b. the award that awards pecuniary damages and corresponding interest will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company.
3. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, damages will be determined in the currency in which the investment was made.
4. The award will be rendered without prejudice to the rights that a third party with a legal interest may have regarding the reparation of the damages suffered, in accordance with the applicable legislation.
Article 13-37: Execution of the award.
1. The award rendered by any court established pursuant to this section shall be binding only on the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.
2. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 and without prejudice to the fact that the procedures for clarification, review or annulment of the award provided for under the applicable mechanism are appropriate in the opinion of the Secretary General, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.
3. A disputing party may request enforcement of a final award provided that:
a. in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID convention:
i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without a disputing party requesting its clarification, revision, or annulment; either
ii) the clarification, revision or annulment procedures referred to in numeral i) have concluded; Y
b. in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:
i) three months have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without a disputing party having initiated a proceeding to review or annul it; either
ii) a court of the disputing Party has denied (dismissed) or admitted a request for reconsideration or annulment of the award that one of the disputing parties has submitted to the national courts in accordance with its law and this decision cannot be appealed.
4. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory. The award will be enforced in accordance with the rules on enforcement of judgments or awards that are in force in the territories in which enforcement is sought.
5. When a disputing Party fails to comply with an award, the Commission, upon receipt of a request from a Party whose investor was a party to the arbitration proceeding, shall form a panel pursuant to Chapter XVII (Dispute Settlement). The requesting Party may invoke these procedures to obtain:
a. a determination that failure to comply with the terms of the award is contrary to the obligations of this Treaty; Y
b. a recommendation that the Party conform to and observe the award in question.
6. The disputing investor may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID convention, the New York Convention or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the procedures contemplated in paragraph 5 have been initiated.
7. For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or operation.
Article 13-38: General provisions.
1. Moment in which the claim is considered submitted to the arbitration procedure.
A claim is considered submitted to arbitration under the terms of this section when:
a. the request for arbitration under ICSID Article 36 has been received by the Secretary General;
b. the notice of arbitration, pursuant to part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, has been received by the Secretary-General; either
c. the notice of arbitration contemplated in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules has been received by the disputing Party.
2. Delivery of documents.
The delivery of the notification and other documents to a Party shall be made at the place designated by the Party no later than the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. Payments under Insurance or Guarantee Contracts.
In an arbitration proceeding pursuant to the provisions of this section, a Party shall not adduce as a defense, counterclaim, compensation right, or others, that the disputing investor received or will receive, in accordance with an insurance or guarantee contract, compensation or other compensation. for all or part of the alleged damages for which restitution is requested.
4. Publication of awards.
The awards will be published only in the event that there is a written agreement between the disputing parties.
Article 13-39: Exclusions.
The dispute resolution provisions of this section and those of Chapter XVII (Dispute Resolution) shall not apply to the cases contained in the annex to this article.
Annex to Article 13-19
Claim by an investor of a Party, on its own behalf or on behalf of a company
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of article 13-28, in the event that an investor has instituted a process on its own account and, in parallel, another investor of the same investment has instituted a process on behalf of that investment for the same cause, the first of these processes will accumulate to the latter.
2. In the case in which an investor has instituted a process on its own before an arbitral tribunal and, in parallel, another investor of the same investment has instituted a process on its own before a national court, the latter will proceed to attract .
Annex to the article13-23
Submission of the claim to arbitration
When a company of a Party that is a legal person owned by an investor of another Party or that is under its direct or indirect control, alleges in proceedings before a judicial or administrative court, that another Party has allegedly violated an obligation to which referred to in section A of this chapter, the investor or investors may not allege the alleged violation in an arbitration proceeding pursuant to section B of this chapter.
Annex to the article13-39
Exclusions
The resolutions adopted by a Party by virtue of paragraph 2 of Article 13-02, nor the resolution that prohibits or restricts the acquisition of an investment in its territory owned or controlled by nationals of that Party, by an investor of another Party, in accordance with the laws of each Party.
Chapter XIV
Intellectual property
General provisions and basic principles.
Article 14-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
intellectual property rights: all categories of intellectual property that are protected by this chapter, in the terms indicated therein;
nationals of the other Party: with respect to the relevant intellectual property right, persons who would meet the eligibility criteria for protection under the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1971), the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Phonogram Producers against Unauthorized Reproduction of their Phonograms (1971), the Rome Convention on the Protection of Performers, Phonogram Producers and Broadcasting Organizations (1961) and, where appropriate , the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1967);
public: which includes, for the purposes of copyright and related rights in relation to the rights of communication and execution of the works provided for in articles 11, 11 bis (I) and 14.1.2§ of the Berne Convention, with respect to at least to dramatic, dramatic-musical, musical, literary, artistic or cinematographic works, any group of individuals who are intended to be directed and are capable of perceiving communications or performances of works, regardless of whether they can do so at the same time and in the same place or at different times and places, as long as that grouping is larger than a family and its immediate circle of acquaintances or is not a group made up of a limited number of individuals who have the same type of close relationships,that it has not been formed with the main purpose of receiving those executions and communications of works;
encrypted program-carrying satellite signal: one that is transmitted in a form by which auditory or visual characteristics, or both, are modified or altered to prevent reception by persons lacking equipment designed to eliminate the effects of that modification or alteration of the program carried on that signal.
Article 14-02: Protection of intellectual property rights.
1. Each Party shall grant in its territory to the nationals of the other Party adequate and effective protection and defense of intellectual property rights and shall ensure that the measures aimed at defending those rights do not in turn become obstacles to legitimate trade.
2. Each Party may grant in its legislation a broader protection of intellectual property rights than that required in this chapter, provided that such protection is not incompatible with it.
3. Each Party may freely establish the appropriate method for applying the provisions of this Chapter, within the framework of its own legal system and practice.
Article 14-03: Provisions on the matter.
1. In order to provide adequate and effective protection and defense of intellectual property rights, each Party shall apply, at least, the provisions contained in this chapter and the substantive provisions of:
a. the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 1971 (Berne Convention) ;
b. the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against the Unauthorized Reproduction of their Phonograms, 1971 (Geneva Convention);
c. the Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations, 1961 (Rome Convention);
d. the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 1967 (Paris Convention); Y
and. the Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration, 1967 (Lisbon Agreement).
2. In relation to subparagraphs d) and e) of paragraph 1, in the event that a Party is not a party to the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the substantive provisions of those Agreements shall apply in accordance with the provisions of Article attached to this article.
Article 14-04: National treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant nationals of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that granted to its own nationals in terms of protection and defense of intellectual property rights contemplated in this chapter, including patents, utility models, and industrial designs. , subject to the exceptions already provided for in the Berne Convention (1971), the Rome Convention (1961), and, where applicable, the Paris Convention (1967).
2. Neither Party may require the nationals of the other Party to comply with any formality or condition to acquire copyright and related rights, as a condition for the granting of national treatment pursuant to this article.
Article 14-05: Exceptions.
Each Party may resort to the exceptions indicated in Article 14-04 in relation to judicial and administrative procedures for the protection and defense of intellectual property rights, including the designation of a legal domicile or the appointment of an agent within the territory of the Party, provided that such exception:
a. it is necessary to ensure compliance with provisions that are not incompatible with those of this chapter; Y
b. is not applied in such a way as to constitute a disguised restriction on trade.
Article 14-06: Most favored nation treatment.
With respect to the protection of intellectual property, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity that a Party grants to the nationals of any other country shall be granted immediately and without conditions to the nationals of the other Party. Any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by a Party that:
a. are derived from international agreements on judicial assistance and observance of the law of a general nature and not limited in particular to the protection of intellectual property;
b. have been granted in accordance with the provisions of the Berne Convention (1971) or the Rome Convention (1961) that authorize that the treatment granted is not based on national treatment but on the treatment given in the other country; either
c. refer to the rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations that are not provided for in this chapter.
Article 14-07: Control of abusive or anti-competitive practices and conditions.
Each Party may apply appropriate measures, as long as they are compatible with the provisions of this chapter, to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by their holders or the resort to practices that unreasonably limit trade or result in detriment of the transfer technology international.
Article 14-08: Cooperation to eliminate trade in goods that infringe intellectual property rights.
The Parties will cooperate with a view to eliminating trade in goods that infringe intellectual property rights. To that end, the Parties shall establish and publicize contact points, established in their governments, dedicated to exchanging information relating to trade in those goods.
brands
Article 14-09: Matter object of protection.
1. Any sign or combination of signs that make it possible to distinguish the goods or services of one person from those of another may constitute a trademark, since these are considered sufficiently distinctive or capable of identifying the goods or services to which they are applied, compared to those of their same species or class. The marks will include service and collective marks. Each Party may establish as a condition for the registration of a trademark that the signs are visible or capable of graphic representation.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party may deny, in accordance with its laws, the registration of marks that:
a. incorporate, among others, the:
i) national symbols or symbols of other national or international public entities;
ii) signs, words or expressions contrary to morality, public order or good customs;
b. may be misleading as to their origin, nature or quality; either
c. suggest a connection to other brands.
3. Each Party may make the possibility of registration subject to use. However, the application for registration will not be subject to the condition of effective use of a trademark. No Party shall deny an application for registration solely on the grounds that the intended use has not occurred before the expiration of a period of three years, from the date of the application for registration.
4. The nature of the goods and services to which a trademark is applied shall in no case be an obstacle to its registration.
5. Each Party shall publish a trademark before its registration or soon after it, in accordance with its legislation, offering interested persons a reasonable opportunity to oppose their registration or to request its cancellation.
Article 14-10: Rights conferred.
The owner of a registered trademark shall have the right to prevent any third party, without his consent, from using identical or similar signs in commerce for goods or services that are identical or similar to those for which the trademark of the registered trademark has been registered. owner, when that use creates a probability of confusion. It will be presumed that there is a probability of confusion when an identical or similar sign is used for identical or similar goods or services. The aforementioned rights will be granted without prejudice to previously existing rights and will not affect the possibility of each Party to recognize rights based on use.
Article 14-11: Well-known trademarks.
1. Each Party shall undertake, ex officio or at the request of the interested party, to refuse or invalidate the registration and prohibit the use of a trademark or trade mark or a service mark that constitutes reproduction, imitation or translation, capable of creating confusion, of a well-known trademark used for identical or similar goods. It shall be understood that a mark is well-known in a Party when a specific sector of the public or business circles of the Party knows the mark as a result of commercial activities carried out in a Party or outside it, by a person who uses that mark. in connection with your goods or services. In order to demonstrate the notoriety of the brand, all the means of proof admitted in the Party in question may be used.
2. Each Party shall not register as a trademark those signs that are the same or similar to a well-known trademark to be applied to any good or service, when the use of the trademark by the person requesting its registration could create confusion or a risk of association with the person who uses that mark in connection with its goods or services, or would constitute an unfair advantage of the prestige of the mark, or suggest a connection with it and its use could harm the interests of that person. This paragraph shall not apply when the applicant for the mark is the owner of the well-known mark in a Party.
3. The person who initiates an action for nullity of a trademark registration granted in contravention of paragraph 2, must prove that he has applied in a Party for the registration of the well-known trademark whose ownership he claims.
Article 14-12: Trademarks registered in the Party.
1. When in a Party it is not possible to request the cancellation or declaration of nullity of the registration of a trademark due to lack of use, in accordance with its legislation, and trademarks are registered that are identical or similar and that serve to distinguish identical goods or services or similar, the owner of the trademark that registered it first in any Party may request from the competent authority the declaration of nullity of the registration of the other trademark, for not having the characteristic of originality and having been registered to the detriment of a better right. .
2. When in a Party it is possible to request the cancellation or declaration of expiration of the registration of a mark due to lack of use, in accordance with its legislation, the registration of the mark may not be canceled or declared expired when the owner of the mark presents valid reasons supported by the existence of obstacles to use. Valid reasons for non-use will be recognized as circumstances arising independently of the will of the trademark owner that constitute an obstacle to its use, such as import restrictions or other government requirements applicable to goods or services identified by the brand. It will be understood that a brand is in use when the goods or services that it distinguishes have been placed on the market or are available on the market under that brand,
Article 14-13: Exceptions.
Each Party may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as the correct use of descriptive terms, provided that the exceptions take into account the legitimate interests of the owner of the trademark and third parties.
Article 14-14: Duration of protection.
The initial registration of a trademark will last for ten years from the date of filing of the application or from the date of its granting and may be renewed indefinitely for successive periods of ten years, provided that the conditions for registration are met. renewal.
Article 14-15: Use of the brand.
1. Each Party may require the use of a mark to maintain registration. When the use is required, the registration may be canceled for non-use only after an uninterrupted period of non-use of at least three years has elapsed, unless the owner of the mark demonstrates valid reasons supported by the existence of obstacles to use. The reasons set out in paragraph 2 of article 14-12 shall be recognized as valid for non-use.
2. For registration purposes, the use of a mark by a person other than the owner of the mark shall be recognized when such use is subject to the control of the owner.
Article 14-16: Other requirements.
Use of a mark shall not be made difficult in commerce by special requirements, such as use that diminishes the function of the mark as an indication of source, use with another mark, or use in a way that impairs the mark's ability to distinguish the goods or services of one person from those of other persons.
Article 14-17: Licenses and assignment of trademarks.
Each Party may establish conditions for the licensing and assignment of trademarks, it being understood that compulsory trademark licenses will not be allowed and that the holder of a registered trademark shall have the right to assign it with or without the transfer of the company to which the trademark belongs. However, each Party may condition the assignment of the trademark when it forms part of the commercial name of the seller, in which case it may only be transferred with the company or establishment that that name identifies.
Geographical indications or origin and
denominations of origin
Article 14-18: Protection of geographical indications or origin and appellations of origin.
1. For the purposes of the provisions of this chapter, an appellation of origin shall be understood as the geographical name of a country, a region or a locality that serves to designate a good as originating in the territory of a country or a region or of a a locality of that territory, and whose quality or characteristics are due exclusively to the geographical environment, including natural factors and human factors.
2. For the same purposes, a geographical indication or origin shall be understood as the geographical name of a country, region or locality that is used in the presentation of a good to indicate its place of origin, provenance, production, collection or extraction.
3. Designations of origin protected in a Party shall not be considered common or generic to distinguish a good while its protection subsists in the country of origin.
4. Each Party, ex officio if its legislation allows it, or at the request of an interested party, shall deny or invalidate the registration of a trademark that contains or consists of a geographical indication or appellation of origin with respect to goods not originating from the indicated territory, if the use of that indication in the mark for those goods in that country is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true place of origin.
5. For the purposes of this article, the definition of originating good established in article 2-01 (Definitions of general application) shall not apply.
Protection of undisclosed information
Article 14-19: Protection of undisclosed information.
1. Each Party shall grant protection to industrial or commercial secrets, understood as those that incorporate information of industrial or commercial application that, kept confidential, means for a person to obtain or maintain a competitive advantage over third parties in carrying out activities. economic.
2. Natural and legal persons will have the legal means to prevent industrial or commercial secrets from being revealed, acquired or used by third parties without the consent of the person who legally has control of the information, contrary to fair trade practices. , such as breach of contract, breach of trust, incitement to infringe, and the acquisition of undisclosed information by third parties who knew, or who did not know through gross negligence, that the acquisition involved such practices, provided that:
a. the information is secret, in the sense that, as a whole or in the precise configuration and composition of its elements, it is not generally known or easily accessible to the people who are members of the circles that normally handle the type of information in question ;
b. the information has a commercial value because it is secret; Y
c. in the given circumstances, the person legally in control has taken reasonable steps to keep it secret.
3. If a Party requires the submission of unpublished experimental data or other data necessary to determine safety as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmacochemical goods or agrochemical goods using new chemical constituents and effectiveness of the use of those assets, that Party shall protect data submitted by individuals where the generation of such data involves considerable effort, except where publication is necessary to protect the public or unless steps are taken to ensure the protection of the data against any unfair commercial use.
4. To grant the protection referred to in this article, each Party may require that a trade secret be recorded in documents, electronic or magnetic media, optical discs, microfilms, films or other similar instruments.
5. Each Party may not limit the duration of protection for industrial or commercial secrets while the conditions described in subparagraphs a), b) and c) of paragraph 2 exist.
6. No Party shall discourage or prevent the voluntary licensing of trade or trade secrets by imposing excessive or discriminatory conditions on those licences, or conditions that dilute the value of trade or trade secrets.
Copyright
Article 14-20: Copyright.
1. Each Party shall protect the works included in Article 2 of the Berne Convention (1971), including any others that incorporate an original expression in the sense that this Convention confers on this term, such as computer programs or data compilations. that for reasons of selection, compendium, arrangement or disposition of its content constitute creations of an intellectual nature. The protection afforded to data compilations shall not extend to the data or materials themselves nor shall it be granted in prejudice of any copyright that exists in such data or materials.
2. Each Party shall grant authors or their successors in title the rights set forth in the Berne Convention (1971), with respect to the works referred to in paragraph 1, including the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. the graphic edition;
b. translation into any language or dialect;
c. the adaptation and inclusion in phonograms, videograms, cinematographic films and other audiovisual works;
d. communication to the public;
and. reproduction by any means or in any form;
F. the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the work by sale, rental, loan or any other means;
g. the importation into the territory of a Party of copies of the work made without the authorization of the right holder; Y
h. any form of use, process or system known or to be known.
3. At least with respect to computer programs, the Parties shall grant authors and their successors the right to authorize or prohibit commercial leasing to the public of the originals or copies of their works protected by copyright.
4. In the case of computer programs, the authorization of the author or beneficiary will not be necessary when the copy of the computer program does not constitute in itself the essential object of the lease.
5. Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights:
a. Any person who acquires or holds economic rights may, freely and separately, transfer them by contract for the purposes of exploitation and enjoyment by the assignee; Y
b. Any person who acquires and holds these economic rights by virtue of a contract, including employment contracts that imply the creation of any type of work and phonograms, has the capacity to exercise those rights in their own name and to fully enjoy the derived benefits. thereof.
6. Each Party shall circumscribe the limitations or exceptions to the rights established in this article to determined special cases that do not impede the normal exploitation of the work or cause unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder.
7. Copyright is permanent for the life of the copyright. After his death, those who have legitimately acquired these rights will enjoy them for a term of at least 50 years. When the duration of the protection of a work is calculated on a basis other than the life of a natural person, that duration will be:
a. not less than 50 years counted from the end of the calendar year of the publication or authorized disclosure of the work; either
b. 50 years from the end of the year in which the work was made in the absence of its publication or authorized disclosure within a period of 50 years from its making.
related rights
Article 14-21: Performers.
1. Each Party shall grant performers the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. the fixation of their unfixed performances and the reproduction of that fixation;
b. communication to the public, transmission and retransmission by wireless means; Y
c. any other form of use of their interpretations or performances.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply once a performer has consented to their performance being incorporated into a visual or audiovisual fixation.
Article 14-22: Producers of phonograms.
1. Each Party shall grant the producer of a phonogram the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. direct or indirect reproduction of the phonogram;
b. the importation into the territory of the Party of copies of the phonogram made without the authorization of the producer; Y
c. the first public distribution of the original and of each copy of the phonogram by sale, lease or any other means.
2. Each Party shall grant to producers of phonograms and to all other holders of rights over phonograms as determined by its legislation, the right to authorize or prohibit commercial leasing to the public of originals or copies of protected phonograms. However, if upon the entry into force of this Agreement a Party applies a system of equitable remuneration to right holders in respect of the leasing of phonograms, it may maintain that system provided that such leasing does not materially impair the rights exclusive reproduction rights holders.
Article 14-23: Broadcasting organizations.
1. Each Party shall grant broadcasting organizations the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. fixation and reproduction of fixations of their broadcasts;
b. the retransmission, the subsequent distribution, as well as the communication to the public of its broadcasts; Y
c. the receipt, in connection with commercial activities, of their broadcasts.
2. Violations of the rights mentioned in paragraph 1 will be cause for civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 14-24: Term of protection of related rights.
The duration of the protection granted under this chapter to performers and producers of phonograms may not be less than 50 years, counted from the end of the calendar year in which the fixation was made or the fixation took place. interpretation or performance. The duration of the protection granted to broadcasting organizations may not be less than 20 years counted from the end of the calendar year in which the broadcasting took place.
Article 14-25: Limitations or exceptions to related rights.
1. The protection provided for in this chapter with regard to the rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations shall not in any way affect the protection of copyright over literary or artistic works. nor can it be interpreted in detriment of that protection.
2. Each Party shall circumscribe the limitations or exceptions to the rights established in this article to determined special cases that do not prevent the normal exploitation of the phonogram or cause unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder to the extent permitted by the Rome Convention ( 1961).
Article 14-26: Miscellaneous provisions.
1. Each Party may grant protection to rights over:
a. titles or heads of a newspaper, magazines, cinematographic newsreels and, in general, of any periodical publication or diffusion;
b. fictitious or symbolic characters in literary works, comic strips or in any periodical publication, when they have a marked originality and are regularly or periodically used;
c. characterization human characters used in artistic performances, artistic names, as well as artistic denominations;
d. original graphic features that are distinctive to the work or collection in its use; Y
and. characteristics of advertising promotions when a marked originality is presented, with the exception of commercial advertisements.
2. The duration of the protection of the rights referred to in paragraph 1 shall be determined by the legislation of each Party.
Enforcement of intellectual property rights
Article 14-27: General provisions.
1. Each Party shall guarantee that its legislation establishes procedures for the enforcement of intellectual property rights in accordance with the provisions of articles 14-27 to 14-32, which allow the adoption of effective measures against any action infringing the rights of intellectual property referred to in this chapter, including agile resources to prevent infringements and resources that constitute an effective means of dissuading new infringements. These procedures will be applied in such a way as to avoid the creation of obstacles to legitimate trade and will provide safeguards against its abuse.
2. Procedures relating to the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and equitable. Those procedures shall not be unnecessarily complicated or burdensome or lead to unreasonable time limits or undue delay.
3. Decisions on the merits of a case will be formulated in writing and will contain the reasons on which they are based. Those decisions shall be made available at least to the parties to the dispute, without undue delay, and shall be based only on evidence about which the parties have been given an opportunity to be heard.
4. The parties to the dispute shall be given the opportunity for a review by a judicial authority of the final administrative decisions and of at least the legal aspects of all first instance judicial decisions on the merits of the case, subject to the provisions in matter of jurisdiction of the national laws relative to the importance of a case. However, it will not be mandatory to give them the opportunity to review the acquittals issued in criminal cases.
5. It is understood that the application of intellectual property rights does not impose any obligation to establish a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights different from the one already existing for the application of legislation in general. Likewise, the application of these rights does not create any obligation with respect to the distribution of resources between the means destined to obtain the observance of intellectual property rights and those destined to the observance of the laws in general.
Article 14-28: Specific procedural aspects and resources in civil and administrative procedures.
1. Each Party shall make available to rights holders the civil judicial procedures for the defense of any intellectual property right included in this chapter and shall provide that:
a. Defendants have the right to receive timely written notice stating in sufficient detail the basis for the claim;
b. the parties in a proceeding are authorized to be represented by an independent lawyer;
c. the proceedings do not impose excessive requirements for mandatory personal appearances;
d. all parties to a proceeding are duly empowered to substantiate their claims and present relevant evidence; Y
and. procedures include means to identify and protect confidential information.
2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power:
a. to order that, when a party to a proceeding has presented sufficient evidence to which it reasonably has access as a basis for its allegations, and has identified any pertinent evidence to substantiate its allegations that is under the control of the other party, the latter provide such proof, subject, where appropriate, to the conditions that guarantee the protection of confidential information;
b. to issue preliminary and final resolutions, of a positive or negative nature, in the event that one of the parties to a proceeding, voluntarily and without valid reason, denies access to evidence or does not provide pertinent evidence under its control within a reasonable period of time or obstructs significantly a procedure related to a case of defense of intellectual property rights. Those resolutions will be issued based on the evidence presented, including the claim or the arguments presented by the party that adversely affects the denial of access to the evidence, provided that the parties are granted the opportunity to be heard regarding the allegations. or the tests;
c. to order a party to a proceeding to desist from the alleged infringement until the final resolution of the case, including to prevent imported goods that imply the infringement of an intellectual property right from entering the commercial circuits of its jurisdiction. This order shall be put into effect at least immediately after the customs clearance of those goods;
d. to order the infringer of an intellectual property right to pay the owner of the right adequate compensation as compensation for the damage that the owner of the right has suffered as a consequence of the infringement, when the infringer has been convicted in the corresponding judicial process;
and. to order an infringer of an intellectual property right to cover the right holder's expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees; Y
F. to order a party to a proceeding, upon whose request action has been taken and who has abused enforcement procedures, to provide adequate compensation to any party wrongly subjected or restrained in the proceeding for damage suffered as a result of that abuse and to pay that party's expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees.
3. With respect to the power indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 2, each Party may, at least with regard to works protected by copyright and phonograms, provide for the judicial authorities the power to order the recovery of profits or the payment of previously determined damages, or both, even if the infringer did not know or had no reasonable basis to know that he was engaged in infringing activity.
4. Each Party shall provide, in order to effectively deter infringements, that its judicial authorities have the power to order that:
a. the goods that they have determined to infringe intellectual property rights may be, without compensation of any kind, withdrawn from commercial circuits in such a way as to avoid any damage to the owner of the right, or they may be destroyed, as long as it is not contrary to the current constitutional provisions; Y
b. the materials and instruments whose predominant use has been the production of infringing goods may be, without compensation of any kind, withdrawn from commercial circuits in such a way that the risks of subsequent infringements are reduced to a minimum.
5. In considering the issuance of the orders referred to in paragraph 4, the judicial authorities of each Party shall take into account the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the offense and the measures ordered, as well as the interests of other persons, including of the right holder. Regarding counterfeit goods, the mere removal of the illegally adhered mark will not be enough to allow the release of the goods in commercial circuits, except in exceptional cases such as those in which the authority orders their donation to charitable institutions.
6. With respect to the administration of any law related to the protection or defense of intellectual property rights, each Party shall only exempt public authorities and officials from the responsibility that appropriate corrective measures take place when the actions have been adopted. or disposed of in good faith during the administration of those laws.
7. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 14-27 to 14-31, when a Party is sued for infringement of an intellectual property right as a result of the use, by it or on its behalf, of that right, that Party may establish as the only recourse available against it, the payment of adequate compensation to the owner of the right, according to the circumstances of the case, taking into account the economic value of the use.
8. Each Party shall provide that when a remedy of a civil nature may be ordered as a result of administrative proceedings on the merits of a matter, those proceedings conform to principles that are essentially equivalent to those set forth in this article.
9. Subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 and paragraph 8 will be applied taking into account the provisions of the annex to this article.
Article 14-29: Precautionary measures.
1. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order prompt and effective precautionary measures to:
a. prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right and, in particular, prevent the introduction of allegedly infringing goods into the commercial circuits of its jurisdiction, including measures to prevent the entry of imported goods at least immediately after customs clearance; Y
b. retain relevant evidence related to the alleged infringement.
2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order precautionary measures in which the counterparty is not given a hearing, in particular when there is a probability that any delay will cause irreparable damage to the holder of the right or when there is a verifiable risk of destroy the evidence.
3. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order an applicant for precautionary measures to present any evidence to which it reasonably has access and which those authorities deem necessary to determine with a sufficient degree of certainty whether:
a. the applicant is the owner of the right;
b. the applicant's right is being infringed or if such infringement is imminent; Y
c. any delay in issuing such measures is likely to cause irreparable damage to the right holder or if there is a verifiable risk that evidence will be destroyed.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order the applicant to post a bond or equivalent guarantee that is sufficient to protect the interests of the respondent and to prevent abuse.
5. Each Party shall provide that when precautionary measures are taken by the judicial authorities of that Party in which the other party is not given a hearing:
a. the affected person is notified of those measures without delay and in no case no later than immediately after the execution of the measures; Y
b. the respondent, upon request, obtain judicial review of the measures by the judicial authorities of that Party, in order to decide, within a reasonable period of time after notification of those measures, whether they will be modified, revoked or confirmed.
6. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order an applicant for precautionary measures to provide any information necessary for the identification of the relevant assets by the authority that will carry out the precautionary measures.
7. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 6, each Party shall provide that, at the request of the respondent, the judicial authorities of the Party revoke or otherwise render ineffective the precautionary measures taken based on paragraphs 1 through 5, if the procedures leading to a decision on the merits of the matter are not initiated:
a. within a reasonable period of time determined by the judicial authority ordering the measures, where the law of that Party so permits; either
b. in the absence of such determination, within a period of no more than 20 business days or 31 calendar days, whichever is greater.
8. Each Party shall provide that, when the precautionary measures are revoked, when they expire by action or omission of the applicant or when the judicial authority subsequently determines that there was no infringement or threat of infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities have the power to order the applicant, at the request of the defendant, to provide the latter with adequate compensation for any damage caused by these measures.
9. Each Party shall provide that when a precautionary measure may be ordered as a result of administrative procedures, those procedures conform to principles that are essentially equivalent to those established in this article.
Article 14-30: Penal procedures and sanctions.
1. Each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in cases of willful counterfeiting of trademarks or willful infringement of copyright on a commercial scale. Each Party shall provide that the applicable sanctions include imprisonment or fines, or both, which are sufficient as a deterrent and are compatible with the level of sanctions applied to crimes of comparable gravity.
2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities may order the confiscation and destruction of infringing assets and any of the materials and instruments whose predominant use has been for the commission of the crime.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the judicial authorities shall take into account, when considering the issuance of such orders, the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the offense and the measures ordered, as well as the interests of other persons including those of the holder of the right. Regarding counterfeit goods, the mere removal of the illegally attached brand will not be enough to allow the release of the goods in commercial circuits, except in exceptional cases, such as those in which the authority orders their donation to charitable institutions.
4. Each Party may provide for the application of criminal procedures and sanctions in cases of infringement of intellectual property rights other than those referred to in paragraph 1, when committed intentionally and on a commercial scale.
Article 14-31: Defense of intellectual property rights at the border.
1. Each Party shall adopt, in accordance with this Article, procedures that allow a right holder who has valid grounds to suspect that the importation of counterfeit or pirated trademark-related goods may occur to submit a written request to the competent authorities. , whether administrative or judicial, so that the customs authority suspends the free circulation of those goods. Neither Party shall be obliged to apply those procedures or the goods in traffic. Each Party may authorize the submission of a request of this nature with respect to goods that imply other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of this article are met.
2. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order any applicant initiating proceedings pursuant to paragraph 1 to submit adequate evidence to:
a. that the competent authorities of the importing Party ensure that an infringement of intellectual property rights can be presumed in accordance with their legislation; Y
b. to provide a sufficiently detailed description of the goods to make them easily recognizable to the customs authorities.
3. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities notify the plaintiff, within a reasonable period, if they have accepted the claim and, when those competent authorities establish it, the period for action by the customs authorities.
4. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order an applicant under paragraph 1 to post a bond or equivalent guarantee that is sufficient to protect the respondent and the competent authorities and to prevent abuse. Such a bond or equivalent guarantee shall not unduly deter the applicant from resorting to those procedures.
5. Each Party shall provide that its competent authority promptly notifies the importer and the applicant of the suspension of customs clearance of the goods referred to in paragraph 1.
6. Each Party shall provide that its customs authority proceed to the customs clearance of the goods provided that all other conditions for their import or export have been met, if within a period not exceeding ten business days from the date of the applicant has been notified of the suspension, the customs authorities have not been informed that:
a. a party other than the defendant has initiated proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the matter; either
b. the competent authority empowered for this purpose has adopted provisional measures that prolong the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods.
7. For the purposes of paragraph 6, each Party shall provide that its customs authorities have the power to extend, in the appropriate cases, the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods for another ten business days.
8. If the procedure leading to obtaining a decision on the merits of the matter has been initiated, at the request of the defendant, a review will be carried out within a reasonable period of time. That review will include the defendant's right to be heard, in order to decide whether those measures should be modified, revoked or confirmed.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 7 and 8, when the suspension of customs clearance is effected or continued pursuant to a precautionary judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 7 of Article 14-29 shall apply.
10. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order the applicant, in accordance with paragraph 1, to pay the importer, the consignee and the owner of the goods adequate compensation for any damage they have suffered as a result of the Improper retention of property or by retention of property that has been released in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 6.
11. Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to grant:
a. sufficient opportunity for the holder of the right to have any property detained by the customs authorities inspected in order to substantiate his claim; Y
b. an equal opportunity for the importer to have those goods inspected.
12. When the competent authorities have issued a favorable ruling on the merits of the matter, each Party may grant those authorities the power to provide the right holder with the names and addresses of the consignor, the importer, and the consignee, as well as the quantity of the goods in question.
13. When a Party requires its competent authorities to act on their own initiative and suspend customs clearance of goods for which they have evidence that, prima facie, suggests that they infringe an intellectual property right:
a. the competent authorities may at any time require the holder of the right any information that may assist them in the exercise of those powers;
b. the importer and right holder shall be promptly notified of the suspension by the competent authorities of the Party. When the importer has requested a reconsideration of the suspension before the competent authorities, that suspension will be subject, with the appropriate modifications, to the provisions of paragraphs 5 to 8; Y
c. the Party will only exempt the authorities and public officials from the responsibility that the appropriate corrective measures give rise to, in the case of acts carried out or disposed of in good faith.
14. Without prejudice to the other actions that correspond to the holder of the right and subject to the right of the defendant to request a review before a judicial authority, each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order the destruction or removal of the infringing property. accordance with the principles set out in paragraph 6 of article 14-28. With regard to counterfeit goods, the authorities will not allow them to be re-exported in the same state, except in exceptional circumstances, nor will they submit them to a different customs procedure.
15. Each Party may exclude from the application of paragraphs 1 to 14, small quantities of merchandise that are not of a commercial nature and form part of the personal baggage of travelers or are sent in small, non-repeated batches.
16. This article will be applied taking into account the provisions of the annex to it.
Article 14-32: Protection of satellite signals carrying programs.
Within the year following the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall consider as a cause of civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with its legislation, the manufacture, import, sale, lease or any act that allows having a device or system that is of primary assistance in deciphering an encrypted satellite signal carrying programs, without the authorization of the legitimate distributor of that signal.
Annex to the article14-03
Agreements on intellectual property
1. Costa Rica will make its best effort to adhere to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1967) as soon as possible, and will do so within a period of 18 months from the date of entry into force of this Treaty.
2. Costa Rica will make its best effort to adhere to the Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration (1967) as soon as possible, and will do so within a period of three years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Annex to the article14-28
Enforcement of intellectual property rights
Costa Rica will make its best effort to implement the measures contemplated in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 and paragraph 8 of article 14-28, and will do so within a period of seven years from the entry into force of this Treaty.
Annex to the article14-31
Defense of intellectual property rights at the border
Costa Rica will make its best effort to implement the measures contemplated in article 14-31, and will do so within a period of seven years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
Chapter XV
Information, publication and guarantees of audience and legality
Article 15-01: Information Center.
1. Each Party shall designate a unit or office as an information center to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.
2. When requested by a Party, the information center of another Party shall indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter and shall provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.
Article 15-02: Publication.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or made available for the knowledge of the Parties and any interested party.
2. To the extent possible, each Party:
a. publish in advance any measure it proposes to take; Y
b. provide interested persons and Parties with a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures.
Article 15-03: Notification and provision of information.
1. Each Party shall notify, to the extent possible, to the Party that has an interest in the matter, any current or proposed measure that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the interests of that other Party under the terms of this Treaty.
2. Each Party, at the request of the Party concerned, shall provide it with information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any current or proposed measure, regardless of whether or not such Party has been previously notified of that measure. .
3. The notification or supply of information referred to in this article will be carried out without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.
Article 15-04: A Guarantees of hearing, legality and due legal process.
1. The Parties reaffirm the guarantees of hearing, legality and due legal process enshrined in their respective laws.
2. Each Party shall maintain tribunals and judicial or administrative procedures for the review and, when appropriate, the correction of the final acts related to this Agreement.
3. Each Party shall ensure that in the judicial and administrative procedures related to the application of any measure that affects the operation of this Agreement, the essential formalities of the procedure are observed, and the legal cause of the same is founded and motivated.
Chapter XVI
Administration of the Treaty
Article 16-01: Administrative Commission.
1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission, made up of the officials referred to in annex 1 to this article.
2. The Commission will have the following functions:
a. ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of the Treaty;
b. evaluate the results achieved in the implementation of the Treaty and monitor its development;
c. propose measures aimed at developing the Treaty and its annexes;
d. contribute to the solution of controversies that arise regarding its interpretation and application;
and. supervise the work of all the committees established in this Agreement and included in annex 2 to this article; Y
F. hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, or any other that is entrusted to it by the Parties.
3. The Commission may:
a. establish and delegate responsibilities to ad hoc or standing committees, working groups, and expert groups;
b. request the advice of persons or institutions without governmental ties; Y
c. if agreed by the Parties, adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions.
4. The Commission will establish its rules and procedures and all its decisions will be made by mutual agreement.
5. The Commission shall meet at least once a year in ordinary session and, at the request of any Party, in extraordinary session. The sessions will be chaired successively by each Party.
Article 16-02: Secretariat.
1. The Commission will establish and supervise a Secretariat made up of national sections.
2. Each Party:
a. establish the permanent office of its national section;
b. will take care of:
i) the operation and costs of its national section; Y
ii) the remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators, experts and their assistants appointed in accordance with this Treaty, as provided in the annex to this article;
c. will designate the Secretary of its national section, who will be the official responsible for its administration; Y
d. shall notify the Commission of the address of its national section.
3. The Secretariat will have the following functions:
a. provide assistance to the Commission;
b. provide administrative support to arbitral tribunals;
c. on instructions from the Commission, support the work of the committees established under this Agreement; Y
d. the others that the Commission entrusts.
Annex 1 to the article16-01
Officials of the Administrative Commission
The officials referred to in article 16-01 are:
a. in the case of Costa Rica, the Minister of Foreign Trade or his successor; Y
b. in the case of Mexico, the Secretary of Commerce and Industrial Development or his successor.
Annex 2 to the article16-01
Committees
1. Committee on Agricultural Standardization and Marketing Measures created pursuant to Article 4-07 (Agricultural Standardization and Marketing Measures).
2. Agricultural Trade Committee created pursuant to Article 4-08 (Agricultural Trade Committee).
3. Sugar Committee created in accordance with Annex 3 to Article 4-04 (Trade in Sugar).
4. Committee on Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Measures established in accordance with Article 4-22 (Committee on Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Measures).
5. Rules of Origin Working Committee created in accordance with article 5-18 (Consultations and modifications).
6. Committee for National Integration of Inputs created in accordance with article 5-20 (Committee for Regional Integration of Inputs).
7. Customs Procedures Committee created pursuant to Article 6-11 (Customs Procedures Committee).
8. Customs Coordination Committee created pursuant to Article 6-20 (Customs Coordination Committee).
9. Committee on Temporary Entry created pursuant to Article 10-06 (Committee on Temporary Entry).
10. Committee for Standardization Measures created pursuant to Article 11-17 (Committee for Standardization Measures).
- Subcommittee on Health Standardization Measures created in accordance with article 11-17 (Committee for Standardization Measures).
- Subcommittee on Standardization Measures in Labeling, Packaging and Packaging created in accordance with article 11-17 (Committee for Standardization Measures).
11. Micro, Small and Medium Industry Committee created in accordance with article 12-21 (Joint participation programs for micro, small and medium industry).
12. Advisory Committee for Private Commercial Disputes, created in accordance with article 17-18 (Alternative means for the resolution of disputes between individuals).
Annex to the article16-02
Remuneration and Payment of Expenses
1. The Commission will set the amounts of remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators, experts and their assistants.
2. The remuneration of the arbitrators, experts and their assistants, their transportation and accommodation expenses, and all the general expenses of the arbitral tribunals will be covered in equal portions by the Parties.
3. The arbitrators, experts and their assistants shall keep a record and submit a final account of their time and expenses, and the arbitral tribunal shall keep a similar record and render a final account of all general expenses.
Chapter XVII
Settlement of disputes
Article 17-01: Cooperation.
The Parties shall always endeavor to reach agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement through cooperation and consultation, and shall endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that might affect its operation.
Article 17-02: Scope of application.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the procedure of this chapter shall apply:
a. to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement; Y
b. when a Party considers that a current or proposed measure of another Party is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or could cause nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to this article.
Article 17-03: Settlement of disputes under the GATT.
1. The controversies that arise in relation to the provisions of this Agreement and the GATT or in the agreements negotiated in accordance with the latter, may be resolved in one or another forum, at the choice of the complaining Party.
2. Once a dispute settlement procedure has been initiated in accordance with article 17-06 or one in accordance with the GATT, the selected forum will be exclusive of any other.
3. For the purposes of this article, a dispute settlement procedure under the GATT shall be considered initiated when a Party requests:
a. the integration of a panel in accordance with Article XXIII:2 of the GATT; either
b. the investigation by a Committee, in accordance with the agreements negotiated in accordance with the GATT, as would be the case of article 20.1 of the Customs Valuation Code.
Article 17-04: Perishable goods.
In disputes relating to perishable goods, the Parties, the Commission and the arbitral tribunal referred to in Article 17-07 will do everything possible to speed up the procedure as much as possible. For this purpose, the Parties will try to reduce by mutual agreement the terms established in this chapter.
Article 17-05: Consultations.
1. Either Party may request in writing to the other Party consultations regarding any measure adopted or planned, or regarding any other matter that it considers could affect the operation of this Agreement in the terms of Article 17-02.
2. The requesting Party shall deliver the application to its national section of the Secretariat and to the other Party.
3. The Parties:
a. they will provide the information that allows examining the manner in which the adopted or projected measure, or any other matter, could affect the operation of this Agreement; Y
b. shall treat confidential information exchanged during consultations in the same manner as the Party that provided it.
Article 17-06: Intervention of the Commission, good offices, conciliation and mediation.
1. Any Party may request in writing that the Commission meet whenever a matter is not resolved pursuant to Article 17-05 within 45 days of delivery of the request for consultations.
2. A Party may also request in writing that the Commission meet when consultations have been held in accordance with the provisions of Articles 4-25 (Dispute Settlement), 5-25 (Referral to the Committee on Rules of Origin) and 11 -20 (Technical inquiries).
3. The Party shall mention in the request the measure or any other matter that is the subject of the complaint, indicate the provisions of this Agreement that it considers applicable, and deliver the request to its national section of the Secretariat and to the other Party.
4. The Commission will meet within the ten days following the delivery of the request, and in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, it may:
a. convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary;
b. resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other dispute resolution procedures; either
c. make recommendations.
Article 17-07: Request for integration of the arbitral tribunal.
1. When the Commission has met in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of Article 17-06 and the matter has not been resolved within 45 days after the meeting, any Party may request in writing the establishment of an arbitral tribunal. . The requesting Party shall deliver the request to its national section of the Secretariat and to the other Party.
2. Upon delivery of the application, the Commission will establish an arbitral tribunal.
3. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, the arbitral tribunal will be constituted and will perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 17-08: List of arbitrators.
1. The Commission will integrate a list of up to twenty people who have the necessary qualities and willingness to be arbitrators. The members of the list will be designated by mutual agreement by the Parties, for periods of three years, and may be reelected.
2. The members of the list:
a. they will have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters related to this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;
b. they will be elected strictly based on their objectivity, reliability and good judgment;
c. they will be independent, will not be linked to the Parties and will not receive instructions from them; Y
d. They will comply with the code of conduct established by the Commission.
3. The list shall include non-national experts from the Parties.
Article 17-09: Qualifications of the arbitrators.
1. All referees will have the qualities stipulated in paragraph 2 of article 17-08.
2. The persons who have intervened in a dispute, under the terms of paragraph 4 of article 17-06, may not be arbitrators for the same dispute.
Article 17-10: Constitution of the arbitral tribunal.
1. The arbitral tribunal will be made up of five members.
2. The Parties shall seek to designate the president of the arbitral tribunal within 15 days following the delivery of the request for its integration. In the event that the Parties do not reach an agreement within this period, one of them, chosen by lot, will designate it within a period of five days. In case of not doing so, the other Party will designate it. The individual appointed as president of the arbitral tribunal may not be of the nationality of the Party that appoints him.
3. Within 15 days of the election of the chair, each Party shall select two arbitrators who are nationals of the other Party.
4. If a Party does not select an arbitrator within that period, the arbitrator shall be selected by lot from among the members of the list who are nationals of the other Party.
5. The referees will preferably be selected from the list. Within 15 days of the date on which the proposal is made, any Party may challenge without explanation any individual not on the list who is proposed as arbitrator by a Party.
6. When a Party considers that an arbitrator has committed a violation of the code of conduct, the Parties will hold consultations and, if they agree, they will remove that arbitrator and choose a new one in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Article 17-11: Rules of procedure.
1. The Commission shall establish Model Rules of Procedure, in accordance with the following principles:
a. the procedures will guarantee the right to a hearing before the arbitral tribunal, as well as the opportunity to present arguments and replies in writing; Y
b. The hearings before the arbitral tribunal, the deliberations and the preliminary decision, as well as all the writings and communications with it, will be confidential.
2. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, the procedure before the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure.
3. The mission of the arbitral tribunal, contained in the mission statement, will be: "To examine, in light of the applicable provisions of the Treaty, the controversy submitted to its consideration in the terms of the request for the meeting of the Commission, and issue the decisions referred to in paragraph 2 of article 17-13 and article 17-14".
4. If the complaining Party alleges that a matter has been the cause of nullification or impairment of benefits in the sense of the annex to article 17-02, the mission statement will indicate so.
5. When a Party requests that the arbitral tribunal formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse commercial effects that the measure that is judged inconsistent with this Agreement or has caused nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to Article 17 has generated for any Party. 02, the mission report will indicate it.
Article 17-12: Function of the experts.
At the request of a Party, or ex officio, the arbitral tribunal may request the information and technical advice of the persons or institutions it deems pertinent.
Article 17-13: Preliminary decision.
1. The arbitral tribunal shall issue a preliminary decision based on the arguments and communications presented by the Parties and on any information it has received pursuant to article 17-12.
2. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, within 90 days following the appointment of the last arbitrator, the arbitral tribunal will submit to the Parties a preliminary decision that will contain:
a. findings of fact, including any derived from a request under paragraph 5 of article 17-11;
b. the determination of whether the measure in question is or may be incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to article 17-02; Y
c. the draft decision.
3. The arbitrators will be able to formulate particular votes on questions regarding which there is no unanimous decision.
4. The Parties may make written observations to the court on the preliminary decision within 14 days of its presentation.
5. In this case, and after examining the written observations, the arbitral tribunal may, ex officio or at the request of any Party:
a. perform any diligence it deems appropriate; Y
b. reconsider your preliminary decision.
Article 17-14: Final decision.
1. The arbitral tribunal will submit to the Commission a final decision, agreed upon by a majority and, where appropriate, individual votes on the issues for which there has not been a unanimous decision, within a period of 30 days from the presentation of the the preliminary decision.
2. Neither the preliminary decision nor the final decision will reveal the identity of the arbitrators who have voted with the majority or with the minority.
3. The final decision of the arbitral tribunal will be published 15 days after its communication to the Commission.
Article 17-15: Compliance with the final decision.
1. The final decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be binding on the Parties in the terms and within the terms that it orders.
2. When the final decision of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is inconsistent with this Agreement, the Party complained against, whenever possible, will refrain from executing the measure or will derogate from it.
3. When the decision of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to article 17-02, it shall determine the level of nullification or impairment and may suggest adjustments mutually satisfactory to the Parties.
Article 17-16: Suspension of benefits.
1. The complaining Party may suspend the application of benefits of equivalent effect to the defendant Party if the arbitral tribunal resolves:
a. that a measure is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement and the Party complained against does not comply with the final resolution within the term that the arbitral tribunal has set; either
b. that a measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to Article 17-02 and the Parties do not reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute within the term that the arbitral tribunal has set.
2. The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant Party complies with the final decision of the arbitral tribunal or until the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute, as the case may be.
3. In considering the benefits to be suspended pursuant to paragraph 1:
a. the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the arbitral tribunal has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or that has been cause for nullification or impairment. within the meaning of the annex to article 17-02; Y
b. the complaining Party that considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, may suspend benefits in other sectors.
4. At the written request of either Party, notified to the other Party and its national section of the Secretariat, the Commission shall establish an arbitral tribunal to determine whether the level of benefits that the complaining Party has suspended in accordance with paragraph 1 is manifestly excessive. .
5. The proceedings before the arbitral tribunal constituted for the purposes of paragraph 4 shall be processed in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure. The arbitral tribunal will present its final decision within 60 days following the election of the last arbitrator, or in any other term that the Parties agree.
Article 17-17: Judicial and administrative instances.
1. When a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement arises in a domestic judicial or administrative proceeding of one Party and the other Party considers that it warrants its intervention, or when a court or administrative body of one Party requests the opinion of the other Party, the Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall notify the other Party and its national section of the Secretariat. The Commission will try, as soon as possible, to agree on an appropriate response.
2. The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall present to them any interpretation agreed upon by the Commission, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.
3. When the Commission fails to reach an agreement, either Party may submit its own opinion to the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.
Article 17-18: Alternative means for the solution of controversies between individuals.
1. To the extent possible, each Party shall promote and facilitate the use of arbitration and other alternative means for the resolution of international commercial disputes between individuals.
2. To this end, each Party shall have adequate procedures to ensure compliance with arbitration agreements and the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards pronounced in those disputes.
3. The Parties shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of paragraph 2, if they are party to and comply with the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, of 1958, or of the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, of 1975.
4. The Commission may establish a Private Business Dispute Advisory Committee composed of persons who have specialized knowledge or experience in the resolution of international business disputes of a private nature. The Committee will submit reports and general recommendations to the Commission on the existence, use, and effectiveness of arbitration and other procedures for resolving these disputes.
Annex to the article17-02
Nullification and impairment
1. A Party may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism of this Chapter when, by virtue of the application of a measure that does not contravene the Agreement, it considers that the benefits that it could reasonably have expected to receive from the application are annulled or impaired:
a. of the Second Part (Trade of goods);
b. Chapter IX (General principles on trade in services);
c. Chapter XI (Standardization measures);
d. Chapter XII (Public sector purchases); either
and. of Chapter XIV (Intellectual Property).
2. In relation to measures subject to an exception pursuant to Articles 9-16 (Exceptions) or 18-01 (General Exceptions), a Party may not invoke:
a. Subparagraph a) of paragraph 1 to the extent that the benefit derives from any provision relating to cross-border trade in services of the Second Part (Trade in goods);
b. literal b) of paragraph 1;
c. Subparagraph c) of paragraph 1 to the extent that the benefit derives from any provision relating to cross-border trade in services of Chapter XI (Standardization Measures);
d. literal d) of paragraph 1; either
and. literal e) of paragraph 1.
 
Chapter XVIII
Exceptions
Article 18-01: General exceptions.
1. Article XX of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of:
a. the second part (Trade in goods), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services or investment; Y
b. the fourth part (Technical barriers to trade), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services.
2. Nothing in the provisions of:
a. the second part (Trade in goods), to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services;
b. the third part (Trade in services); Y
c. the fourth part (Technical barriers to trade), to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services,
shall be construed as preventing either Party from adopting or enforcing the measures necessary to ensure compliance with laws or regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to health and safety, and consumer protection; provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 18-02: National security.
1. Other than as provided in Article 12-18 (Exceptions), nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to mean:
a. compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;
b. prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:
i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on goods, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment ;
ii) adopted in time of war or other emergencies in international relations; either
iii) regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; either
c. prevent any Party from taking measures in accordance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.
Article 18-03: Exceptions to the disclosure of information.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to oblige a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which may impede compliance with the Political Constitution or the laws of the Party or is contrary to its Political Constitution or its laws in what refers to the protection of the privacy of people, financial affairs and bank accounts of individual clients of financial institutions, among others.
Chapter XIX
Final Provisions
Article 19-01: Annexes.
The annexes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.
Article 19-02: Amendments.
1. The Parties may agree to any modification or addition to this Agreement.
2. The agreed modifications and additions will enter into force once they are approved according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party and will constitute an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 19-03: Entry into force.
This Treaty will enter into force on January 1, 1995, once the communications certifying that the necessary legal formalities have been completed are exchanged.
Article 19-04: Reserves.
This Treaty may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations at the time of its ratification.
Article 19-05: Accession.
1. Any Central American country or group of countries may join this Agreement subject to the terms and conditions agreed between that country or group of countries and the Commission, and once its accession has been approved in accordance with legal procedures. applicable to each country.
2. This Agreement shall not have force between a Party and any country or group of countries that join, if at the time of accession either of them does not give its consent.
3. The accession will enter into force once the communications certifying that the legal formalities have been completed are exchanged.
Article 19-06: Complaint.
1. Any Party may denounce this Agreement. The denunciation will take effect 180 days after it is communicated to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term.
2. In the case of the accession of a country or group of countries in accordance with the provisions of Article 19-05, notwithstanding that a Party has denounced the Treaty, it shall remain in force for the other Parties.
Article 19-07: Evaluation of the Treaty.
The Parties will periodically evaluate the development of this Agreement in order to seek its improvement and consolidate the integration process in the region, promoting an active participation of the productive sectors.
Signed in Mexico City, on the fifth day of April in the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-four, in two equally authentic copies.- The President of the United Mexican States, Carlos Salinas de Gortari.- The President of the Republic from Costa Rica, Rafael Calderón Fournier .- Signature

