COOPERATION AGREEMENT
between the European Economic Community and the People's Democratic Republic
of Algeria
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE BELGIANS,
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF DENMARK,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC,
THE PRESIDENT OF IRELAND,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC,
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE GRAND DUKE OF LUXEMBOURG,
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF THE NETHERLANDS,
V
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND,
and
THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES,
of the one part, and
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL OF THE REVOLUTION, PRESIDENT OF THE
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS OF THE PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ALGERIA,
of the other part,
PREAMBLE
WISHING to demonstrate their common desire to maintain and strengthen their friendly relations
in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter,
RESOLVED to establish wide-ranging cooperation which will contribute to Algeria's economic
and social development and help to strengthen relations between the Community and Algeria,
RESOLVED to promote, having regard to their respective levels of development, economic and
trade cooperation between Algeria and the Community and to provide a sound basis therefor
conformity with their international obligations,
SOLVED to establish a new model for relations between developed and developing States,
inpatible with the aspirations of the international community towards a more just and more
i lanced economic order,
HAVE DECIDED to conclude this Agreement, and to this end have designated as their Plenipotentiaries:
Article 1
The object of this Agreement between the European
Economic Community and Algeria is to promote
overall cooperation between the Contracting Parties
with a view to contributing to the economic and social
development of Algeria and helping to strengthen
relations between the Parties. To this end provisions and measures will be adopted and implemented in the field of economic, technical and financial
cooperation, and in the trade and social fields.
TITLE I
ECONOMIC, TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL
COOPERATION
Article 2
The Community and Algeria shall institute cooperation with the aim of contributing to the development of Algeria by efforts complementary to those
made by Algeria itself, and of strengthening existing
economic links on as broad a basis as possible for
the mutual benefit of the Parties.
Article 3
In order to achieve the cooperation referred to in
Article 2, account shall be taken, in particular, of the
following:
— the objectives and priorities of Algeria's development plans and programmes;
Article 4
1. The purpose of cooperation between the Community and Algeria shall be to promote, in particular:
— participation by the Community in the efforts
made by Algeria to develop its production and
economic infrastructure in order to diversify its
economic structure. Such participation should be
connected, in particular, with the industrialization
of Algeria and the modernization of its agriculture;
— the marketing and sales promotion of products
exported by Algeria ;
— industrial cooperation aimed at boosting the industrial production of Algeria through measures:
— to encourage participation by the Community
in the implementation of Algeria's industrial
development programmes,
— to foster the organization of contacts and
"meetings between Algerian and Community
industrial policy-makers promoters and firms
in order to promote the establishment of new
relations in the industrial field in conformity
with the objectives of the Agreement,
— to facilitate the acquisition on favourable
terms of patents and other industrial property
by means of financing in conformity with
Protocol 1 and/or by other appropriate
arrangements with undertakings and institutions in the Community,
— to permit the removal of non-tariff and nonquota barriers likely to impede access to either
market;
— cooperation in the fields of science, technology
and the protection of the environment;
— as regards energy, the participation by Community operators in programmes for the
exploration, production and processing of Algeria's
energy resources and any activities which would
develop these resources on the spot, and the
proper performance of long-term contracts for
the delivery of oil, gas or petroleum products
between their operators;
— cooperation in the fisheries sector;
— the encouragement of private investments which
are in the mutual interest of both Parties;
— exchange of information on the economic and
financial situation, and on the trend thereof, as
required for the proper functioning of the Agreement.
2. The Contracting Parties may decide on further
areas of cooperation.
Article 5
1 . The Cooperation Council shall periodically define the guidelines of cooperation for the purpose of
attaining the aims set out in the Agreement.
2. The Cooperation Council shall be responsible
for seeking ways and means of establishing cooperation in the areas defined in Article 4. To that end it
is empowered to make decisions.
Article 6
The Community shall participate in the financing of
any measures to promote the development of Algeria
under the conditions laid down in Protocol 1 on
technical and financial cooperation.
Article 7
The Contracting Parties shall facilitate the proper
performance of cooperation and investment contracts
which are of interest to both Parties and come within
the framework of the Agreement.
TITLE II
TRADE
Article 8
In the field of trade, the object of this Agreement
is to promote trade between the Contracting Parties,
taking account of their respective levels of development and of the need to ensure a better balance in
their trade, with a view to increasing the rate of
growth of Algeria's trade and improving the conditions of access for its products to the Community
market. A. Industrial products
Article 9
1 . Subject to the special provisions of Articles 11, 12
and 14, products originating in Algeria which are not
listed in Annex II to the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community shall be imported into
the Community free of quantitative restrictions and
measures having equivalent effect, and of customs
duties and charges having equivalent effect.
2. The new Member States shall apply the provisions
of paragraph 1 , it being understood that in no case
may they apply more favourable treatment to
Algeria than to the Community as originally constituted.
Article 1 0
1 . In the case of customs duties comprising a protective element and a fiscal element, Article 9 shall
apply to the protective element.
2. The United Kingdom shall replace the fiscal
element of the customs duties referred to in paragraph 1 by an internal tax in accordance with
Article 38 of the Act concerning the conditions of
accession and the adjustments to the Treaties of
22 January 1972.
Article 1 1
The measures provided for in Article 1 of Protocol 7
to the Act concerning the conditions of accession and
the adjustments to the Treaties referred to in Article
10 on imports of motor vehicles and the motor
vehicle assembly industry in Ireland shall apply to
Algeria
Article 12
1 . Imports of the following products shall be subject
to annual ceilings above which the customs duties
actually applied in respect of third countries may be
reintroduced in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 5,
the ceiling fixed for the year of the entry into force
of the Agreement being indicated in each case.
2. As from the second year after the entry into force
of the Agreement, the ceilings shown in paragraph 1
shall be increased annually by 3% for heading Nos
45.02, 45.03 and 45.04 and by 5% for the other tariff
headings.
3 . When a ceiling fixed for imports of a product referred to in paragraph 1 is reached, the customs duties actually applied in respect of third countries may
be reimposed on imports of the product in question
until the end of the calendar year.
When imports into the Community of a product
subject to ceilings reach 75% of the level fixed, the
Community shall inform the Cooperation Council.
4. After 1 July 1977 the Contracting Parties shall
examine within the Cooperation Council the possibility of increasing the percentage by which the
ceilings for articles of cork of heading No 45.02,
45.03 or 45.04 are raised.
5. The ceilings provided for in this Article shall be
abolished by 31 December 1979 at the latest.
Article 13
1 . The Community reserves the right to modify the
arrangements applicable to the petroleum products
falling within subheadings and heading Nos 27.10,
27.11 A and B I, 27.12, 27.13 B or 27.14 of the
Common Customs Tariff:
— upon adoption of a common definition of origin
for petroleum products,
— upon adoption of decisions under a common
commercial policy, or
— upon establishment of a common energy policy.
2. In that event the Community shall ensure that
imports of these products will enjoy advantages equivalent to chose provided for in this Agreement.
For the application of this paragraph consultations
shall be held within the Cooperation Council at the
request of the other Party.
3 . Subject to paragraph 1 , this Agreement shall not
affect the non-tariff rules applied to imports of
petroleum products.
Article 14
For goods resulting from the processing of agricultural
products listed in Annex A, the reductions specified
in Article 9 shall apply to the fixed component of
the charge levied on imports of these products into
the Community.
B. Agricultural products
Article 15
1 . Customs duties on imports into the Community of the products originating in
Algeria which are listed below shall be reduced by the rates indicated for each of them.
2. As from the implementation of Community rules
on potatoes, the tariff reduction provided for in paragraph 1 for the products of subheading 07.01 A II ex
a) shall be 50% and shall be applicable for the period
from 1 January to 15 April.
3 . Paragraph 1 shall apply to fresh lemons of subheading 08.02 ex C of the Common Customs Tariff
on condition that on the internal Community market
the prices of lemons imported from Algeria are, after
customs clearance and deduction of import charges
other than customs duties, not less than the reference
price plus the incidence on that reference price of the
customs duties actually applied in respect of third
countries and a fixed amount of 1.20 units of account
per 100 kilograms.
4. The import charges other than customs duties
referred to in paragraph 3 shall be those laid down
for calculating the entry prices referred to in Regulation (EEC) No 1035/72 on the common organization of the market in fruit and vegetables.
However, the Community shall be entitled to calculate the amount to be deducted in respect of the
import charges other than customs duties referred to
in paragraph 3 in such a way, according to origin, as
to avoid difficulties which may arise from the incidence of those charges on entry prices.
Articles 23 to 28 of Regulation (EEC) No 1035/72
shall continue to apply.
Article 16
1 . Provided that Algeria levies a special charge on
exports of olive oil, other than olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading
15.07 A II of the Common Customs Tariff and
provided also that this special charge is reflected in
the import price, the Community shall take the
necessary measures to ensure that:
( a) the levy on imports into the Community of the
said olive oil, wholly obtained in Algeria and
transported direct from that country to the Community, is the import levy calculated in accordance with Article 13 of Regulation No 136/66/
EEC on the establishment of a common organization of the market in oils and fats, less 0.5 unit
of account per 100 kilograms
(b) the amount of the levy calculated in the manner
described under ( a) is reduced by an amount
equal to that of the special charge paid but not
exceeding 10 units of account per 100 kilograms;
2. If Algeria does not levy the charge referred to in
paragraph 1 , the Community shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the levy on imports into the
Community of olive oil, other than olive oil having
undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A II of the Common Customs Tariff, is
the import levy calculated in accordance with Article
13 of Regulation No 136/66/EEC on the establishment of a common organization of the market in oils
and fats, less 0-5 unit of account per 100 kilograms.
3 . Each Contracting Party shall take the measures
necessary for implementation of paragraph 1 and, in
the event of difficulties and at the request of the
other Contracting Party, shall supply the information
required for the proper operation of the system.
4. Consultations on the functioning of the system
provided for in this Article shall take place within
the Cooperation Council at the request of either
Contracting Party. Article 17
Without prejudice to the collection of the variable
component of the levy calculated in accordance with
Article 14 of Regulation No 136/66/EEC, the fixed
component shall not be imposed on imports into
the Community of olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A I
of the Common Customs Tariff, wholly obtained in
Algeria and transported direct from that country
to the Community.Article 18
1 . From 1 July 1976 prepared and preserved sardines falling within subheading 16.04 D of the Common Customs Tariff originating in Algeria may be
imported into the Community free of customs duties
subject to observance of the minimum prices fixed
in accordance with the following paragraphs.
2. For the period 1 July 1976 to 30 June 1978 the
minimum prices referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
those specified in Annex C. The prices for the period
beginning 1 July 1978 shall be not lower than those
specified in the said Annex as updated by exchange
of letters between the Contracting Parties in order
to take account of the trend of costs for the products
in question.
3 . From 1 July 1979 the minimum prices referred to
in paragraph 1 shall be agreed by annual exchanges
of letters between the Contracting Parties.
4. Exemption from the customs duties referred to
in paragraph 1 shall apply only from the date and
for the periods determined by the exchanges of letters
laying down the technical rules for applying this
Article. Article 19
1 . Customs duties on imports into the Community
of the products originating in Algeria which are listed
below shall be reduced by the following rates:
2. The tariff reduction referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply only from the date and for
the periods determined by exchanges of letters to be concluded annually between the
Contracting Parties for the purpose of establishing the conditions and detailed rules for
such reduction.
Article 20
1 . The treatment set out in the following paragraphs shall be applied to wine of fresh
grapes falling within heading No ex 22.05 of the Common Customs Tariff originating
in Algeria and imported into the Community provided that, subject to the special provisions set out in this Article, the import prices of such products plus the customs duties
actually levied are not less at any given time than the Community reference prices for such
wine. In order to qualify for the treatment specified in the
preceding subparagraph:
— wine in bulk must be put up in accordance with
the following requirements:
( a) the containers must be suitable for transporting wine and be used solely for that
purpose ;
(b) the containers must be completely filled;
( c) the means of closing the containers must be
such that they cannot be tampered with and
must ensure that they cannot be the subject
of operations during transportation or storage
other than those carried out under the supervision of the authorities of Algeria or of the
Member States of the Community;
( d) each container must be labelled in such a way
as to permit identification of the quality wine
it contains;
' (e ) the wine in question may be .transported only
in containers of a capacity not exceeding 25
hectolitres;
— wine in bottles must be put up in containers
holding two litres or less.
For the purpose of applying this paragraph, Algeria
shall be responsible for verifying the identity of the
above wine in accordance with its national rules,
particularly as regards analysis criteria. To this end
all the wine concerned shall be accompanied by a
certificate of designation of origin issued by the
relevant Algerian authority in accordance with the
model given in Annex D to this Agreement. 4. The arrangements provided for in this Article
shall be valid for a transitional period of five years
from the date on which they become operative.Article 21
1 . The Community shall take all necessary measures
to ensure that the levy on imports into the Community of bran, sharps and other residues derived
from the sifting, milling or other working of cereals,
other than of maize and rice, falling within subheading 23.02 A II of the Common Customs Tariff
and originating in Algeria, is the import levy
calculated in accordance with Article 2 of Regulation
(EEC) No 1052/68 on the import and export system
for products processed from cereals and from rice,
less a fixed amount equivalent to 60% of the
variable component of the levy, and that the fixed
component is not imposed. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply
provided that Algeria levies on exports of the
products referred to therein a special charge equal
to the amount by which the levy is reduced and that
this charge is reflected in the Community import
price.
3 . Detailed rules ifor the application of this Article
shall be laid down in an exchange of letters between
the Community and Algeria.
4. Consultations on the functioning of the arrangement provided for in this Article shall take place
within the Cooperation Council at the request of
either Contracting Party. Article 22 1 . The rates of reduction specified in Articles 15,
18 , 19 and 20 shall apply to the customs duties
actually applied in respect of third countries.
2. However, the duties resulting from the reductions
made by Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom
may in no case foe lower than those applied by the
said countries to t)he Community as originally
constituted. 3 . In derogation from paragraph 1 , should the application thereof temporarily result in tariff movements away from alignment on the final duty,
Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom may
maintain their duties until the level of these duties
has been reached on the occasion of a subsequent
alignment, or they may apply the duty resulting
from a subsequent alignment as soon as a tariff
movement reaches or passes the said level.
4. The reduced duties calculated in accordance with
Articles 15 , 18 , 19 and 20 shall be rounded off to
the 'first decimal place.
However, subject to the application by the Community of Article 39 (5 ) of the Act concerning the
conditions of accession and the adjustments to the
Treaties referred to in Article 10, as regards the
specific duties or the specific part of the mixed duties
in the customs tariffs of Ireland and of the United
Kingdom the reduced duties shall be rounded off to
the fourth decimal place.
5 . In the new Member States the variable component
of the levy referred to in Article 21 shall be calculated
taking into account the rates actually applied in
respect of third countries. Article 23
1 . Should specific rules foe introduced as a result of
implementation of its agricultural policy or modification of the existing rules, or should the provisions
on the implementation of its agricultural policy be
modified or developed, the Community may modify
the arrangements laid down in the Agreement in
respect of the products concerned.
In such cases the Community shall take appropriate
account of the interests of Algeria.
2. If the Community, in applying paragraph 1 ,
modifies the arrangements made by this Agreement
for products covered by Annex II to the Treaty
establishing the European Economic Community, it
shall accord imports originating in Algeria an
advantage comparable to that provided for in this
Agreement. 3 . Any modification of the arrangements made by
this Agreement shall; be the subject, at the request of
the other Contracting Party, of consultations within
the Cooperation Council. C. Common provisions
Article 24
1 . The products originating in Algeria referred to in
this Agreement may not enjoy more favourable treatment when imported into the Community than that
applied by the Member States 'between themselves.
2. For the application of paragraph 1 , account shall
not be taken of the customs duties and charges
having equivalent effect resulting from the application of Articles 32, 36, and 59 of the Act concerning
the conditions of accession and the adjustments to
the Treaties referred to in Article 10. Article 25
1 . Subject to the special provisions relating to frontier-zone trade, Algeria shall grant the Community
in the field of trade treatment no less favourable
than most-favoured-nation treatment.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply in the case of the
maintenance or establishment of customs unions or
free-trade areas.
3 . Furthermore, Algeria may derogate from the
provisions of paragraph 1 in the case of measures
adopted with a view to the economic integration of
the Maghrelb, or measures benefiting the developing
countries. Such measures shall be notified to the
Community. Article 26
1 . The Contracting Parties shall inform each other
at the time of signature of this Agreement of the
provisions relating to the trade arrangements they
apply.
2. Algeria shall be entitled to introduce into its
trade arrangements with the Community new
customs duties or charges having equivalent effect
and new quantitative restrictions or measures having
equivalent effect and to increase the duties or charges
and the quantitative restrictions or measures 'having
equivalent effect applied to products originating in or
going to the Community, where such measures are
necessitated by Algeria's industrialization and develop­ment Requirements. Such measures shall be notified
to the Community.
For the application of these measures consultations
shall be held within the Cooperation Council at the
request of the other Contracting Party. Article 27
Where Algeria applies quantitative restrictions in the
form of quotas to a given product in accordance
with its own legislation it shall treat the Community
as a single entity. Article 28
On the occasion of the reviews provided for in
Article 53 of the Agreement the Contracting Parties
shall seek opportunities to make progress towards
the removal of obstacles to trade, while having
regard to Algeria's essential development requirements.
Article 29
The concept of 'originating products' for the
purposes of implementing this title and the methods
of administrative cooperation relating thereto are
laid down in Protocol 2. Article 30
In the event of modifications to the nomenclature
of the customs tariffs of the Contracting Parties
affecting products referred to in this Agreement, the
Cooperation Council may adapt the tariff nomenclature of these products to conform with such
modifications, subject to the maintenance of the real
advantages resulting from this Agreement. Article 31
The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any
measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature
establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products of one Contracting
Party and like products originating in the territory
of the other Contracting Party.
Products exported to the territory of one of the
Contracting Parties may not benefit from repayment
of internal taxation in excess of the amount of direct
or indirect taxation imposed upon them. Article 32
Payments relating to commercial transactions carried
out in accordance with foreign trade and exchange
regulations and the transfer of such payments to tlhe
Member State of the Community in which the
creditor is resident or to Algeria shall Ibe free from
any restrictions. Article 33
The Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or
restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit
justified on grounds of public morality^ public policy
or public security; the protection of health and life
of humans, animals or plants; the protection of
national treasures of artistic, historic or archaelogical
value ; the protection of industrial and commercial
property, or rules relating to gold or silver. Such
prohibitions or restrictions must not, however,
constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a
disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting
Parties. Article 34
1 . If one of the Contracting Parties finds that
dumping is taking place in trade with the other
Contracting Party, it may take appropriate measures
against this practice in accordance with the Agreement
on implementation of Article VI of the General
Agreement on tariffs and trade, under the conditions
and in accordance with the procedures laid down in
Article 36.
2. In the event of measures being directed against
bounties or subsidies the Contracting Parties undertake to respect the provisions of Article VI of the
General Agreement on tariffs and trade. Article 35
If serious disturbances arise in any sector of the
economy or if difficulties arise which might bring
about serious deterioration in the economic situation
of a region, the Contracting Party concerned may
take the necessary safeguard measures under the
conditions and in accordance with the procedures
laid down in Article 36. Article 36
1 . In the event of a Contracting Party subjecting
imports of products liable to give rise to the difficulties referred to in Article 35 to an administrative procedure, the purpose to which is to provide rapid
information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other Contracting Party.
2. In the cases specified in Articles 34 and 35, before
taking the measures provided for therein or, in cases
to which paragraph 3 (b) applies, as soon as possible,
the Contracting Party in question shall supply the
Cooperation Council with all relevant information
required for a thorough examination of the situation
with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the
Contracting Parties.
In the selection of measures, priority must be given
to those which least disturb the functioning of the
Agreement. Such measures must not exceed the
limits of what is strictly necessary to counteract the
difficulties which have arisen. The safeguard measures shall be notified immediately
to the Cooperation Council and shall be the subject
of periodic consultations within the Cooperation
Council, particularly with a view to their abolition
as soon as circumstances permit.
3 . For the implementation of paragraph 2, the
following provisions shall apply:
( a) as regards Articles 34 and 35, consultation in the
Cooperation Council shall take place before the
Contracting Party concerned takes the appropriate measures;
(b) where exceptional circumstances requiring
immediate action make prior examination impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may, in the
situations specified in Articles 34 and 35, apply
forthwith such precautionary measures as are
strictly necessary to remedy the situation. Article 37
Where one or more Member States of the Community or Algeria is in serious difficulties or is
seriously threatened with difficulties as regards its
balance of payments, the Contracting Party concerned
may take the necessary safeguard measures. In the
selection of measures, priority must fee given to those
which least disturb the functioning of the Agreement.
They shall be notified immediately to the other
Contracting Party and shall be the subject of periodic
consultations within the Cooperation Council,
particularly with a view to their abolition as soon as
circumstances permit. TITLE III
COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF LABOUR Article 38
The treatment accorded by each Member State to
workers of Algerian nationality employed in its
territory shall be free from any discrimination based
on nationality, as regards working conditions or
remuneration, in relation to its own nationals.
Algeria shall accord the same treatment to workers
who are nationals of a Member State and employed
in its territory. Article 39
1 . Subject to the provisions of the following paragraphs, workers of Algerian nationality and any
members of their families living with them shall
enjoy, in the field of social security, treatment free
from any discrimination based on nationality in
relation to nationals of the Member States in which
they are employed. 2. All periods of insurance, employment or residence
completed Iby such workers in the various Member
States shall be added together for the purpose of
pensions and annuities in respect of old age, death
and invalidity, and also for that of medical care for
the workers and for members of their families resident in the Community.
3. The workers in question shall receive family
allowances for members of their families who are
resident in the Community. 4. The workers in question shall be able to transfer
freely to Algeria at the rates applied by virtue of
the law of the debtor Member State or States, any
pensions or annuities in respect of old age, death,
industrial accident or occupational disease, or of
invalidity resulting from industrial accident or
occupational disease. 5. Algeria shall accord to workers who are nationals
of a Member State and employed in its territory, and
to the members of their families, treatment similar
to that specified in paragraphs 1 , 3 and 4. Article 40
1 . Before the end of the first year following the
entry into force of this Agreement, the Cooperation
Council shall adopt provisions to implement the
principles set out in Article 39.
2. The Cooperation Council shall adopt detailed
rules for administrative cooperation providing the
necessary management and control guarantees for
the application of the provisions referred to in
paragraph 1 . Article 41
The provisions adopted by the Cooperation Council
in accordance with Article 40 shall not affect any
rights or obligations arising from bilateral agreements linking Algeria and the Memlber States where
those agreements provide for more favourable treatment of nationals of Algeria or of the Member
States. TITLE IV
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS Article 42
1 . A Cooperation Council is hereby established
which shall have the power, for the purpose of attaining the objectives set out in the Agreement, to take
decisions in the cases provided for in the Agreement*
The decisions taken shall be binding on the Contracting Parties, which shall take such measures as
are required to implement them.
2. The Cooperation Council may also formulate any
resolutions, recommendations or opinions which it
considers desirable for the attainment of the common
objectives and the smooth functioning of the Agreement.
3 . The Cooperation Council shall adopt its rules of
procedure.
Article 43 -
1 . The Cooperation Council shall be composed, on
the one hand, of the members of the Council of the
European Communities and of members of the Commission of the European Communities and, on the
other hand, of members of the Government of
Algeria. 2. Members of the Cooperation Council may be
represented as laid down in the rules of procedure.
3 . The Cooperation Council shall act by mutual
agreement between the Community on the one hand
and Algeria on the other. Article 44
1 . The office of President of the Cooperation
Council shall be held alternately by a member of
the Council of the European Communities and a
member of the Government of Algeria.
2. Meetings of the Cooperation Council shall be
called once a year by its President.
The Cooperation Council shall, in addition, meet
whenever necessary, -at the request of either Contracting Party, in accordance with the conditions to be
laid down in its rules of prooedure. Article 45
1 . The Cooperation Council shall be assisted in the
performance of its duties by a Cooperation Committee composed, on the one hand, of one representative of each Member State and one representative
of the Commission of the European Communities
and, on the other, of representatives of Algeria.
2. The Cooperation Council may decide to set up
any other committee that can assist it in carrying out
its duties.
3 . In its rules of procedure, the Cooperation Council
shall determine the composition and duties of such
committees and how they shall function. Article 46
The Cooperation Council shall take any appropriate
measures to facilitate the necessary cooperation and
contacts between the European parliamentary
assembly and the Chamber of Representatives of the
People's Democratic Republic of Algeria.
Article 47
Either Contracting Party shall, if so requested by the
other Contracting Party, provide all relevant information on any agreements it concludes involving tariff or trade provisions, anid on any amendments to
its customs tariff or external trade arrangements.
r
Where such amendments or agreements have a direct
and particular incidence on the functioning of the
Agreement, appropriate consultations shall be held
within the Cooperation Council at the request of
the other Contracting Party so that the interests of
the Contracting Parties may be taken into consideration. Article 48
1 . When the Community concludes an Association
Agreement having a direct and particular incidence
on the functioning of the Agreement appropriate
consultations shall 'be held within the Cooperation
Council so that the Community may take into
consideration the interests of the Contracting Parties
as defined by this Agreement.
2. In the event of a third State acceding to the
Community, appropriate consultations shall be held
within the Cooperation Council so that the interests
of the Contracting Parties as defined by this
Agreement may be taken into consideration. Article 49
1 . The Contracting Parties shall take any general
or specific measures required to fulfil their
obligations under the Agreement. They shall see to it
that the objectives set out in the Agreement are
attained.
2. If either Contracting Party considers that the other
Contracting Party has failed Co fulfil an obligation
under the Agreement, it may take appropriate
measures. Before so doing, it shall supply the
Cooperation Council with all relevant information
required for a thorough examination of the situation
with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the
Contracting Parties.
In the selection of measures, priority must be given
to those whiah least disturb the functioning of the
Agreement. These measures shall be notified
immediately to the Cooperation Council and shall
be the subject of consultations within the Cooperation Council if the other Contracting Party so
requests. Article 50
1 . Any dispute which arises between the Contracting
Parties concerning the interpretation of the Agreement may be placed before the Coopieration Council. 2. If the Cooperation Council fails to settle the
dispute at its next meeting, either Party may notify
the other of the appointment of an arbitrator; the
other Party must then appoint a second arbitrator
within two months. For the application of this
procedure, the Community and the Member States
shall be deemed to be one Party to the dispute.
The Cooperation Council shall appoint a third
arbitrator.
The decisions of the arbitrators shall be taken by
majority vote.
Each Party to the dispute must take the measures
required for the implementation of the arbitrators'
decision. Article 51
Nothing in the Agreement shall prevent a Contracting
Party from taking any measures:
( a) which it considers necessary to prevent the
disclosure of information contrary to its essential
security interests;
( b ) which relate to trade in arms, munitions or war
materials or to research, development or
production indispensable for defence purposes,
provided that suph measures do not impair the
conditions of competition in respect of products
not intended for specifically military purposes;
( c ) which it considers essential to its security in time
of war or serious international tension. Article 52
In the fields covered by the Agreement:
— the arrangements applied by Algeria in respect
of the Community shall not give rise to any
discrimination between the Member States, their
nationals, or their companies or firms,
— the arrangements applied by the Community in
respect of Algeria shall not give rise to any
discrimination between Algerian nationals,
companies or firms. Article 53
The Contracting Parties shall review, in accordance
with the procedure adopted for negotiating the Agreement itself, in the first place from the beginning
of 1978 and again from the beginning of 1983, the
results of the Agreement and any improvements
which could be made by either side as from
1 January 1979 and 1 January 1984, on the basis of
the experience gained during the functioning of the
Agreement and of the objectives defined therein. Article 54
Protocols 1 and 2 and Annexes A, B, C and D shall
form an integral part of the Agreement. The
declarations and exchanges of letters shall appear in
the Final Act, which shall form an integral part of
the Agreement. Article 55
Either Contracting Party may denounce this Agreement by notifying the other Contracting Party. The
Agreement shall cease to apply six months after the
date of such notification. Article 56
This Agreement shall apply, on the one hand, to the
territories to which the Treaty establishing the
European Economic Community applies under the
conditions laid down in that Treaty and, on the
other, to the territory of the People's Democratic
Republic of Algeria.
Article 57
This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the
Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Italian and
Arabic languages, each of these texts being equally
authentic.
Article. 58
This Agreement will be approved by the Contracting
Parties in accordance with their own procedures.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first
day of the second month following notification that
the procedures referred to in the first paragraph have
been completed.
