FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

AND
 THE EFTA STATES 
III
PREAMBLE
The Arab Republic of Egypt (hereinafter referred to as Egypt), on the one part, and the
Republic of Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway, the
Swiss Confederation (hereinafter referred to collectively as the EFTA States), on the
other part, hereinafter referred to as "the Parties":
CONSIDERING the importance of the links existing between Egypt and the EFTA
States, in particular the Declaration on Co-operation signed in Zermatt in December
1995, and recognizing the common wish to strengthen these links, thus establishing
close and lasting relations,
RECALLING the membership of Egypt and the EFTA States in the World Trade
Organization (hereinafter referred to as “the WTO”) and their commitment to comply
with the rights and obligations arising from the Marrakech Agreement establishing the
WTO, including the principles of most-favoured-nation and of national treatment,
RECALLING their intention to participate actively in the process of economic
integration in the Euro-Mediterranean region, and expressing their preparedness to cooperate in seeking ways and means to strengthen this process,

REAFFIRMING their commitment to the principles and objectives set out in the United
Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
DESIRING to create favourable conditions for the development and diversification of
trade between them and for the promotion of commercial and economic co-operation in
areas of common interest on the basis of equality, mutual benefit, non-discrimination
and international law,
RESOLVED to contribute to the strengthening of the multilateral trading system and to
develop their relations towards free trade in compliance with the WTO rules,
CONSIDERING that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting
the Parties from their obligations under other international agreements, especially the
WTO,
DESIRING to create new employment opportunities while promoting sustainable
development,
DECLARING their readiness to examine the possibility of developing and deepening
their economic relations in order to extend them to fields not covered by this
Agreement,
CONVINCED that this Agreement provides an appropriate framework for exchange of
information and views on economic developments and trade, 
IV
CONVINCED that this Agreement will create conditions encouraging economic, trade
and investment relations between them,
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Free Trade
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement"): 
V
CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. Egypt and the EFTA States shall establish a free trade area in accordance with
the provisions of this Agreement with a view to spurring prosperity and economic
development in their territories.
2. The objectives of this Agreement, which is based on trade relations between
market economies, are:
(a) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in goods, in conformity with Article
XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (hereinafter
referred to as “the GATT 1994”);
(b) to gradually develop an environment conducive to increased investment
flows and enhanced trade in services;
(c) to ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights;
and
(d) to support the harmonious development of economic relations between
the Parties through technical and financial assistance.
ARTICLE 2
Trade relations governed by this Agreement
 This Agreement applies to trade relations between, on the one side, Egypt, and,
on the other side, the individual EFTA States.
ARTICLE 3
Territorial application
This Agreement shall apply to the territories of the Parties except as provided for
in Protocol C. 
VI
CHAPTER II TRADE IN GOODS
ARTICLE 4
Scope
This Chapter shall apply to the following products originating in Egypt or an
EFTA State:
(a) all products falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System (hereinafter referred to as
"HS"), with the exception of the products listed in Annex I;
(b) processed agricultural products specified in Protocol A, with due regard
to the arrangements provided for in that Protocol;
(c) fish and other marine products as provided for in Annex II; and
(d) agricultural products falling within HS Chapters 1 to 24 as specified in
Annex III.
ARTICLE 5
Rules of origin
 and co-operation in customs administration
Protocol B lays down the rules of origin and methods of administrative cooperation.
ARTICLE 6
Customs duties on imports and charges having
equivalent effect
1. No new customs duties on imports or charges having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between Egypt and the EFTA States as of the entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. Egypt shall gradually eliminate its customs duties on imports and any charges
having equivalent effect on products originating in an EFTA State in accordance with
Annex IV.
3. The EFTA States shall abolish on the date of entry into force of this Agreement
all customs duties on imports and any charges having equivalent effect on products
originating in Egypt. 
VII
ARTICLE 7
Basic duties
1. The applicable rates for imports between the Parties, to which the successive
reductions set out in this Agreement are to be applied, shall be the WTO bound rate or
the applied rate enforced as of the entry into force of this Agreement if it is lower. If,
after the entry into force of this Agreement, a tariff reduction is applied on an erga
omnes basis, the reduced rate shall apply.
2. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective rates applied on the
date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8
Customs duties of a fiscal nature
 Article 6 shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
ARTICLE 9
Quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect
1. Quantitative restrictions on imports and any other measures having equivalent
effect in trade between Egypt and the EFTA States shall be abolished from the entry
into force of this Agreement.
2. No new quantitative restriction on imports or any other measures having
equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between Egypt and the EFTA States.
ARTICLE 10
Customs duties and quantitative restrictions on exports
 Egypt and the EFTA States shall neither apply customs duties or charges having
equivalent effect, nor quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect to
exports between themselves.
ARTICLE 11
Internal taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature
establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products of a
Party and like products originating in the territory of another Party. 
VIII
2. Products exported to the territory of a Party may not benefit from repayment of
indirect internal taxation in excess of the amount of indirect taxation imposed on them
either directly or indirectly.
ARTICLE 12
Payments and transfers
1. Payments relating to trade between Egypt and an EFTA State and the transfer of
such payments to the territory of the Party where the creditor resides, shall be free from
any restrictions.
2. The Parties shall refrain from any currency exchange or administrative
restrictions on the grant, repayment or acceptance of short and medium-term credits
covering commercial transactions in which a resident participates.
ARTICLE 13
Technical regulations
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade (hereinafter referred to as "the WTO TBT Agreement").
2. The Parties shall strengthen their co-operation in the field of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment, with a view to increasing the mutual
understanding of their respective systems and facilitating access to their respective
markets, thereby preparing the ground for possible mutual recognition agreements.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the Parties agree to hold consultations in the
framework of the Joint Committee where Egypt or an EFTA State considers that one or
more EFTA States or Egypt respectively have taken measures which are likely to create,
or have created, an obstacle to trade, in order to find an appropriate solution in
conformity with the WTO TBT Agreement.
ARTICLE 14
Sanitary and phytosanitary measures
1. The Parties shall apply their regulations for sanitary and phytosanitary matters in
a non-discriminatory fashion and shall not introduce any new measures that have the
effect of unduly obstructing trade.
2. The principles set out in paragraph 1 shall be applied in accordance with the
WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which is
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement. 
IX
ARTICLE 15
State trading enterprises
 The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of state trading enterprises
shall be governed by Article XVII of the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the
Interpretation of Article XVII of the GATT 1994, which are hereby incorporated into
and made part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 16
Subsidies and countervailing measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of subsidies and
countervailing measures shall be governed by Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994,
the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and the WTO
Agreement on Agriculture.
2. If a Party finds that subsidies are granted which affect trade with another Party,
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures in accordance with the above
mentioned Agreements and relevant internal legislation and executive regulations.
ARTICLE 17
Anti-dumping
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of the application of antidumping measures shall be governed by Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the
Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994.
2. If a Party finds that dumping is taking place in trade with another Party, the
Party concerned may take appropriate measures in accordance with the above
mentioned Agreements and relevant internal implementation legislation.
ARTICLE 18
Safeguard measures
1. The provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on
Safeguards shall apply between the Parties.
2. Before applying safeguard measures pursuant to the provisions of Article XIX of
the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards, the Party intending to apply
such measure shall supply the Joint Committee with all relevant information required
for a thorough examination of the situation with a view to seeking a solution acceptable
to the Parties. In order to find such a solution, the Parties shall immediately hold 
X
consultations within the Joint Committee. If, as a result of the consultations, the Parties
do not reach an agreement within thirty days of the initiation of the consultations on a
solution to avoid the safeguard measures, the Party intending to apply safeguard
measures may apply the provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO
Agreement on Safeguards.
3. In the selection of safeguard measures pursuant to this Article, the Parties shall
give priority to those that cause least disturbance to the achievement of the objectives of
this Agreement.
4. Safeguard measures shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee and
shall be subject to periodic consultations within the Committee, particularly with a view
to their abolition as soon as circumstances permit.
ARTICLE 19
Structural adjustment
1. By way of derogation from the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 6, Egypt
may take exceptional measures of limited duration to increase or re-introduce customs
duties.
2. Such measures may only apply to new and infant industries or to sectors
undergoing restructuring or experiencing serious difficulties, particularly where those
difficulties entail severe social problems.
3. Customs duties on import into Egypt of products originating in an EFTA State
that are introduced by such exceptional measures may not exceed 25 per cent ad
valorem, and must retain a preferential margin for products originating in the EFTA
States. The total value of imports of the products subjected to such measures may not
exceed 20 per cent of total imports of industrial products from the EFTA States during
the last year for which statistics are available.
4. Such measures shall be applied for no longer than five years, except where a
longer duration is authorized by the Joint Committee. They shall cease to apply at the
latest on expiry of the maximum transitional period.
5. Such measures may not be introduced for a given product if more than three
years have elapsed since the abolition of all duties, quantitative restrictions and charges
and measures having equivalent effect for the product concerned.
6. Egypt shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures it intends to
adopt and, at the request of an EFTA State, consultations shall be held on the measures
and sectors concerned before they are implemented. When adopting such measures,
Egypt shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the abolition of the customs
duties introduced or increased pursuant to this Article. Such schedule shall provide for
the phasing out of the duties concerned by equal annual instalments, starting no later 
XI
than the end of the second year following their introduction. The Joint Committee may
decide on a different schedule.
7. By way of derogation from the provisions of paragraph 4, the Joint Committee
may exceptionally, in order to take into account the difficulties involved in setting up
new industries, endorse the measures already taken by Egypt pursuant to paragraph 1
for a maximum period of four years beyond the twelve years transitional period
ARTICLE 20
Re-export and serious shortage
1. Where compliance with the provisions of Article10 leads to:
(a) re-export to a third country against which the exporting Party maintains,
for the product concerned, quantitative export restrictions, export duties
or measures or charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the
exporting Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to major
difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures laid down
in paragraph 2.
2. The difficulties arising from the situations referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
submitted for examination to the Joint Committee. The Committee may take any
decision needed to put an end to the difficulties. If it has not taken such a decision
within thirty days of the matter being referred to it, the exporting Party may apply
appropriate measures on the exportation of the product concerned. The measures shall
be non-discriminatory and be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their
maintenance.
3. In the selection of measures, priority must be given to the action which least
disturbs the functioning of this Agreement.
4. The measures taken shall be subject to periodic consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view to their elimination as soon as circumstances permit.
ARTICLE 21
General exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports,
exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or
public security, of the protections of health and life of humans, animals or plants, of the
protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value, of
the protection of intellectual property or of regulations concerning gold and silver or
conservation of exhaustible natural resources. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall 
XII
not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or disguised restriction on
trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 22
Security exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures
which:
(a) it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to
its essential security interests;
(b) relate to the production of, or trade in, arms, munitions or war materials
or to research, developments or productions indispensable for defence
purposes, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of
competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military
purposes; or
(c) it considers essential to its own security in the event of serious internal
disturbances affecting the maintenance of law and order, in time of war
or serious international tension constituting threat of war or in order to
carry out obligations it has accepted for the purpose on maintaining
peace and international security.
CHAPTER III PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 23
Protection of intellectual property
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non–discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, and provide for measures for the enforcement
of such rights against infringement thereof, counterfeiting and piracy, in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, Annex V to this Agreement and the WTO Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (hereinafter referred to as "the
TRIPS Agreement").
2. The Parties shall accord to each others’ nationals, treatment no less favourable
than they accord to their own nationals. Exemptions from this obligation must be in
accordance with the substantive provisions of Article 3 of the TRIPS Agreement.
3. The Parties shall accord to each others’ nationals, treatment no less favourable
than accorded to nationals of any other state. Exemptions from this obligation must be 
XIII
in accordance with the substantive provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular
Articles 4 and 5 thereof.
4. The Parties shall regularly review this Article and Annex V to this Agreement
with a view to their effective implementation and their future development. In the event
that problems in the area of intellectual property rights affecting trading conditions
arise, urgent consultations shall take place, with a view to reaching mutually satisfactory
solutions.
5. With a view to facilitating the implementation of this Article and Annex V to
this Agreement, the EFTA States shall grant technical and financial assistance to Egypt
in accordance with Chapter VII.
CHAPTER IV INVESTMENT AND SERVICES
ARTICLE 24
Investment conditions
1. The Parties shall create stable, favourable and transparent conditions for
investors of the other Parties that are making or seeking to make investments in their
territories.
2. Investments of investors of a Party shall, in the territories of the other Parties, at
all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment as well as protection and security, in
accordance with international law.
3. The Parties shall consider extending the scope of this Agreement to include the
right of establishment of companies of one Party in the territory of another Party. The
Joint Committee shall make recommendations for achieving this objective.
ARTICLE 25
Investment promotion
1. The Parties recognize the importance of promoting cross-border investment and
technology flows as a means for achieving economic growth and development. Cooperation in this respect may include:
(a) appropriate means of identifying investment opportunities and
information channels on investment regulations;
(b) the provision of information on the Parties’ measures to promote
investment abroad (technical assistance, financial support, investment
insurance, etc.); 
XIV
(c) the furthering of a legal environment conducive to increased investment
flows, including through the conclusion of bilateral agreements; and
(d) the development of mechanisms for joint investments, in particular with
small and medium enterprises.
2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by
relaxing health, safety or environmental standards.
ARTICLE 26
Trade in services
1. The Parties reaffirm their respective commitments under the terms of the
General Agreement on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred to as "the GATS") and in
particular the commitment to accord each other most-favoured nation treatment
(hereinafter referred to as "MFN") in trade in service sectors covered by these
commitments.
2. In accordance with the GATS, this treatment shall not apply to:
(a) advantages accorded by any Party under the provisions of an agreement
as defined in Article V of the GATS or under measures adopted on the
basis of such an agreement; or
(b) other advantages accorded pursuant to the list of MFN exemptions
annexed by any Party to the GATS.
ARTICLE 27
Right of establishment and liberalisation of services
1. The Parties shall consider extending the scope of this Agreement to include the
right of establishment of companies of one Party in the territory of another Party and the
liberalization of the supply of services by companies of one Party to service consumers
in another Party.
2. The Joint Committee shall make the necessary recommendations for the
implementation of the objectives set out in paragraph 1. When formulating these
recommendations, the Joint Committee shall take into account the experience gained by
the implementation of the MFN treatment granted to each other by the Parties in
accordance with their respective obligations under the GATS, and in particular Article
V thereof.
3. The objective set out in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be the subject of a first
examination by the Joint Committee at the latest five years after the entry into force of
this Agreement. 
XV
CHAPTER V PAYMENT AND CAPITAL MOVEMENT
ARTICLE 28
Payments for current transactions
Subject to the provisions of Article 30, the Parties undertake to allow all
payments for current transactions to be made in a freely convertible currency.
ARTICLE 29
Capital movements
1. The Parties shall ensure that capital for investments made in companies formed
in accordance with their laws, any returns stemming therefrom, and the amounts
resulting from liquidations of investments shall be freely transferable.
2. The Parties shall hold consultations with a view to facilitating the movement of
capital between Egypt and the EFTA States and achieve its complete liberalization as
soon as conditions are met.
ARTICLE 30
Balance of payments difficulties
Where an EFTA State or Egypt is in serious balance of payments difficulties, or
under threat thereof, the EFTA State concerned or Egypt respectively may, in
conformity with the conditions laid down within the framework of the GATT 1994 and
Articles VIII and XIV of the Statutes of the International Monetary Fund, take
restrictive measures with regard to current payments if such measures are strictly
necessary. The EFTA State concerned or Egypt, as appropriate, shall inform the other
Parties immediately thereof and shall provide as soon as possible a timetable for the
removal of such measures.
CHAPTER VI COMPETITION AND OTHER ECONOMIC MATTERS
ARTICLE 31
Rules of competition concerning undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in
so far as they may affect trade between Egypt and an EFTA State: 
XVI
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of
undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have
as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of
competition; and
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the
territories of the Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof.
2. The Joint Committee shall, within five years of the entry into force of this
Agreement, adopt by decision the necessary rules for the implementation of
paragraph 1.
3. If, in the absence of the rules referred to in paragraph 2, a Party considers that a
particular practice by an undertaking or undertakings of another Party is incompatible
with the terms of paragraph 1, and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious
prejudice to its interest or material injury to its domestic industry, including its service
industry, it may take appropriate measures after consultation within the Joint Committee
or after thirty working days following referral for such consultation.
4. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary adopted in conformity with
paragraph 2, the Parties shall exchange information taking into account the limitations
imposed by the requirements of their national secrecy laws, such as in particular rules
concerning professional and business secrecy.
ARTICLE 32
Public enterprises
With regard to public enterprises and enterprises to which special or exclusive
rights have been granted, the Joint Committee shall ensure that as from the fifth year
following the date of entry into force of this Agreement there is neither enacted nor
maintained any measure distorting trade between the Parties contrary to their interests.
This provision should not obstruct the performance in law or in fact of the particular
tasks assigned to theses enterprises.
ARTICLE 33
Public procurement
The Parties agree on the objective of a progressive liberalisation of public
procurement. The Joint Committee will hold consultations on the implementation of
this objective. 
XVII
CHAPTER VII TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
ARTICLE 34
Objectives and scope
1. The EFTA States declare their readiness to provide technical and financial
assistance to Egypt, in accordance with their national policy objectives, in order to:
(a) facilitate the implementation of the overall objectives of this Agreement,
in particular to enhance trading and investment opportunities arising
from this Agreement; and
(b) support Egypt’s own efforts to achieve sustainable economic and social
development.
2. Assistance shall focus on sectors affected by the process of liberalisation and
restructuring of the Egyptian economy as well as on sectors likely to bring the
economies of the EFTA States and Egypt closer together, particularly those generating
growth and employment.
ARTICLE 35
Methods and means
1. Assistance to Egypt shall be provided bilaterally or through EFTA programmes
or a combination of the two.
2. Parties shall co-operate with the objective of identifying and employing the most
effective methods and means for the implementation of this Chapter, including by
taking into consideration efforts of relevant international organisations.
3. With a view to fostering sustainable development efforts, Parties shall also
cooperate, through the implementation of this Chapter, on methods and means of
assistance, to agree on environmental aspects that could be taken into consideration.
4. Means of assistance may include:
(a) exchange of information, transfer of expertise and training;
(b) grants, preferential loans, development funds or other financial means;
(c) implementation of joint actions such as seminars and workshops; and
(d) technical and administrative assistance. 
XVIII
ARTICLE 36
Fields of co-operation
Assistance may cover any field jointly identified by the Parties that may serve to
enhance Egypt’s capacities to benefit from increased international trade and investment,
including in particular:
(a) trade promotion, trade facilitation, and promotion of market
opportunities;
(b) customs and origin matters;
(c) fish and aquaculture;
(d) technical regulations and sanitary and phytosanitary measures, including
standardisation and certification;
(e) trade and investment statistics;
(f) regulatory assistance and implementation of laws in areas such as
intellectual property and public procurement; and
(g) local enterprise development.
CHAPTER VIII INSTITUTIONAL AND PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 37
The Joint Committee
1. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administered by
a Joint Committee, which is hereby established. Each Party shall be represented in the
Joint Committee by its competent authority.
2. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties
shall exchange information and, at the request of any Party, shall hold consultations
within the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep under review the
possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the EFTA States and
Egypt.
3. The Joint Committee may take decisions in the cases provided for in this
Agreement. On other matters the Joint Committee may make recommendations.
4. The Joint Committee shall meet upon request of any Party whenever necessary,
but at least every two years. 
XIX
ARTICLE 38
Procedures of the Joint Committee
1. The Joint Committee shall act by common agreement.
2. If a representative of a Party in the Joint Committee has accepted a decision
subject to the fulfilment of constitutional requirements, the decision shall enter into
force, if no later date is contained therein, on the date the lifting of the reservation is
notified.
3. For the purpose of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of
procedure.
4. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
parties, as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
ARTICLE 39
Fulfilment of obligations and consultations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the
objectives and the fulfilment of their obligations under this Agreement. Should any
divergence with respect to the interpretation and application of this Agreement arise, the
Parties shall make every effort through co-operation and consultations to arrive at a
mutually satisfactory resolution.
2. Any Party may request in writing consultations with another Party regarding any
actual or proposed measure or any other matter that it considers might affect the
operation of this Agreement. The Party requesting consultations shall at the same time
notify the other Parties in writing thereof and supply all relevant information.
3. The consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee if any of the Parties so
request within ten days from the receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2,
with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
ARTICLE 40
Provisional re-balancing measures
1. If any Party to this Agreement considers that another Party has failed to fulfil an
obligation under this Agreement and the Joint Committee has failed to arrive at a
commonly acceptable solution within three months, the Party concerned may take such
provisional re-balancing measures as are appropriate and strictly necessary to remedy
the imbalance. Priority shall be given to such measures as will least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement. The measures taken shall be notified immediately to the
Parties and to the Joint Committee, which shall hold regular consultations with a view 
XX
to their abolition. The measures shall be abolished when conditions no longer justify
their maintenance, or, if the dispute is submitted to arbitration, when an arbitral award
has been rendered and complied with.
2. Measures according to paragraph 1 may be taken without prior consultations in
the Joint Committee in cases of a material breach of this Agreement by another Party.
A material breach shall consist of the repudiation of this Agreement not sanctioned by
the general rules of international law or a grave violation of an essential element of this
Agreement, creating an environment not conducive for consultations or where a delay
would be detrimental to the objectives of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 41
Arbitration
1. Disputes between the Parties, relating to the interpretation of rights and
obligations under this Agreement, which have not been settled through direct
consultations or in the Joint Committee within 90 days from the date of the receipt of
the request for consultations, may be referred to arbitration by any Party to the dispute
by means of a written notification addressed to the other Party to the dispute. A copy of
this notification shall be communicated to Egypt or the EFTA Secretariat, as the case
may be. Where more than one Party requests the submission to an arbitral tribunal of a
dispute with the same Party relating to the same question a single arbitral tribunal
should be established to consider such disputes whenever feasible.
2. The constitution and functioning of the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by
Annex VI. The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and binding upon the Parties
to the dispute.
CHAPTER VIII FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 42
Evolutionary clause
1. The Parties undertake to review this Agreement in light of international
economic developments, i.a. in the framework of the WTO, and to examine in this
context and in the light of any relevant factor, the possibility of further developing and
deepening the co-operation under this Agreement and to extend it to areas not covered
therein. The Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine this possibility and,
where appropriate, to make recommendations to them, particularly with a view to
opening up negotiations. 
XXI
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be
subject to ratification or approval by the Parties in accordance with their own
procedures.
ARTICLE 43
Annexes and Protocols
The Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement are an integral part of it. The Joint
Committee may decide to amend the Annexes and Protocols.
ARTICLE 44
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement other than those referred to in Article 43 which
are approved by the Joint Committee shall be submitted to the Parties for ratification or
acceptance and shall enter into force on the first day of the third month following the
deposit of the last instrument of ratification or acceptance.
ARTICLE 45
Customs unions, free trade areas, frontier trade and other preferential agreements
This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs
unions, free trade areas, arrangements for frontier trade and other preferential
agreements, except insofar as they alter the trade arrangements provided for in this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 46
Accession
1. Any new Member State of the European Free Trade Association may accede to
this Agreement, provided that the Joint Committee decides to approve its accession, on
terms and conditions to be negotiated between the acceding State and the Parties to this
Agreement.
2. In relation to an acceding State, this Agreement shall enter into force on the first
day of the third month following the exchange of its instrument of accession. 
XXII
ARTICLE 47
Withdrawal and expiration
1. Each Party may withdraw from this Agreement by means of a written
notification. The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the date on which the
notification has been received by the other Parties.
2. If Egypt withdraws, this Agreement shall expire at the end of the notice period,
and if all EFTA States withdraw it shall expire at the end of the latest notice period.
3. Any EFTA State which withdraws from the Convention establishing the
European Free Trade Association shall ipso facto on the same day as the withdrawal
takes effect cease to be a Party to this Agreement.
4. If any EFTA State withdraws from the Convention establishing the European
Free Trade Association or from this Agreement, a meeting of the remaining Parties shall
be convened to discuss the issue of the continued existence of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 48
Relation to the bilateral arrangements on trade in agricultural products
1. The bilateral arrangements on trade in agricultural goods between the EFTA
States and Egypt referred to in Annex III shall enter into force on the date on which this
Agreement enters into force for the EFTA State concerned and Egypt. Such bilateral
arrangements on trade in agricultural goods shall remain in force as long as the Parties
to it remain Parties to this Agreement.
2. If an EFTA State or Egypt withdraws from the bilateral arrangement on trade in
agricultural products concluded between them, this Agreement shall terminate between
that EFTA State and Egypt on the same date as the withdrawal from the arrangement
becomes effective.
ARTICLE 49
Entry into force
1. This Agreement shall enter into force in relation to those Signatory States which
have ratified the Agreement on the first day of the second month following the
exchange of their instruments of ratification or acceptance, provided that Egypt is
among the States that have deposited their instruments of ratification or acceptance.
2. A Signatory State may, if constitutional requirements allow, apply this
Agreement provisionally during an initial phase, provided that Egypt has ratified the
Agreement. Provisional application of the Agreement shall be notified to the other
Signatory States. 
XXIII
ARTICLE 50
Depositary
 The Government of Norway shall act as Depositary for the EFTA States. 
XXIV
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed
this Agreement.
Done at Davos, this 27th day of January 2007 in two originals in the Arabic and English
languages, both being equally authentic. In case of any divergence in the interpretation
of this Agreement, the English text shall prevail.
For the Republic of Iceland For the Arab Republic of Egypt
.......................................................... .....................................................
For the Principality of Liechtenstein
..........................................................
For the Kingdom of Norway
..........................................................
For the Swiss Confederation
.......................................................... 