EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY
PROTOCOL ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST
AFRICAN COMMUNITY COMMON MARKET
PROTOCOL ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST
AFRICAN COMMUNITY COMMON MARKET
ARRANGEMENT OF ARTICLES
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE TITLE
PART A: INTERPRETATION
ARTICLE 1: Interpretation
PART B: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST
AFRICAN COMMUNITY COMMON
MARKET
ARTICLE 2: Establishment of the East African
 Community Common Market
ARTICLE 3: Principles of the Common Market
ARTICLE 4: Objectives of the Common Market
ARTICLE 5: Scope of Co-operation in the Common Market
PART C: FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS
ARTICLE 6: Free Movement of Goods 
  
2
PART D: FREE MOVEMENT OF PERSONS AND
LABOUR
ARTICLE 7: Free Movement of Persons
ARTICLE 8: Standard Identification System
ARTICLE 9: Travel Documents
ARTICLE 10: Free Movement of Workers
ARTICLE 11: Harmonisation and Mutual Recognition of
Academic and Professional Qualifications
ARTICLE 12: Harmonisation of Labour Policies, Laws and
Programmes
PART E: RIGHTS OF ESTABLISHMENT AND
RESIDENCE
ARTICLE 13: Right of Establishment
ARTICLE 14: Right of Residence
ARTICLE 15: Access to and Use of Land and Premises 
  
3
PART F: FREE MOVEMENT OF SERVICES
ARTICLE 16: Free Movement of Services
ARTICLE 17: National Treatment
ARTICLE 18: Most Favoured Nation Treatment
ARTICLE 19: Notification
ARTICLE 20: Domestic Regulation
ARTICLE 21: General Exceptions to Trade in Services
ARTICLE 22: Security Exceptions on Trade in Services
ARTICLE 23: Implementation of the Free Movement of
Services
PART G: FREE MOVEMENT OF CAPITAL
ARTICLE 24: Elimination of Restrictions on the Free
Movement of Capital
ARTICLE 25: General Exceptions
ARTICLE 26: Safeguard Measures
ARTICLE 27: Conditions for Application of the Safeguard
Measures
ARTICLE 28: Capital and Related Payments and Transfers 
  
4
PART H: OTHER AREAS OF CO-OPERATION IN
THE COMMON MARKET
ARTICLE 29: Protection of Cross-Border Investments
ARTICLE 30: Economic and Monetary Policy Co-ordination
ARTICLE 31: Financial Sector Policy Co-ordination
ARTICLE 32: Harmonisation of Tax Policies and Laws
ARTICLE 33: Prohibited Business Practices
ARTICLE 34: Prohibited Subsidies
ARTICLE 35: Public Procurement
ARTICLE 36: Consumer Protection
ARTICLE 37: Co-ordination of Trade Relations
ARTICLE 38: Co-ordination of Transport Policies
ARTICLE 39: Harmonisation of Social Policies
ARTICLE 40 : Environmental Management
ARTICLE 41: Cooperation in Statistics
ARTICLE 42: Research and Technological Development
ARTICLE 43: Co-operation in Intellectual Property Rights
ARTICLE 44: Co-operation in Industrial Development
ARTICLE 45: Co-operation in Agriculture and Food Security
  
5
PART I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 46: Institutional Framework
ARTICLE 47: Approximation and Harmonisation of Policies,
Laws and Systems
ARTICLE 48: Safeguard Measures
ARTICLE 49: Measures to Address Imbalances
ARTICLE 50: Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of
the Common Market
ARTICLE 51: Regulations, Directives and Decisions
ARTICLE 52: Annexes
ARTICLE 53: Amendment of the Protocol
ARTICLE 54: Settlement of Disputes
ARTICLE 55: Entry into Force
ARTICLE 56: Depository and Registration
PROTOCOL ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST
AFRICAN COMMUNITY COMMON MARKET
PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF ARTICLES 76 AND    104 OF THE
TREATY FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY,
THE PROVISIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN
COMMUNITY COMMON MARKET ARE HEREBY SET FORTH:
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS The United Republic of Tanzania, the Republic of Burundi, the
Republic of Kenya, the Republic of Rwanda and the Republic of Uganda
(hereinafter referred to as “the Partner States’’), are Parties to the Treaty
for the Establishment of the East African Community (hereinafter referred
to as “the Treaty’’);  
AND WHEREAS by the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 151 of the
Treaty, the Partner States undertook to conclude such Protocols as may
be necessary in each area of co‐operation, which shall spell out the
objectives and scope of, and institutional mechanisms for co‐operation
and integration;
AND WHEREAS:  
(a) under the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 2  and paragraph 2 of
Article  5 of the Treaty, the Partner States undertook to, inter  alia,
establish among themselves a Common Market, as a transitional
stage to, and an integral part of the Community;  
(b) under the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 76 of the Treaty, the
Partner States have determined that the establishment of a
Common Market shall be progressive;
(c) under the provisions of paragraph 4 of Article 76 of the Treaty, the
Partner States agreed to conclude the Protocol on the
establishment of  a Common Market;
RECALLING the decision of the 11th Meeting of the Council to conclude
one protocol covering the provisions of Articles 76 and 104 of the Treaty;
  
2
NOTING that the Partner States concluded the Protocol Establishing the
East African Community Customs Union;
CONSIDERING that the objective of establishing a Common Market is the
realisation of accelerated economic growth and development through the
attainment of the free movement of goods, persons, labour, the rights of
establishment and residence, the free movement of services and capital;
NOTING the importance of the development of the social dimensions in
the Community and the desire to ensure economic and social
development in promoting employment and improving standards of living
and working conditions within the Community;
CONSCIOUS of their individual obligations and commitments under the
Treaty and under other regional and international agreements;
RECALLING the objectives of the Community to develop policies and
programmes aimed at widening and deepening cooperation among the
Partner States in the economic and social fields;
AGREE AS FOLLOWS:
PART A
INTERPRETATION
ARTICLE 1
Interpretation
In this Protocol, except where the context otherwise requires:
  
3
“child” means a son or daughter of a worker or self employed person
under the age of eighteen years, who is a citizen;  
“citizen” means a national of a Partner State recognized under the laws
governing citizenship in the Partner State;  
“common market” means the common market as defined under Article 1
of the Treaty;
“common standard travel document” means a passport or any other
valid travel document establishing the identity of the holder, issued by or
on behalf of the Partner State of which he or she is a citizen and shall also
include inter‐state passes;
“Community” means the East African Community established by Article 2
of the Treaty;  
“company” means a business entity incorporated as a company under the
laws of a Partner State;  
“co‐operation” includes the undertaking by the Partner States in
common, jointly or in concert, of activities undertaken in furtherance of
the objectives of the Community, as provided for under the Treaty or
under any contract or agreement made thereunder or in relation to the
objectives of the Community;
“Council” means the Council of Ministers of the Community established
by Article 9 of the Treaty;
“Customs Union” means the East African Community Customs Union
established by Article 2 of the Protocol on the Establishment of the East
African Community Customs Union;
“dependant” means a son or daughter of    a worker or a self employed
person who has attained the age of    eighteen years, the mother, the
father, a sister or a brother of a worker or a self employed person who is
wholly dependent on the worker or self employed person, who is a
citizen;   
   
“economic activity” means any legitimate income generating activity;  
  
4
“environment” means the natural resources of air, water, soil, fauna and
flora, eco‐systems, land, the man‐made physical features, cultural
heritage, the characteristic aspects of the landscape and the socio‐
economic interaction between the said factors and any living and non‐
living organisms;  
“firm” means a business entity other than a company, registered in
accordance with the laws governing registration of such business entity in
a Partner State;
“labour” includes a worker and a self employed person;
“national of a Partner State” means a natural or legal person who is a
national in accordance with the laws of the Partner State;  
“Partner States” means the Republic of Burundi, the Republic of Kenya,
the Republic of Rwanda, The United Republic of Tanzania, the Republic of
Uganda, and any other country granted membership to the Community
under Article 3 of the Treaty;  
“piracy” means infringement of intellectual property rights;  
“public security” means the function of governments which ensures the
protection of citizens and other nationals, organizations and institutions
against threats to their well‐being and to the prosperity of their
communities;  
“public service” means government ministries, government departments
and government agencies providing services to the public in a Partner
State;
“self employed person” means a person engaged in an economic activity
not under any contract of employment or supervision and who earns a
living through this activity;  
“spouse” means a husband or a wife of a worker or a self employed
person, in a legally recognised marriage in accordance with the national
laws of a Partner State, who is a citizen;
  
5
“third parties” means foreign countries or persons;
“Treaty” means the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African
Community and any annexes and protocols thereto;  
“vulnerable group” includes groups of persons who are marginalised on
grounds of stigmatised illness, gender, ethnicity, disability or age;  
“worker” means a person who performs services for and under the
direction of another person in return for remuneration.
  
PART B
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN
COMMUNITY COMMON MARKET
ARTICLE 2
Establishment of the East African Community Common
Market
1. In order to promote the objectives of the Community provided for
under Article 5 of the Treaty and in accordance with the provisions
of this Protocol, the Partner States hereby establish a common
market as an integral part of the Community.  
2. The Common Market established under paragraph 1, shall be called
the East African Community Common Market (hereinafter referred
to as “the Common Market”).
3. The Common Market shall be managed in accordance with the
relevant laws of the Community.   
4. In accordance with the provisions of Articles 76 and 104 of the
Treaty, this Protocol provides for the following:  
(a) the free movement of goods;
(b) the free movement of persons;
(c) the free movement of labour;
  
6
(d) the right of establishment;  
(e) the right of residence;
(f) the free movement of services; and
(g) the free movement of capital.
5. The establishment of the Common Market shall, notwithstanding
paragraph 1, be progressive.   
ARTICLE 3
Principles of the Common Market
1. The Common Market shall be guided by the fundamental and
operational principles of the Community as enshrined in Articles 6
and 7 of the Treaty.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the Partner States undertake to:
(a) observe the principle of non‐discrimination of nationals of
other Partner States on grounds of nationality;
(b) accord treatment to nationals of other Partner States, not
less favourable than the treatment accorded to  third parties;  
(c) ensure transparency in    matters    concerning the other
Partner States; and
(d) share information for the implementation of   this Protocol.  
ARTICLE 4
Objectives of the Common Market
1. The overall objective of the Common Market is to widen and
deepen cooperation among the Partner States in the economic and
social fields for the benefit of the Partner States.  
2. The specific objectives of the Common Market are to:  
(a) accelerate economic growth and development of the Partner
States through the attainment of the free movement of
  
7
goods, persons and labour, the rights of establishment and
residence and the free movement of services and capital;
(b) strengthen, coordinate  and regulate the economic and trade
relations among the Partner States in order to promote
accelerated, harmonious and balanced development within
the Community;
(c) sustain the expansion and integration of economic activities
within the Community, the benefit of which shall be equitably
distributed among the Partner States;  
(d) promote common understanding and cooperation among the
nationals of the Partner States for their economic and social  
development; and
(e) enhance research and technological advancement to
accelerate economic and social development.
3. In order to realise and attain the objectives provided for in this
Article, the Partner States shall co‐operate in, integrate and
harmonise their policies in areas provided for in this Protocol and in
such other areas as the Council may determine in order to achieve
the objectives of the Common Market.
ARTICLE 5
Scope of Co-operation in the Common Market
1. The provisions of this Protocol shall apply to any activity undertaken
in cooperation by the Partner States to achieve the free movement
of goods, persons, labour, services and capital and to ensure the
enjoyment of the rights of establishment and residence of their
nationals within the Community.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 and pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Article 2 of this Protocol, the Partner States agree to:  
  
8
(a) eliminate tariff, non‐tariff and technical barriers to trade;
harmonise and mutually recognize  standards and implement
a common trade policy for the Community;  
(b) ease cross‐border movement of persons and eventually
adopt an integrated border management system;  
(c) remove restrictions on movement of    labour, harmonise
labour policies, programs, legislation, social services, provide
for social security benefits and establish common standards
and measures for association of workers and employers,
establish employment promotion centres and eventually
adopt a common employment policy;
(d) remove restrictions on the right of establishment and
residence of nationals of other Partner States in their
territory in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol;
(e) remove measures that restrict movement of services and
service suppliers, harmonise standards to ensure
acceptability of services traded; and  
(f) eliminate restrictions on free movement of capital; ensure
convertibility of currencies; promote investments in capital
markets (stock exchange) eventually leading to an integrated
financial system.  
3. For the purposes of facilitating the implementation of the Common
Market, the Partner States further agree to:
(a) co‐operate to harmonise and to mutually recognise academic
and professional qualifications;
(b) co‐operate to ensure protection of cross border investments;
  
9
(c) co‐ordinate and harmonise their economic, monetary and
financial policies;
(d) co‐operate to ensure fair competition and promote consumer
welfare;
(e) co‐ordinate their trade relations    to govern international
trade and trade relations between the Community and third
parties;
(f) co‐ordinate and harmonise their transport policies and
develop their transport infrastructure modes;
(g) co‐ordinate and harmonise their social policies;  
(h) integrate environmental and natural resources management
principles in the  activities relating  to  the Common Market;
(i) ensure the availability of relevant, timely and reliable
statistical data for purposes of the Common Market;  
(j) promote research and technological development within the
Community;
(k) co‐operate in the promotion and protection of intellectual
property rights;
(l) promote industrial development for the attainment of
sustainable growth and development in the Community; and
(m) sustainably develop and promote agriculture and ensure food
security in the Community.  
  
10
PART C
FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS

ARTICLE 6
Free Movement of Goods
1. The free movement of goods between the Partner States shall be
governed by the Customs Law of the Community as specified in
Article 39 of the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African
Community Customs Union.  
2. In addition to the Customs Law of the Community, the free movement
of goods shall be governed by:
(a) the East African Community Protocol on Standardisation,
Quality Assurance, Metrology and Testing;
(b) the East African Community Standardisation, Quality
Assurance, Metrology and Testing Act, 2006;
(c) the provisions of this Protocol;
(d) protocols that may be concluded in the areas of cooperation
on sanitary and phyto‐sanitary and technical barriers to
trade; and
(e) any other instruments relevant to the free movement of
goods.
PART D
FREE MOVEMENT OF PERSONS AND LABOUR
ARTICLE 7
Free Movement of Persons
1. The Partner States hereby guarantee the free movement of persons
who are citizens of the other Partner States, within their territories.  
  
11
2. In accordance with paragraph 1, each    Partner State shall ensure
non‐discrimination of the  citizens of the other Partner States based
on their nationalities by ensuring:  
(a) the entry of citizens of the other Partner States into the
territory of the Partner State without a visa;  
(b) free movement of persons who are citizens of the other
Partner States within the territory of the Partner State;
(c) that the citizens of the other Partner States are allowed to
stay in the territory of the Partner State; and
(d) that the citizens of the other Partner States are allowed to
exit the territory of the Partner State without restrictions.
3. The Partner States shall, in accordance with their national laws,
guarantee the protection of the citizens of the other Partner States
while in their territories.
4. The free movement of persons shall not exempt from prosecution
or extradition, a national of a Partner State who commits a crime in
another Partner State.
5. The free movement of persons shall be subject to limitations
imposed by the host Partner State on grounds of public policy,
public security or public health.  
6. A Partner State imposing a limitation under paragraph 5, shall notify
the other Partner States accordingly.
7. The Partner States shall effect reciprocal opening of border posts
and keep the posts opened and manned for twenty four hours.
8. The movement of refugees within the Community shall be governed
by the relevant international conventions.
  
12
9. The implementation of this Article shall be in accordance with the
East African Community Common Market (Free Movement of
Persons) Regulations, specified in Annex I to this Protocol.  
ARTICLE 8
Standard Identification System
The Partner States shall establish a common standard system of
issuing national identification documents to their nationals which
shall be the basis for identifying the citizens of the Partner States
within the Community.
ARTICLE 9
Travel Documents
1. A citizen of a Partner State who wishes to travel to another Partner
State shall use a valid common standard travel document.
2. The Partner States which have agreed to use machine  ‐ readable
and electronic national identity cards as travel documents may do
so.   
3. The Partner States which have agreed to use machine  ‐ readable
and electronic national identity cards shall work out modalities for
the implementation of paragraph 2.
ARTICLE 10
Free Movement of Workers
1. The Partner States hereby guarantee the free movement of
workers, who are citizens of the other Partner States, within their
territories.
  
13
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall ensure
non discrimination of the workers of the other Partner States,
based on their nationalities, in relation to employment,
remuneration and other conditions of work and employment.
3. For the purpose of this Article, the free movement of  workers shall
entitle a worker to:
(a) apply for employment and accept offers of employment
actually made;
(b) move freely within the territories of the Partner States for the
purpose of employment;
(c) conclude contracts and take up employment in accordance
with the contracts, national laws and administrative actions,
without any discrimination;
(d) stay in the territory of a Partner State for the purpose of  
employment in accordance with the national laws and
administrative procedures governing the employment of
workers  of that Partner State;
(e) enjoy the freedom of association and collective bargaining for
better working conditions in accordance with the national
laws of the host Partner State; and
(f) enjoy the rights and benefits of social security as accorded to
the workers of the host Partner State.  
4. For the purposes of the implementation of subparagraph (f) of
paragraph 3, the Council shall issue directives and make regulations
on social security benefits.
5. A worker shall have the right to be accompanied by a spouse and a
child, and:
(a) a spouse who accompanies the worker shall be entitled to be
employed as a worker or to engage in any economic activity
  
14
as a self employed person    in the territory of that Partner
State;
(b) a child who accompanies the worker shall be entitled to be
employed as a worker or to engage in any economic activity
as a self employed person in the territory of that Partner
State subject to the age limits under the national laws of that
Partner State.
6. The Partner States shall facilitate the admission of a dependant of a
worker in accordance with the national laws of the Partner States.
7. The office responsible for employment in a Partner State shall
facilitate a citizen of another Partner State who seeks employment
in the territory of that Partner State to receive the same assistance
as would be accorded to a citizen of that Partner State who seeks
employment.
8. The Partner States shall, within the framework of a joint
programme, encourage the exchange of young workers amongst
the Partner States.
9. The national laws and administrative procedures of a Partner State
shall not apply where the principal aim or effect is to deny citizens
of other Partner States the employment that has been offered.
10. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to employment in the
public service unless the national laws and regulations of a host
Partner State so permit.
11. The free movement of workers shall be subject to limitations
imposed by the host Partner State on grounds of public policy,
public security or public health.  
12. A Partner State imposing a limitation under paragraph 11, shall
notify the other Partner States accordingly.
  
15
13. The implementation of this Article shall be in accordance with the
East African Community Common Market (Free Movement of
Workers) Regulations, specified in Annex II to this Protocol.
ARTICLE 11
Harmonisation and Mutual Recognition of Academic
and Professional Qualifications
1. For the purpose of ensuring the free movement of labour, the
Partner States undertake to:
(a) mutually recognise the academic and professional
qualifications granted, experience obtained, requirements
met, licences or certifications granted, in other Partner
States; and
(b) harmonise their curricula, examinations, standards,
certification and accreditation of educational and training
institutions.  
2. The implementation of this Article shall be in accordance with
Annexes to be concluded by the Partner States.
ARTICLE 12
Harmonisation of Labour Policies, Laws and
Programmes
1. The Partner States undertake to harmonise their labour policies,
national laws and programmes to facilitate the free movement of
labour within the Community.
2. The Partner States undertake to review and harmonise their
national social security policies, laws and systems to provide for
social security for self‐employed persons who are citizens of other
Partner States.
3. The implementation of this Article shall be in accordance with
directives and regulations issued by the Council.
  
16
PART E
RIGHTS OF ESTABLISHMENT AND RESIDENCE
ARTICLE 13
Right of Establishment
1. The Partner States hereby guarantee the right of establishment of
nationals of the other Partner States within their territories.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall ensure
non discrimination of the nationals of the other Partner States,
based on their nationalities.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the right of establishment shall
entitle:
(a) a national of a Partner State to:
(i) take up and pursue economic activities as a self
employed person; and
(ii) set up and manage economic undertakings,  
in the territory of another Partner State;
(b) a self‐employed person who is in the territory of another
Partner State to join a social security scheme of that Partner
State in accordance with the national laws of that Partner
State.
4. The rights applicable to a spouse, child and dependant of a worker
under Article 10 of this Protocol shall apply to the spouse, child and
dependant of a self employed person.
5. The Partner States  shall ensure that all restrictions on the right of
establishment based on the nationality of companies, firms and self
employed persons of the Partner States are removed,  and shall not
introduce any new restrictions on the right of establishment in their
territories, save as otherwise provided in this Protocol.
  
17
6. Companies and firms established in accordance with the national
laws of a Partner State and having their registered office, central
administration or principal place of business and which undertake
substantial economic activities in the Partner State shall, for
purposes of establishment, be accorded non discriminatory
treatment in other Partner States.  
7. For the purposes of undertaking any economic activity in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, the Partner States
shall mutually recognize the relevant experience obtained,
requirements met, licenses and certificates granted to a company
or firm in the other Partner States.
8. The right of establishment shall be subject to limitations imposed by
the host Partner State on grounds of public policy, public security or
public health.  
9. A Partner State imposing a limitation under paragraph 8, shall notify
the other Partner States accordingly.
10. The provisions of this Protocol shall not prejudice the application of
national laws and administrative procedures and practices
providing for special treatment for third parties accorded by
individual Partner States on grounds of public policy, public security
or public health.
11. For the purposes of this Article, the Partner States shall:
(a) remove the administrative procedures and practices,  
resulting from national laws or from agreements previously
concluded between the Partner States, that form an obstacle
to the right of establishment;
(b) progressively remove    any administrative procedures and
practices resulting from national laws that restrict  the right
of establishment, in respect of the conditions for:
(i) setting up agencies, branches or subsidiaries of
companies or firms in their territories; and
  
18
(ii) the entry of personnel of the companies or firms
registered in another Partner State into managerial or
supervisory positions in    agencies, branches or
subsidiaries in that  Partner State;  
(c) ensure that workers who are citizens of a Partner State
employed in the territory of another Partner State are
allowed to remain in that territory for the purpose of taking
up economic activities as self‐employed persons, where they
satisfy the conditions which they would be required to satisfy
if they were entering that Partner State at the time when
they intended to take up such economic activities;
(d) coordinate safeguard measures, which in the interest of the
Community, are required for the protection of the companies
and firms to ensure that the safeguard measures are similar
throughout the Community; and
(e) satisfy themselves that the conditions of the right of
establishment are not distorted by prohibited subsidies or aid
granted by a Partner State to companies or firms owned by
the nationals of the Partner State.
12. The implementation of this Article shall be in accordance with the
East African Community Common Market (Right of Establishment)
Regulations, specified in Annex III to this Protocol.
ARTICLE 14
Right of Residence
1. The Partner States hereby guarantee the right of residence to the
citizens of the other Partner States who have been admitted in their
territories in accordance with Articles 10 and 13 of this Protocol.
2. The right of residence guaranteed under paragraph 1, shall apply to
the spouse, child and a dependant of a worker or self‐employed
  
19
person entitled to rights provided in Articles 10 and 13 of this
Protocol.
3. The Partner States shall issue residence permits to citizens of other
Partner States who qualify in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
4. The right of residence shall be subject to limitations imposed by the
host Partner State on grounds of public policy, public security or
public health.  
5. A Partner State imposing a limitation under paragraph 4, shall notify
the other Partner States accordingly.
6. The provisions of this Article shall not affect any provisions of
national laws, administrative procedures and practices of a Partner
State which would be more favourable to citizens of the other
Partner States.
7. The Partner States hereby agree that matters relating to permanent
residence shall be governed by the national policies and laws of the
Partner States.
8. The implementation of this Article shall be in accordance with the
East African Community Common Market (Right of Residence)
Regulations, specified in Annex IV to this Protocol.
ARTICLE 15
Access to and Use of Land and Premises
1. The Partner States hereby agree that access to and use of land and
premises shall be governed by the national policies and laws of the
Partner States.
  
20
2. The rights provided under Articles 13 and 14 in as far as they relate
to access to and use of land and premises shall be subject to this
Article.  
PART F
FREE MOVEMENT OF SERVICES
       
ARTICLE 16
Free Movement of Services
1. The Partner States hereby guarantee the free movement of services
supplied by nationals of Partner States and the free movement of
service suppliers who are nationals of the Partner States within the
Community.
2. The free movement of services shall cover the supply of services:
(a) from the territory of a Partner State into the territory of
another Partner State;
(b) in the territory of a Partner State to service consumers from
another Partner State;
(c) by a service supplier of a Partner State, through commercial
presence of the service supplier in the territory of another
Partner State; and
(d) by the presence of a service supplier, who is a citizen of a
Partner State, in the territory of another Partner State.
3. In fulfilling their obligations and commitments under this Part, the
Partner States shall take such measures to ensure the observance of
the measures by local governments and local authorities and non
governmental bodies within the Partner States.
4. The measures to be taken by the Partner States under paragraph 3
include any laws and administrative actions taken by:
  
21
(a) national governments, local governments or local authorities;
and  
(b) non‐governmental bodies in the exercise of powers
delegated by national governments, local governments or
local authorities.
5. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall
progressively remove existing restrictions and shall not introduce
any new restrictions on the provision of services in the Partner
States, by nationals of other Partner States    except as otherwise
provided in this Protocol.
6. Without prejudice to any other provisions of this Protocol, a person
providing a service may, in order to provide the service, temporarily
engage in activities related to the service in the Partner State,
where the service is to be supplied, under the same conditions as
are applicable to the nationals of the Partner State.
7. For the purposes of this Part “services” includes:
(a) services in any sector except services supplied in the   
exercise of governmental authority which are   not provided
on a commercial basis or in competition with one or more
service suppliers;  
(b) services normally provided for remuneration, in so far as they
are not governed by the provisions relating to free movement
of goods, capital and persons.
ARTICLE 17
National Treatment
1. Each Partner State shall accord to services and service suppliers of
other Partner States, treatment not less favourable than that
accorded to similar services and service suppliers of the Partner
State.
  
22
2. For the purposes of fulfilling the requirement of paragraph 1, each
Partner State may accord to services and service suppliers of other
Partner States, either formally identical treatment or formally
different treatment to that it accords to like services and service
suppliers of the Partner State.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be
considered to be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of
competition in favour of services or service suppliers of the Partner
State compared to like services or service suppliers of the other
Partner States.
ARTICLE 18
Most Favoured Nation Treatment
Each Partner State shall upon the coming into force of this Protocol,
accord unconditionally, to services and service suppliers of the other
Partner States, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to like
services and service suppliers of other Partner States or any third party or
a customs territory.
ARTICLE 19
Notification
1. Each Partner State shall promptly notify the Council of all measures
of general application affecting the free movement of services at
the entry into force of this Protocol.  
2. The Partner States shall notify the Council of any international
agreements pertaining to or affecting trade in services with third
parties that they are signatory to, prior to and after the entry into
force of this Protocol.
3. Where a Partner State submits a notification to the Council under
paragraph 2, the Secretariat shall transmit a copy of that
notification to the other Partner States.
  
23
4. Each Partner State shall, promptly and at least annually, inform the
Council of the introduction of any new national laws or
administrative guidelines, or any changes to existing laws or
administrative guidelines which affect trade in services provided for
in this Protocol.
5. Each Partner State shall respond promptly to any request by
another Partner State for specific information on any of its
measures of general application or international agreements.
6. The Council may make decisions on the measures or international
agreements referred to in this Article.
ARTICLE 20
Domestic Regulation
1. The Partner States may regulate their services sectors in accordance
with their national policy objectives provided that the measures are
consistent with the provisions of this Protocol and do not constitute
barriers to trade in services.
2. The Partner States shall ensure that all measures of general
application affecting trade in services are administered in a
reasonable, objective and impartial manner.
ARTICLE 21
General Exceptions to Trade in Services
   
  
24
1. Subject to the requirement that measures are not applied in a
manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination between Partner States where like
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in services,
nothing in this Part shall be construed to prevent the adoption or
enforcement by any Partner State of measures:  
(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public
order;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Part
including those relating to:
    (i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices
or which deal with the effects of a default on services
contracts;
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation
to the processing and dissemination of personal data
and the protection of confidentiality of individual
records and accounts; and
    (iii) safety;
(d) inconsistent with Article 17 of this Protocol, provided that the
difference in treatment is aimed at ensuring the equitable or
effective imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of
services or service suppliers of other Partner States; or
(e) inconsistent with Article 18 of this Protocol, provided that the
difference in treatment is the result of an agreement on the
avoidance of double taxation or provisions on the avoidance
of double taxation in any other international agreement or
arrangement by which the Partner State is bound.
2. Pursuant to subparagraph (d) of paragraph 1, measures that are
aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection
  
25
of direct taxes include measures taken by a Partner State under  its
taxation system which:
(a) apply to non‐resident service suppliers in recognition of the
fact that the tax obligation of non‐residents is determined with
respect to taxable items sourced or located in the territory of
the Partner States;  
(b) apply to non‐residents in order to ensure the imposition or
collection of taxes in the territory of the Partner States;   
(c) apply to non‐residents or residents in order to prevent the
avoidance or evasion of taxes, including compliance measures;
(d) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the
territory of another Partner State    in order to ensure the
imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived
from sources in the territory of the Partner States;  
(e) distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide
taxable items from other service suppliers, in recognition of
the difference in the nature of the tax base between them;  or
(f) determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss,
deduction or credit of  resident citizens, companies or firms  or
the branches of the companies or firms, or between related
companies or firms   or their branches, in order to safeguard
the tax base of the Partner State.
   
  
26
ARTICLE 22
 Security Exceptions on Trade in Services
1. Nothing in this Part shall be construed:
(a) to require any Partner State to furnish any information, the
disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential
security interests;  
(b) to prevent any Partner State from taking any action which it
considers necessary for the protection of its essential security
interests:
(i) relating to the supply of services carried out directly or
indirectly for the purpose of provisioning a military
establishment;
(ii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the
materials from which they are derived;
(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in
international relations; or
(c) to prevent any Partner State from taking any action in
pursuance of its obligations under the United Nations Charter
for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.
2. The Partner States shall, to the fullest extent possible, inform the
Council of measures taken under subparagraphs (b) and (c) of
paragraph 1 and of their termination.
ARTICLE 23
Implementation of the Free Movement of Services
1. The implementation of Article 16 of this Protocol shall be
progressive and in accordance with the Schedule on the Progressive
Liberalisation of Services, specified in Annex V to this Protocol.
  
27
2. The Partner States, undertake to make additional commitments on
the elimination of restrictions on the service sectors and sub sectors
that are not specified in Annex V of this Protocol, after entry into
force of this Protocol.  
3. The Council shall issue directives on the modalities for the
implementation of paragraph 2.
PART G
FREE MOVEMENT OF CAPITAL
ARTICLE 24
Elimination of Restrictions on the Free Movement of
Capital
1. Except as provided in this Part, the Partner States shall upon the
coming into force of this Protocol :  
(a) remove restrictions between the Partner States, on the
movement of capital belonging to persons resident in the
Community;
(b) remove any discrimination based on the nationality or on the
place of residence of the persons  or on the place where the  
capital is invested;
(c) remove any existing restrictions and shall not introduce any
new restrictions on the movement of capital and payments
connected with such movement and on current payments
and transfers, or apply more restrictive regulations;  and  
(d) remove restrictions relating to current payments connected
with the movement of goods, persons, services or capital
between Partner States in accordance with the provisions of
this Protocol.
   
  
28
2. The implementation of this Article shall be progressive and in
accordance with the Schedule on the Removal of Restriction on the
Free Movement of Capital, specified in Annex VI to this Protocol.
ARTICLE 25
General Exceptions
1. The free movement of capital may be restricted upon justified
reasons related to:
(a) prudential supervision;
(b) public policy considerations;
(c) money laundering; and
(d) financial sanctions agreed to by the Partner States.
2. Where a Partner State adopts a restriction under paragraph 1, the
Partner State shall inform the Secretariat and the other Partner
States and furnish proof that the action taken was appropriate,
reasonable and justified.
ARTICLE 26
Safeguard Measures
1. Where the movement of capital leads to disturbances in the
functioning of the financial markets in a Partner State, the Partner
State concerned may take safeguard measures subject to the
conditions provided under Article 27 of this Protocol.
2. Where a competent authority of a Partner State makes an
intervention in the foreign exchange market, which seriously
distorts the conditions of competition, the other Partner States may
take, for a strictly limited period, the necessary measures in order
to counter the consequences of the intervention.
3. A Partner State may take safeguard measures, where the Partner
State is in difficulties or is seriously threatened with difficulties, as
regards its balance of payments.
  
29
ARTICLE 27
Conditions for Application of the Safeguard Measures
1. The safeguard measures which may be adopted or maintained
pursuant to the provisions of Article 26 of this Protocol shall:
(a) subject to the provisions of this Protocol, not    discriminate
among  Partner States in favour of third parties;
(b) at all times seek to minimize damage to the commercial,
economic or financial interests of other Partner States;
(c) not exceed the safeguard measures   necessary to deal with
the circumstances described in Article 26; and
(d) be temporary and be phased out progressively as the
situation described in Article 26 improves.
2. In determining the imposition of the safeguard measures provided
for in Article 26 of this Protocol, the Partner State concerned may
accord priority to activities which are essential to its economic
stability.
  
3. Safeguard measures shall not be adopted or maintained for the
purpose of protecting a particular sector in contravention of the
provisions of this Protocol.
4. The safeguard measures adopted or maintained pursuant to Article
26 of this Protocol or any changes to the safeguard measures shall
be notified to the Secretariat and to the other Partner States.
5. The Council shall establish procedures for periodic consultations
including, where possible and desirable, prior consultations with the
objective of making recommendations to the concerned Partner
State for the removal of the safeguard measures.
6. The consultations under paragraph 5 shall address the compliance
of any safeguard measures taken under paragraph 1 and, in
  
30
particular, the progressive phase‐out of the safeguard measures in
accordance with paragraph 1(d).
ARTICLE 28
Capital and Related Payments and Transfers
For the purposes of this Protocol, capital and related payments and
transfers include:
(a) direct investment;
(b) equity and portfolio investments;
(c) bank and credit transactions;
(d) payment of interest on loans and amortisation;
(e) dividends and other income on investments;
(f) repatriation of proceeds from the sale of assets; and
(g) other transfers and payments relating to investment flows.
PART H
OTHER AREAS OF CO‐OPERATION IN THE COMMON
MARKET
ARTICLE 29
Protection of Cross-Border Investments
1. The Partner States undertake to protect cross border investments
and returns of investors of other Partner States within their
territories.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall ensure:
(a) protection and security of cross border investments of
investors of other Partner States;
(b) non‐  discrimination of the investors of the other Partner
States, by according, to these    investors treatment    no less
favourable than that accorded in like circumstances to the
nationals of that Partner State or to third parties;
  
31
(c) that in case of expropriation, any measures taken are for a
public purpose, non‐discriminatory, and in accordance with
due process of law, accompanied by prompt payment of
reasonable and effective compensation.
3. The Partner States shall within two years after coming into force of
this Protocol take measures to secure the protection of cross border
investments within the Community.
4. For the purpose of this Article:
“cross – border investment” means any investment by a national of
a Partner State in the territory of another Partner State;
“investment” means any kind of asset owned or controlled by an
investor of a Partner State in another Partner State in accordance
with the national laws and investment policies of that Partner State
and includes:  
(a) an enterprise;
(b) shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation in an
enterprise;
(c) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments and loans;
(d) futures, options and other derivatives;
(e) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession,
revenue‐sharing and other similar contracts;  
(f) intellectual property rights;
(g) licenses, authorizations, permits and similar rights conferred
pursuant to applicable national laws; and   
(h) other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property,
and related property rights such as leases, mortgages, liens
and pledges;  
“investor” means a national of a Partner State who has made an
investment in the territory of another Partner State.
  
32
ARTICLE 30
Economic and Monetary Policy Co-ordination
1. For the proper functioning of the Common Market, the Partner
States shall co‐ordinate and harmonize their economic and
monetary policies to ensure macroeconomic stability, sustainable
economic growth and balanced development.  
  
2. The Council shall monitor the implementation of the economic and
monetary policies by the Partner States to ensure macro‐economic
stability and sustainable economic development.  
3. The Partner States undertake to adhere to the macroeconomic
convergence criteria as determined by the Council.
4. The Partner States shall submit to the Council periodic progress
reports on the performance of their national economies to facilitate
close co‐ordination of economic policies and adherence to the
macroeconomic convergence criteria.
ARTICLE 31
Financial Sector Policy Co-ordination
1. For the proper functioning of the Common Market the Partner
States undertake to co‐ordinate and harmonize their financial
sector policies and regulatory frameworks to ensure the efficiency
and stability of their financial systems as well as the smooth
operations of the payment systems.
2. The Partner States shall ensure and maintain convertibility of their
national currencies and promote the use of national currencies in
the settlement of payments for all transactions within the
Community.
  
33
ARTICLE 32
Harmonisation of Tax Policies and Laws
The Partner States undertake to progressively harmonize their tax policies
and laws to remove tax distortions in order to facilitate the free
movement of goods, services and capital and to promote investment
within the Community.
ARTICLE 33
Prohibited Business Practices
1. The Partner States shall prohibit any practices that adversely affect
free trade.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall  apply in the case of :
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by
associations of undertakings and concerted practices which
may affect trade between Partner States and which have as
their objective or effect the prevention, restriction or
distortion of competition within the Community;
(b) concentrations which create or strengthen a dominant
position and as a result of which effective competition would
be significantly impeded within the Community or in a
substantial part of the Community; and
(c) any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant
position within the Community or in a substantial part of the
Community.
3. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply in the case of:
(a) any agreement or category of agreements between
undertakings;
(b) any decision by associations of undertakings; or
(c) any concerted practice or category of concerted practices,
  
34
which improves production or distribution of goods, promotes
technical or economic development or which has the effect of
promoting consumer welfare and does not impose restrictions
inconsistent with the attainment of the objectives of the Common
Market or has the effect of eliminating competition in respect of a
substantial part of a product.
ARTICLE 34
Prohibited Subsidies
1. The Partner States shall not grant any subsidy through resources in
any form, which distorts or threatens to distort effective
competition by favouring an undertaking, in so far as it affects trade
between the Partner States.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply where a subsidy granted is authorised
by the Treaty or by Acts or policies of the Community or decisions
of the Council.  
ARTICLE 35
Public Procurement
The Partner States shall not discriminate against suppliers, products or
services originating from other Partner States, for purposes of achieving
the benefits of free competition in the field of public procurement.
ARTICLE 36
Consumer Protection
1. The Partner States shall promote the interests of the consumers in
the Community by appropriate measures that:
(a) ensure the  protection of life, health and safety of consumers;
and
(b) encourage fair and effective competition in order to provide
consumers with greater choice among goods and services at
the lowest cost.  
  
35
2. The implementation of Articles 33 to 36 of this Protocol shall be in
accordance with directives and regulations issued by the Council.
Article 37
Co-ordination of Trade Relations
1. The Partner States shall coordinate their trade relations to promote
international trade and trade relations between the Community and
third parties.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall adopt
common principles in particular in relation to:
(a) tariff rates;
(b) conclusion of tariff and trade agreements;
(c) the achievements of uniformity of measures of liberalisation;
(d) export promotion strategies ; and
(e) trade remedies.
3. The Council shall establish a mechanism for the co‐ordination of
trade relations with third parties and shall :
(a) adopt common negotiating positions in the development of
mutually beneficial trade agreements with third parties; and
(b) promote participation and joint representation in
international trade negotiations.
4. The Partner States shall provide information to the Council on trade
relations with third parties, to facilitate the effective
implementation of paragraph 3.
5. For purposes of trade arrangements between individual Partner
States and third parties, the provisions of Article 37 of the Protocol
on the Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union
shall apply.
  
36
ARTICLE 38
Co-ordination of Transport Policies
1. The Partner States undertake to evolve coordinated and
harmonized transport policies to provide for adequate, reliable,
safe and internationally competitive transport infrastructure modes
and services for the development and consolidation of the Common
Market.  
2. Paragraph 1 shall apply to logistics and transport by road, rail,
inland waterways, maritime, pipeline and air and facilities such as
ports, airports and inland dry ports.
3. For the purposes of implementing this Article, the Partner States:
(a) shall honour the existing ratified agreements entered
between the Partner States;
(b) may in future enter into other agreements;  
(c) shall honour their existing commitments and obligations
emanating from international conventions and agreements;
and
(d) shall subject to the provisions of subparagraph (c) of this
paragraph, align all other agreements on transport to the
provisions of this Protocol.
4. The Council shall within three years upon entry into force of this
Protocol, make regulations applicable to:
(a) railway transport;
(b) maritime transport and port operations;
(c) pipeline transport;  
(d) air transport;
(e) non – motorized transport; and  
(f) multimodal transport and logistics.
  
37
ARTICLE 39
Harmonisation of Social Policies
1. The Partner States undertake to coordinate and harmonise their
social policies to promote and protect decent work and improve the
living conditions of the citizens of the Partner States for the
development of the Common Market.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall coordinate
and harmonise their social policies relating to:
(a) good governance, the rule of law and social justice;
(b) promotion and protection of human and peoples’ rights;
(c) promotion of equal opportunities and gender equality;  
(d) promotion and protection of the rights of marginalised and
vulnerable groups;  
(e) promotion of African moral values, social values and ethics;
and
(f) promotion of unity and cohesion among the people in the
Community.
3. The Partner States undertake to implement programmes to:
(a) promote  employment creation;
(b) strengthen  labour laws and improve  working conditions;
(c) eliminate  compulsory and forced labour;
(d) promote  occupational safety and health at the work places;  
(e) abolish child labour in particular the worst forms of child
labour;
(f) promote formal education to advance social development;
(g) promote vocational and technical training;
(h) expand  and improve social protection;
(i) promote    social dialogue between the social partners and
other stakeholders;  
(j) promote the right of persons with disabilities;
(k) promote sports;  
(l) prevent  and manage  HIV and AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis;
  
38
(m) prevent    and manage   the outbreak of epidemics and other
diseases in order to improve the general hygiene and health
of the people;
(n) prevent    social vices such as alcoholism, drug abuse or
substance abuse and perverse behaviour;
(o) eliminate  human smuggling and trafficking; and
(p) eliminate ignorance, diseases and poverty.
4. The Partner States shall, in implementing programmes under
paragraph 3:
(a) promote, preserve and mainstream cultural activities and
heritage in development initiatives; and
(b) adopt measures and programmes aimed at promoting the
welfare of the vulnerable groups.   
   
ARTICLE 40
Environmental Management
1. The Partner States undertake to ensure sound environmental and
natural resources management principles for the proper functioning
of the Common Market, through prevention of activities that are
detrimental to the environment.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall manage
the environment in accordance with:
(a) the East African Community Protocol on Environment and
Natural Resources Management;
(b) the East African Community Protocol for Sustainable
Development of Lake Victoria Basin;
(c) the Lake Victoria Transport Act,  2008;  
(d) the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African
Community Customs Union ;  
(e) the East African Community Customs Management Act, 2004;  
(f) the relevant provisions of this Protocol; and
(g) any other relevant laws of the Community.
  
39
3. The Partner States shall respect the principles of international
environmental law and honour their commitments in respect of
international agreements which relate to environmental
management.
4. The Partner States shall develop common policies in responding to
emerging issues on the environment.
5. The provisions of this Article shall not preclude the Partner States
from maintaining or introducing more stringent protective
measures regarding the environment, where the measures are
compatible with this Protocol.
ARTICLE 41
Cooperation in Statistics
1. The Partner States shall cooperate to ensure the availability of
relevant, timely and reliable statistical data for:
(a) describing, monitoring and evaluating all aspects of the
Common Market; and  
(b) sound decision making and effective service delivery in the
Common Market.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States undertake to
develop and adopt harmonised statistical methods, concepts,
definitions and classifications for organizing statistical work while
duly observing internationally accepted best practices.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1 the Partner States shall collect,
compile, store and disseminate relevant, reliable, timely, consistent
and comparable statistical information.
4. The Council may issue directives on:
(a) statistics to be collected and compiled as well as the
periodicity and format in which statistical data shall    be
submitted by the Partner States to the Secretariat;
  
40
(b) the key indicators for monitoring the implementation of the
integration process of the Common Market and evaluating
the impact of the integration process on the welfare of the
people in the Community    and the competitiveness of the
Community;
(c) statistics to be aggregated and disseminated by the
Community;
(d) the coordination of Community   statistics programmes and  
the development and maintenance of an integrated
Community  statistical database; and
(e) the development of infrastructural and human resource
capacities in the field of statistics in the Partner States.   
ARTICLE 42
Research and Technological Development
1. The Partner States undertake to promote research and
technological development through market‐led research,
technological development and the adaptation of technologies in
the Community, to support the sustainable production of goods and
services and enhance international competitiveness.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall:
(a) disseminate the results of activities in research, technological
development and demonstration programmes;
(b) facilitate access to their technological and research facilities
by researchers and other experts;
(c) encourage private sector participation in activities relating to
intra‐regional research and transfer of technology;
(d) adopt measures to develop the human resource of the
Community in research and development;
  
41
(e) establish and support research infrastructure, facilities and
institutions;
(f) collaborate with the East African Science and Technology
Commission and other institutions on research, science and
technology; and  
(g) establish a mechanism for the coordination of the activities
specified in this paragraph.
3. Pursuant to the objectives set out in paragraph 1, the Council
shall issue directives and make regulations to:
(a) promote co‐operation in research, technological
development and demonstration programmes within
Partner States, and with regional institutions, foreign  
countries and international organizations;
(b) stimulate creativity and excellence in research through the
funding of ‘frontier research’ carried out by individual
teams competing at the Community level;
(c) implement research, technological development and
demonstration programmes with and between
undertakings, including small and medium‐sized
enterprises, research centres and universities and to assist
the undertakings in their research and technological
development activities;
(d) develop technological policies and strategies, having due
regard to the importance of technology management and
protection of intellectual property rights;
(e) provide measures for protecting, developing and
commercialising indigenous knowledge;  
(f) promote and ensure sustainability of an information and
communications technology culture;
  
42
(g) promote and facilitate technology transfer, acquisition
and dissemination in order to achieve increased
production and productivity; and
(h) establish and develop a technology innovation system    
for the productive sector of the economy of the
Community.
4. The Partner States undertake to establish a Research and
Technological Development Fund for purposes of implementing this
Article.  
5. The Council shall issue directives and make regulations for the
implementation of paragraph 4.
ARTICLE 43
 Co-operation in Intellectual Property Rights
1. The Partner States undertake to co‐operate in the field of
intellectual property rights to:
(a) promote and protect creativity and innovation for economic,
technological, social and cultural development in the
Community; and
(b) enhance the protection of intellectual property                
rights.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States undertake to
cooperate in   the following areas:  
(a) copyright and related rights;
(b) patents;  
(c) layout designs of integrated circuits;
(d) industrial designs;
(e) new plant varieties;
(f) geographical indications;
(g) trade and service marks;
(h) trade secrets;
  
43
(i) utility models;
(j) traditional knowledge;
(k) genetic resources;  
(l) traditional cultural expressions and folklore; and
(m) any other areas that may be determined by the Partner
States.  
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1,  Partner States shall:
(a) put in place measures to prevent infringement, misuse and
abuse of intellectual property rights;
(b) cooperate in fighting piracy and counterfeit activities;
(c) exchange information on matters relating to intellectual
property rights;
(d) promote public awareness on intellectual property rights
issues;
(e) enhance capacity in intellectual property;
(f) increase dissemination and use of patent documentation as a
source of technological information;
(g) adopt common positions in regional and international norm
setting in the field of intellectual property;  and
(h) put in place intellectual property policies that promote
creativity, innovation and development of intellectual capital.
4. The Partner States shall establish mechanisms to ensure:
(a) the legal protection of the traditional cultural expressions,
traditional knowledge, genetic resources and national
heritage;
(b) the protection and promotion of cultural industries;  
  
44
(c) the use of protected works for the benefits of the
communities in the Partner States ; and
(d) the cooperation in public health, food security, research and
technological development.
5. The Council shall issue directives for:
(a) co‐operation in the administration, management    and
enforcement of intellectual property rights;  
(b) the elimination of discriminatory practices in the    
administration of intellectual property rights amongst Partner
States.
6. The Partner States shall honour their commitments in respect of
international agreements which relate to intellectual property
rights.
ARTICLE 44
Co-operation in Industrial Development
1. The Partner States undertake to cooperate in the area of industrial
development in the activities related to the production of goods
and services in the Common Market, for the attainment of
sustainable growth and development in the Community.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Partner States shall adopt
common principles to:  
(a) promote linkages among industries and other economic
sectors within the Community;
(b) promote value addition and product diversification to
improve resource utilisation;
(c) promote industrial research and development, transfer,
acquisitions, adaptation and development of modern
technology;
  
45
(d) promote sustainable and balanced industrialisation    in the
Community    to cater for the least industrialized Partner
States;  
(e) facilitate the development of micro, small and    medium
industries and promote indigenous entrepreneurs;
(f) promote investment and employment     opportunities in the
Community;
(g) promote knowledge based industries;
(h) promote industrial productivity and competitiveness of
industries  at national, Community   and international levels;
(i) promote sustainable industrial development that ensures  
environmental protection, management and efficient
resource utilisation; and
(j) disseminate and exchange industrial and technological
information.
3. The Council shall issue directives and make regulations on:
(a) the implementation of the East African Industrial       
Development Strategy;
(b) the promotion of new technologies and the infrastructure
necessary for industrial development;
(c) the improvement of quality and technical regulatory
infrastructure to ensure compliance of industrial products to
standards and technical regulations;
(d) the establishment of physical infrastructure for industrial
development including industrial parks and special economic
zones;  
  
46
(e) the establishment of a regional mechanism for developing
human capacity for industrial and technological
advancement;
(f) support for regional fora for Public‐Private Partnership and
Civil Society dialogue;  
(g) the development    of a regional mechanism to provide
sustainable and affordable industrial development finance;
(h) support for the development of a regional productive base
for capital, intermediate goods, tools and implements; and
(i) any other measures that may be necessary.  
ARTICLE 45
Co-operation in Agriculture and Food Security
1. The Partner States undertake to:  
(a) sustainably develop and promote agriculture with regard to
crops, livestock, fish, forestry and their products; and
(b) ensure food security in the Community through access to
quality and sufficient food.
2. The objectives of promoting agriculture and ensuring food    
security in the Common Market shall be to:
(a) increase agricultural production and productivity;
(b) achieve food and nutrition security;
(c) promote investments in agriculture and food  security;
(d) develop  effective agricultural markets and marketing systems
in the Community; and
  
47
(e) promote agro processing and value addition to agricultural
products.
3. For the purposes of this Article, Partner States shall:
(a) cooperate in agricultural research and development;
(b) cooperate in plant breeding;  
(c) promote the production and distribution of quality seeds of
crops, livestock, fish and forest trees;
(d) develop capacity in the agricultural sector;
(e) cooperate in breeding, multiplication, distribution and
artificial insemination of livestock including    domesticated
animals;
(f) develop, promote, manage and conserve fisheries  resources
on a sustainable basis within the Community;
(g) cooperate in the control of plant and animal pests, vectors
and diseases;
(h) establish early warning systems and manage food security;
(i) develop, promote and manage forests and forestry products;
(j) promote and support the development of sustainable water
use and irrigation facilities;  
(k) stabilize markets and ensure the availability of supplies for
both domestic consumption and exports;
(l) establish an effective regime of sanitary and phyto‐sanitary
measures, standards and technical regulations;
(m) establish and promote the production and availability of farm
inputs and implements in sufficient quantities in the Partner
States; and
  
48
(n) promote and encourage private sector participation in
agricultural commercial activities and provision of support
services.
4. The implementation of this Article shall be in accordance with the
existing and any other relevant instruments that may be approved
by the Council.
5. The Partner States undertake to establish an Agricultural
Development Fund.  
6. The purposes of the Agricultural Development Fund shall be to:
(a) promote sustainable and competitive agricultural production;
(b) finance agricultural  capital investment and working  capital;
(c) finance agricultural mechanisation and inputs;
(d) facilitate access to credit by all categories of farmers and
agricultural entrepreneurs especially  small‐scale farmers and
agricultural entrepreneurs;  
(e) facilitate financing for value addition and processing capacity;
and
(f) cater for any other financing requirement in the agricultural
sector.
  
49
PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 46
Institutional Framework
In accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 76 of the Treaty, the Council
may establish and confer powers and authority upon such institutions as it
may deem necessary to administer the Common Market.
ARTICLE 47
Approximation and Harmonisation of Policies, Laws
and Systems
1. The Partner States undertake to approximate their national laws
and to harmonise their policies and systems, for purposes of
implementing this Protocol.
2. The Council shall issue directives for purposes of implementing this
Article.  
ARTICLE 48
Safeguard Measures
1. The Partner States agree to apply safeguard measures in the event
of serious injury or of a threat of serious injury occurring to the
economy of a Partner State, following the application of the
relevant provision of this Protocol.
2. In the event of serious injury, where   prompt and immediate action
is deemed necessary, the Partner State concerned shall take
necessary safeguard measures after informing the Council and the
other Partner States through the Secretary General.
3. In the case of threat of serious injury, the Partner State concerned
shall consult the Council before taking necessary safeguard
measures.
  
50
4. The Council shall examine the basis, consider the method and the
effect of the application of the safeguard measures taken by the
Partner State under paragraphs 2 and 3 and make an appropriate
decision.
ARTICLE 49
Measures to Address Imbalances
The Council shall approve measures to address imbalances that may arise
from the implementation of this Protocol.
ARTICLE 50
Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the
Common Market
1. The Council shall establish a framework for monitoring and
evaluating the implementation of this Protocol.
2. For the purposes of this Article, the Council shall:
(a) ensure that the operations of the Common Market conform
to the objectives of this Protocol;
(b) annually  review the specific commitments and programmes
in this Protocol and take the necessary measures to ensure
that the Partner States adhere to their commitments and
programmes within the agreed timeframe;  
(c) evaluate the implementation of this Protocol; and
(d) assess any causes of delay in the implementation of this
Protocol and take the appropriate measures to remedy the
situation.
3. For the purposes of the implementation of paragraph 2, the Council
shall take into account any changes occurring in the economic and
social circumstances of the Partner States.
4. The annual review in subparagraph (b) of paragraph 2 shall:
  
51
(a) consist of an assessment of the implementation of the agreed
commitments and programmes, taking into account the
results of any relevant activities of the monitoring and
evaluation exercise; and
(b) in particular, include an assessment of the results achieved in
the realisation and enjoyment of the  freedoms  and rights of
citizens guaranteed under this Protocol, measured against:  
(i) the agreed commitments;
(ii) the effectiveness in the implementation of the agreed
commitments; and
(iii) the extent to which the commitments agreed to in the
implementation Schedules have been adhered to.     
5. The evaluation of the implementation of the Common Market
referred to in subparagraph (c) of paragraph 2 shall be carried out
every three years.
ARTICLE 51
 Regulations, Directives and Decisions
The Council shall from time to time make regulations, issue directives and
make decisions as may be necessary for the effective implementation of
the provisions of this Protocol.
   
ARTICLE 52
Annexes
The Partner States shall conclude such annexes to this Protocol as shall be
deemed necessary and such annexes shall form an integral part of this
Protocol.
  
52
ARTICLE 53
 Amendment of the Protocol
1. This Protocol may be amended by Partner States in accordance with
the provisions of Article 150 of the Treaty.
2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 1, the  Council may:
(a) with the approval of the Summit, review the annexes to this
Protocol and make such modifications as it deems necessary;
(b) submit to the Partner States proposals for the amendment of
the provisions of this Protocol.
ARTICLE 54
Settlement of Disputes
1. Any dispute between the Partner States arising from the
interpretation or application of this Protocol shall be settled in
accordance with the provisions of the Treaty.  
2. In accordance with their Constitutions, national laws and
administrative procedures and with the provisions of this Protocol,
Partner States guarantee that:
(a) any person whose rights and liberties as recognised by this  
Protocol have been infringed upon, shall have the right to
redress, even where this infringement has been committed
by persons acting in  their official capacities; and
(b) the competent judicial, administrative or legislative authority
or any other competent authority, shall rule on the rights of
the person who is seeking redress.   
  
53
ARTICLE 55
Entry into Force
This Protocol shall enter into force upon ratification and deposit of
instruments of ratification with the Secretary General by all the Partner
States.
ARTICLE 56
Depository and Registration
1. This Protocol and all instruments of ratification shall be deposited
with the Secretary General who shall transmit certified true copies
of the Protocol and instruments of ratification to all the Partner
States.
2. The Secretary General shall register this Protocol with the African
Union, the United Nations, the World Trade Organisation and such
other organisations as the Council may determine.
DONE at Arusha, Tanzania, on the 20th day of November in the
year Two Thousand and Nine.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the undersigned have appended their
signatures hereto:
  
54
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
JAKAYA MRISHO KIKWETE
PRESIDENT  
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI
PIERRE NKURUNZIZA      
PRESIDENT  
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA
MWAI KIBAKI
PRESIDENT
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA    
PAUL KAGAME                                                                           
PRESIDENT                                                                                                                        
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI         
PRESIDENT