AGREEMENT
between the Government of Iceland, of the
one part, and the Government of Denmark
and the Home Government of the Faroe
Islands, of the other part
The Government of Iceland, of the one
part, and the Government of Denmark and
the Home Government of the Faroe Islands,
of the other part;
Hereinafter referred to as the CONTRACTING PARTIES;
WISHING to enhance the economic relations between Iceland and the Faroe Islands
and to harmonize their economic development;
EMPHASIZING fair conditions for competition in a unified market without a customs
union;
DETERMINED to extend their economic
relations to generally all sectors of economic
activity; DETERMINED to develop and enhance
their co-operation in other fields;
HAVE DECIDED to abolish all obstacles
to economic relations between Iceland and the
Faroe Islands within the substantive scope of
this Agreement.
Article 1
Objective
The objective of this Agreement is the
establishment of a single economic area covering the territories of Iceland and the Faroe
Islands, where, within the substantive scope
of this Agreement, any discrimination on the
basis of nationality, place of establishment, or
the place of origin of goods is prohibited.
Article 2
Territorial scope
This Agreement applies to the territories of
Iceland and the Faroe Islands.
Any measures, which the Contracting
Parties commit themselves to take under this
Agreement, shall be limited to the territories
of either Iceland or the Faroe Islands, and to
their natural persons, as defined in Protocol 1,
and to legal persons domiciled there.
 The provisions of this Agreement shall apply
to movement between Iceland and the Faroe
Islands of goods originating in the territories
of Iceland or the Faroe Islands, and of services and capital provided by natural persons of
either Iceland or the Faroe Islands, as defined
in Protocol 1, or by legal persons domiciled in
either Iceland or in the Faroe Islands.
Article 3
Substantive scope
Unless otherwise stated therein, this
Agreement applies to:
a) trade in goods;
b) trade in services;
c) movement of persons and right to residence;
d) movement of capital and investment;
e) right of establishment;
f) competition, state monopolies, state aid
and public procurement;
g) co-operation in other areas, as provided for
in Article 7.Article 4
Most favoured nation treatment
Within the scope of this Agreement, each
Contracting Party shall accord to the natural
and legal persons of the other Contracting
Party, and goods originating within the territorial scope of this Agreement, treatment no
less favourable than that they accord to natural and legal persons of any other country, and
goods originating outside the territorial scope
of this Agreement.
Article 5
National treatment
1. Within the scope of this Agreement,
A. any discrimination between Icelandic
natural persons and Faroese natural
persons on the basis of nationality, as
defined in Protocol 1, is prohibited;
B. any discrimination between legal persons domiciled within the territorial
scope of the Agreement, on the basis
of their place of establishment, is prohibited;
C. any discrimination between goods originating within the territorial scope of
the Agreement, on the basis of their
place of origin, is prohibited.
2. In the application of the principle contained in paragraph 1, the Contracting Parties
commit themselves, inter alia, to the following:
A. With respect to trade in goods:
i. Any discrimination regarding the
treatment of goods, in law or in
fact, on the basis of their origin,
shall be prohibited.
ii. Quantitative restrictions, by any
name or for any reason, and measures having equivalent effect shall
be prohibited.
iii. Tariffs, by any name or for any reason, and measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited.
iv. All goods, legally marketed anywhere within the territorial scope
of the Agreement, shall be covered
by the provisions of this Article,
subject to the requirements of the
protection of public morals and
safety. v. Protocol 2 to this Agreement contains the applicable rules of origin.
vi. Protocol 3 to this Agreement contains rules regarding co-operation
between the Contracting Parties
on customs matters and simplified
customs procedures.
B. With respect to trade in services:
i. Any discrimination, in law or in
fact, against a service provider of
one Contracting Party operating in
the territory of the other Contracting Party shall be prohibited.
ii. Without prejudice to the provision of (i) above, natural or legal
persons of one Contracting Party
operating in the territory of the
other Contracting Party shall fulfill the same requirements as natural or legal persons of the latter
Contracting Party, under the latter
Contracting Party’s national law.
C. With respect to movement of persons
and right to residence:
i. Any discrimination, in law or in
fact, regarding the right to residence
or free movement of persons, shall
be prohibited, as further stipulated
in Protocol 4 to this Agreement.
ii. Access to schools, universities and
other institutions of learning shall
be granted without discrimination.
iii. A Contracting Party shall recognize, as if issued in its own territory,
comparable diplomas and other evidence of professional qualifications
obtained in the territory of the other
Contracting Party. Recognition
of such diplomas and evidence of
qualifications shall in no event be
less favourable than the recognition
given to comparable diplomas and
evidence of qualifica­tions issued
by a non-Contracting Party to this
Agreement.
iv. Three years of residence by Icelandic
natural persons in the Faroe Islands
and of Faroese natural persons in
Iceland shall entail the right to
stand for municipal election and
cast a vote in municipal elections. D. With respect to movement of capital and
investment:
i. Any discrimination, in law or in
fact, regarding the free movement
of capital or investment, on the
basis of the destination of the
capital or the place of investment,
anywhere within the territorial
scope of this Agreement, shall be
prohibited.
E. With respect to right of establishment:
i. Any discrimination, in law or in
fact, as regards the right of establishment, shall be prohibited.
F. With respect to competition:
i. Any discrimination in rules on
competition or their application
shall be prohibited.
ii. In order to ensure free trade and
fair conditions for competition in
the economic area established by
this Agreement, the competition
authorities of the Contracting
Parties shall co-operate, exchange
information and consult each other
on surveillance in general terms
and, as the case may be, in individual cases.
iii. If a Contracting Party becomes
aware of dumping of a specific
product by an exporter of the
other Contracting Party, as defined
by the relevant provisions of the
WTO agreements, the affected
Contracting Party may take appropriate measures in accordance with
Article VI of the GATT 1994. The
affected Contracting Party shall
notify the other Contracting Party
in writing and allow for a 30 day
period for consultations with a
view to finding a mutually acceptable solution.
G. With respect to state monopolies:
i. In their operations, state monopolies of a Contracting Party shall
not accord discriminatory treatment, in law or in fact.
H. With respect to state aid:
i. State aid or aid through state
resources in any form whatsoever,
directed at an economic activity wholly or partly within the territory of a Contracting Party, shall
be granted in that territory without
discrimination.
ii. If a Contracting Party finds that
state aid or aid through state
resources by the other Contracting
Party distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or sectors, the
former Contracting Party may
bring the matter before the Joint
Committee in accordance with
Article 8.
I. With respect to public procurement:
i. Any discrimination relating to
public procurement, in law or in
fact, shall be prohibited.
J. With respect to trade in agricultural
goods:
i. Where imports of specific agricultural products in chapters
1, 2, 4, 5, 12, 15, 16 and 21 in
the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding System
from one Contracting Party are
seriously detrimental to the production activity of that product in
the other Contracting Party, the
latter Contracting Party may unilaterally take appropriate and proportionate measures. Prior to taking such measures the Contracting
Parties shall afford sufficient time
for consultations in order to find
solutions to remedy the situation.
ii. Where exceptional circumstances require urgent action, the
Contracting Party of the importer
may apply measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation at
the earliest three days after having
informed the Contracting Party of
the exporter.
iii. Any measures shall immediately
be notified, together with all the
relevant information, to the Joint
Committee in accordance with
Article 8 and shall be the subject
of periodical consultations within
the Joint Committee, particularly
with a view to their abolition as
soon as circumstances permit. Article 6
Exceptions from national treatment
The following exceptions from the principle contained in Article 5, paragraph 1, shall
apply:
1. All traded goods shall be subject to the
veterinary and phytosanitary rules of the
importing Contracting Party. Such rules
shall not imply hindrances of the technical
or procedural type to direct trade. Subject
to their international treaty obligations on
veterinary and phytosanitary matters, the
Contracting Parties shall ensure that direct
trade in products that are subject to sanitary and phytosanitary disciplines is facilitated and undertake to establish border
inspection posts and other facilities necessary to enable direct trade in all products
covered by this Agreement.
2. Iceland may continue to apply restrictions
existing on the date of signature of this
Agreement on foreign ownership and/or
ownership by non-residents as well as on
establishment of non-nationals and nationals who do not have legal domicile in
Iceland in the sectors of fisheries and fish
processing.
3. The Faroe Islands may continue to apply
restrictions existing on the date of signa­ture
of this Agreement on foreign ownership
and/or ownership by non-residents as well
as on establishment of non-nationals and
nationals who do not have legal domicile
in the Faroe Islands in the fisheries sector.
4. The Faroe Islands may continue to apply
provisions on licences according to Articles
10, 11 and 18 of the Hydrocarbon Activities
Act (No. 31, 16 March 1998). In this
respect, the Faroese Act on Hydrocarbon
Activities shall be interpreted so as to allow
Icelandic legal persons established, and
Icelandic natural persons domiciled in the
Faroe Islands, to enjoy rights under that
Act on a non-discriminatory basis. In all
other respects the general provisions of this
Agreement apply to this area.
5. The provisions of this Agreement concerning investment shall not apply to investment by the governments or governmental
bodies of the Contracting Parties.
Article 7
Co-operation in other areas
1. Within the scope of this Agreement, the
Contracting Parties will strengthen and
broaden mutual co-operation in all relevant fields of common concern including
the following:
•	 Culture, education, training, sport and
youth
•	 Energy
•	 Environment
•	 Health services
•	 Human resource development in the
public sector
•	 Research and technological development
•	 Resource management
•	 Telecommunications
•	 Tourism
•	 Transport
2. Provisions on co-operation pursuant to
paragraph 1 will be set out by the Joint
Committee in protocols to this Agreement
to be introduced later.
Article 8
Joint committee
1. A Joint Committee of the Contracting
Parties is hereby established. It shall ensure
the effective implementation and operation
of this Agreement. To this end, it shall
carry out exchanges of views and information.
2. The Joint Committee may, by consent,
decide to amend Articles 5, 6 and 7 as well
as the Protocols to this Agreement, or add
protocols to this Agreement as provided for
in Article 7, paragraph 2, with the aim of
progressively liberalising trade or strengthening the co-operation of the Contracting
Parties.
3. The Joint Committee shall adopt its own
rules of procedure.
4. The Joint Committee shall meet in accordance with its rules of procedure, no less
than annually, and at the request of either
Contracting Party.
5. The Joint Committee may establish subsidiary bodies.
Article 9
Council
1. Members of Governments shall meet no
less than annually.
2. A Council is hereby established. It shall,
in particular, give political impetus for the
implementation of this Agreement and
guide the Joint Committee established
thereunder in the performance of its work,
as appropriate.
3. The Council shall assess the overall functioning and development of this Agreement.
The Joint Committee may refer to the
Council any issue giving rise to difficulty.
4. The Council shall adopt its own rules of
procedure.
Article 10
Protocols
The Protocols to this Agreement shall constitute an integral part thereof.
Article 11
Accession
This Agreement may be extended to other
Parties or parts of the Kingdom of Denmark
on application, subject to agreement on the
terms and conditions for such extension.
Article 12
Termination
1. Either Contracting Party may terminate
this Agreement by a diplomatic note to the
other Contracting Party. The Agreement
shall expire on the first day of the month
following that in which a twelve month
period from the reception of the termination notification lapsed.
2. Advantages granted to investors or service
providers of one Contracting Party by
another Contracting Party pursuant to the
terms of this Agreement, before the date of
the termination notification, shall remain
in force for a period not less than five years
after its termination.
Article 13
Entry into force
1. This Agreement is subject to ratification,
acceptance or approval by the Contracting
Parties in conformity with their respective
procedures.
2. The Agreement shall enter into force on
the first day of the month following the
de­posit of the latter instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval with the
depository, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Iceland.
3. The Agreement between the Government
of Denmark and the Home Government of
the Faroe Islands, of the one part, and the
Government of Iceland, of the other part,
on Free Trade between the Faroe Islands
and Iceland, signed on 6 August 1992, shall
cease to be in force on the entry into force
of this Agreement, subject to the provisions
of Protocol 2 to the present Agreement.
Done at Hoyvík on 31 August 2005, in the
Icelandic, Faroese, Danish and English languages, all texts being equally authentic.
In case of any discrepancies the English text
shall prevail.
For the Government of Iceland
Davíð Oddsson
For the Government of Denmark
and the Home Government of
the Faroe Islands
Jóannes Eidesgaard
PROTOCOL 1
In the context of this Agreement an “Icelandic
natural person” shall be defined as a person
of Icelandic citizenship and a “Faroese natural
person” as a person of Danish citizenship,
domiciled or previously domiciled in the Faroe
Islands.
PROTOCOL 2
concerning the definition of the concept of
“originating products”
and methods of administrative co-operation
The rules of origin laid down in Protocol
3 to the Agreement between the Government
of Denmark and the Home Government of
the Faroe Islands, of the one part, and the
Government of Iceland, of the other part,
on Free Trade between the Faroe Islands and
Iceland, signed on 6 August 1992, as applicable
on the date of entry into force of the present
Agreement, shall continue to apply and be
considered to be part of this Protocol.
PROTOCOL 3
concerning mutual assistance in customs
matters
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) 'customs legislation' shall mean provisions applicable in the territories of the
Contracting Parties governing the import,
export, transit of goods and their placing
under any other customs procedure, including measures of prohibition, restriction and
control adopted by the said Contracting
Parties;
(b) 'customs duties' shall mean all duties,
taxes, fees or other charges which are
levied and collected in the territories of
the Contracting Parties, in application of
customs legislation, but not including fees
and charges which are limited in amount
to the approximate costs of services rendered;
(c) 'applicant authority' shall mean a competent administrative authority which has
been appointed by a Contracting Party for
this purpose and which makes a request for
assistance in customs matters;
(d) 'requested authority' shall mean a competent administrative authority which has
been appointed by a Contracting Party for
this purpose and which receives a request
for assistance in customs matters;
(e) 'contravention' shall mean any violation
of the customs legislation as well as any
attempted violation of such legislation.
Article 2
Scope
1. The Contracting Parties shall assist each
other, in the manner and under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, in ensuring that customs legislation is correctly
applied, in particular by the prevention,
detection and investigation of contraventions of such legislation.
2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided
for in this Protocol, applies to any administrative authority of the Contracting
Parties which is competent for the application of this Protocol. It shall not prejudice
the rules governing mutual assistance in
criminal matters.
Article 3
Assistance on request
1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall furnish it
with all relevant information to enable it to
ensure that customs legislation is correctly
applied, including information regarding
operations noted or planned which contravene or would contravene such legislation.
2. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall inform it
whether goods exported from the territory
of one of the Contracting Parties have
been properly imported into the territory
of the other Contracting Party, specifying,
where appropriate, the customs procedure
applied to the goods.
3. At the request of the applicant authority,
the requested authority shall take the necessary steps to ensure that surveillance is
kept on:
(a) natural or legal persons where there are
reasonable grounds for believing that
they are contravening or have contravened customs legislation;
(b) movement of goods notified as possibly
giving rise to substantial contraventions
of customs legislation;
(c) means of transport where there are reasonable grounds for believing that they
have been, are or may be used in the
contravening of customs legislation.
Article 4
Spontaneous assistance
The Contracting Parties shall within their
competences provide each other with assistance if they consider that to be necessary for
the correct application of customs legislation,
particularly when they obtain information
pertaining to:
- operations which have contravened,
contravene or would contravene such
legislation and which may be of interest to the other Contracting Party;
- new means or methods employed in
realizing such operations;
- goods known to be subject to substantial contravention of customs legislation on import, export, transit or any
other customs procedure.
Article 5
Delivery and notification
At the request of the applicant authority,
the requested authority shall in accordance
with its legislation take all necessary measures
in order to:
- deliver all documents;
- notify all decisions;
falling within the scope of this Protocol to
an addressee, residing or established in its
territory.
Article 6
Form and substance of requests for assistance
1. Requests pursuant to the present Protocol
shall be made in writing. Documents necessary for the execution of such requests shall
accompany the request. When required
because of the urgency of the situation,
oral requests may be accepted, but must
be confirmed in writing immediately.
2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall
include the following information:
(a) the applicant authority;
(b) the measure requested;
(c) the object of and the reason for the
request;
(d) laws, rules and other legal instruments
involved;
(e) indications as exact and comprehensive
as possible on the natural or legal persons being the target of the investigations;
(f) a summary of the relevant facts, except
in cases provided for in Article 5.
3. Requests shall be submitted in an official
language of the requested authority or in
a language acceptable to such authority.
4. If a request does not meet the formal
requirements, its correction or completion
may be demanded; the ordering of precautionary measures may, however, take
place.
Article 7
Execution of requests
1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority or, when the
latter cannot act on its own, the administrative department to which the request has
been addressed by this authority, shall proceed, within its competence and resources
available, as though it were acting on its
own account or at the request of other
authorities of that same Contracting Party,
by supplying information already possessed,
by carrying out appropriate enquiries or by
arranging for them to be carried out.
2. Requests for assistance will be executed
in accordance with the laws, rules and
other legal instruments of the requested
Contracting Party.
3. Duly authorized officials of a Contracting
Party may, with the agreement of the other
Contracting Party involved and within the
conditions laid down by the latter, obtain
from the offices of the requested authority
or other authority for which the requested
authority is responsible, information relating to the contravention of customs legislation which the applicant authority needs
for the purposes of this Protocol.
4. Officials of a Contracting Party may, with
the agreement of the other Contracting
Party, be present at enquiries carried out
in the latter's territory.
Article 8
Form in which information is to be
communicated
1. The requested authority shall communicate results of enquiries to the applicant
authority in the form of documents, certified copies of documents, reports and the
like.
2. The documents provided for in paragraph
1 may be replaced by computerized information produced in any form for the same
purpose.
Article 9
Exceptions to the obligation to provide
assistance
1. The Contracting Parties may refuse to give
assistance as provided for in this Protocol,
where to do so would:
(a) be likely to prejudice sovereignty, public policy (l'ordre publique), security or
other essential interests; or
(b) involve currency or tax regulations
other than regulations concerning customs duties; or
(c) violate an industrial, commercial or
professional secret.
2. Where the applicant authority asks for assistance which it would itself be unable
to provide if so asked, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. It shall then
be left to the requested authority to decide
how to respond to such a request.
3. If assistance is withheld or denied, the
decision and the reasons therefor must be
notified to the applicant authority without
delay.
Article 10
Obligation to observe confidentiality
Any information communicated in whatever
form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of a
confidential nature. It shall be covered by the
obligation of official secrecy and shall enjoy
the protection extended to similar information under the relevant laws applicable in the
Contracting Party which received it.
Article 11
Use of information
1. Information obtained shall be used solely
for the purposes of this Protocol and may
be used by each Contracting Party for
other purposes only with the prior written consent of the administrative authority which furnished the information and
shall be subject to any restrictions laid
down by that authority. These provisions
are not applicable to information concerning offences relating to narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances. Such information
may be communicated to other authorities
directly involved in the combat of illicit
drug traffic.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not impede the use of
information in any judicial or administrative proceedings subsequently instituted
for failure to comply with customs legislation.
3. The Contracting Parties may, in their
records of evidence, reports and testimonies and in proceedings and charges
brought before the courts, use as evidence
information obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of
this Protocol.
Article 12
Experts and witnesses
An official of a requested authority may be
authorized to appear, within the limitations of
the authorization granted, as expert or wit­ness in judicial or administrative proceedings
regarding matters covered by this Protocol
in the jurisdiction of the other Contracting
Party, and produce such objects, documents or
authenticated copies thereof, as may be needed
for the proceedings. The request for an appearance must indicate specifically on what matter
and by virtue of what title or qualification the
official will be questioned.
Article 13
Assistance expenses
The Contracting Parties shall waive all
claims on each other for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred pursuant to this Protocol,
except, as appropriate, for expenses to experts
and witnesses and to interpreters and translators who are not dependent upon public services.
Article 14
Implementation
1. The management of this Protocol shall be
entrusted to the central customs authorities of the Contracting Parties. They
shall decide on all practical measures and
arrangements necessary for its application,
taking into consideration rules in the field
of data protection. They may recommend
to the competent bodies amendments
which they consider should be made to this
Protocol.
2. The Contracting Parties shall transmit to
each other lists of the competent authorities appointed to act as correspondents
for the purpose of the operational implementation of this Protocol. This information shall be supplemented by lists, to
be revised when necessary, of officials of
those services responsible for preventing,
investigating and combating contravention of customs legislation. Moreover, in
order to ensure the maximum efficiency of
operation of this Protocol, the Contracting
Parties shall take appropriate measures to
ensure that the departments responsible for
combating customs fraud establish direct
personal contacts, including when applicable at the level of local customs authorities, in order to facilitate exchange of information and handling of requests.
3. The Contracting Parties shall consult each
other and subsequently keep each other informed of the detailed rules of implementation which are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
PROTOCOL 4
The Contracting Parties undertake to facilitate the free movement of persons within the
territorial scope of the Agreement. They are
Parties to the following Nordic Conventions
regarding a common Nordic labour market,
social security and social assistance, which provide basic minimum principles in this regard:
Nordic Convention on a Common Nordic
Labour Market, signed on 6 March 1982. The
Convention came into force on 1 August 1983.
It became applicable to the Faroe Islands on
1 April 1992.
Nordic Convention on Social Assistance and
Social Services, signed on 14 June 1994. The
Convention came into force on 1 October 1996
and became applicable to the Faroe Islands on
the same date.
Nordic Convention on Social Security,
signed on 18 August 2003. The Convention
came into force on 1 September 2004. The
Nordic Countries have been informed of its
applicablility to the Faroe Islands, and it will
become promulgated in the Faroe Islands in
September 2005. JOINT DECLARATION BY THE CONTRACTING PARTIES
TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF ICELAND,
OF THE ONE PART, AND THE GOVERNMENT OF DENMARK AND
THE HOME GOVERNMENT OF THE FAROE ISLANDS, OF THE OTHER PART
In respect of goods covered, as regards Iceland, by Annex I to the Agreement on the European
Economic Area
Article 6(1) of the Agreement shall be interpreted so as to inter alia bestow upon the Contracting Parties a mutual obligation to grant the same rights as laid down in the Protocol on Veterinary
Matters supplementary to the Agreement between the European Community, on the one part, and
the Government of Denmark and the Home Government of the Faroe Islands, on the other part,
of 8 December 1999, and Decision No 1/2001 of the EC-Faroe Islands Joint Committee of 31
January 2001 laying down the provisions to implement the Protocol on Veterinary Matters.
In respect of transfers
Each Contracting Party undertakes to create and maintain favourable conditions for investors
of the other Contracting Party and to guarantee the free transfer of funds between the Contracting Parties in connection with investment and trade in goods and services.
Nr. 1 3. nóvember 2006
In respect of Nordic conventions
The Contracting Parties agree that any rights and obligations accorded to them under conventions or agreements between the Nordic countries shall be regarded as minimum rights and obligations and no provisions in the Agreement shall diminish or reduce those rights and obligations.
In respect of voting rights
Bearing in mind the requirements of the Icelandic Constitution regarding the right to stand for
election and cast a vote in elections to Alþingi, each Contracting Party shall undertake to explore
the possibility of according natural persons of the other Contracting Party such right regarding
the parliamentary elections to Alþingi in Iceland and Løgtingið in the Faroe Islands, with similar
conditions as stated in Article 5 (2) C, iv of the Agreement.
In respect of the management of living marine resources
It is not the purpose of the Agreement to restrict in any way the management or exploitation
by the Contracting Parties of their respective living marine resources. The Contracting Parties
undertake to actively explore the possibility of enhanced co-operation on their respective regimes
regarding management and exploitation of living marine resources according to Article 7 of the
Agreement.
Without prejudice to the need for effective management of their fisheries resources, both Contracting Parties agree to identify ways to facilitate fish processing and trade in fish between the the
Faroe Islands and Iceland, with a view to removing any nuisances without delay.
Icelandic authorities will address this by finding a solution in the near future to the 10% surcharge of quota, when vessels fishing in Icelandic waters land their catch in the Faroe Islands.
Faroese authorities will address this by finding a solution in the near future to the 30% surcharge
of days-at-sea, when Faroese vessels fishing in Faroese waters have landed more than 25% of their
catch outside the Faroe Islands and land their catch in Iceland.
No new provisions that diminish the possibility of enhanced trade in fish and fish processing
between the the Faroe Islands and Iceland will be imposed after the date of signature of the Agreement.
In respect of rules of origin
Given the anticipated participation of the Faroe Islands in the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean System
on Rules of Origin, the Contracting Parties have agreed to temporarily extend the application
of the Rules of Origin laid down in Protocol 3 to the Agreement between the Government of
Denmark and the Home Government of the Faroe Islands, of the one part, and the Government
of Iceland, of the other part, on Free Trade between the Faroe Islands and Iceland, signed on 6
August 1992. Protocol 2 to the present Agreement shall be duly amended when the participation of
the Faroe Islands in the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean System on Rules of Origin becomes effective.
Hoyvík, 31 August 2005.
For the Government For the Government of Denmark and
of Iceland the Home Government of the Faroe Islands
Davíð Oddsson Jóannes Eidesgaard