1
COMMERCIAL AND TARIFF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF
KINGDOM OF MOROCCO AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
GUINEA
_ _ _ _ _
The Government of the Kingdom of Morocco and the Government of the
Republic of Guinea, hereinafter referred to as "Contracting Parties".
Wishing to develop and strengthen commercial relations and
economies and to promote trade in goods and services between their two
countries, on the basis of equality and mutual interests.
Taking into consideration the provisions of the Agreements of the Organization
Commerce World of which they are both members.
Have agreed as follows:
SECTION 1
The Contracting Parties subject to the laws and regulations in force
in their respective countries, will take all appropriate measures to facilitate,
consolidate and diversify trade in goods and services between the two countries.
SECTION 2
The Contracting Parties shall grant exemption from customs duties and
charges having equivalent effect on products originating in and coming from the two countries
included in lists "1" and "2" appended to this Agreement.
List "1" includes products originating in and coming from the Kingdom
Morocco, admitted free of customs duties and charges having equivalent effect in
Republic of Guinea.
List "2" includes products originating in and coming from the
Republic of Guinea, admitted free of customs duties and taxes and
charges having equivalent effect in the Kingdom of Morocco.
Products not included in lists 1 and 2 above, benefit from the treatment of the
Most favored nation with respect to customs duties and taxes
equivalent applied to imports in each of the two countries.
2
SECTION 3
For the purposes of this Convention, customs duties mean the duties
of importation appearing in the Customs Tariff of each of the two countries and by taxes
with equivalent effect, the other duties and taxes imposed by one of the Parties
contracting to imported products and not applied to the local products that they
whatever their names.
SECTION 4
Products traded between the two countries enjoy national treatment
with respect to internal taxes imposed in the country of importation on
similar local products.
SECTION 5
The products originating in and coming from the two countries, included in the lists
“1” and “2” annexed to this Convention are free to import and do not
are subject to no prior administrative authorization.
Products not included in lists 1 and 2 above are subject to the laws and
foreign trade regulations in force in each of the two
country.
SECTION 6
The provisions of this Convention do not preclude the application of
prohibition or restriction on imports and exports, aimed at safeguarding the
safety, the health of the population and the protection of fauna, flora and
historical, archaeological and artistic heritage of the two countries.
SECTION 7
Are considered as originating in the territory of one of the Parties
Contracting parties:
- Goods wholly obtained in the territory of either
of the Contracting Parties, including products of the vegetable, animal and
fishing, live animals and natural resources that have not suffered
no industrial transformation.
- Industrial products whose local added value is equal to at least 40%
the ex-factory value of the product. This rate includes the value of inputs and
semi-processed products imported by each of the two countries and used
in the manufacture of these products.
3
SECTION 8
Goods originating in and coming from the territory of either
of the Contracting Parties must be accompanied by a certificate of origin, stamped
by the customs authorities of the exporting country.
SECTION 9
Provisions relating to the technical and practical aspect concerning the origin
of the products exchanged within the framework of this Agreement as well as those relating to
customs cooperation between the two countries are set out in the appendix to this
Convention.
SECTION 10
In order to avoid any injury or threat of injury to domestic production,
each Contracting Party undertakes not to practice dumping on the market of
the other Contracting Party and not to grant subsidies for the export of
goods intended for the other Contracting Party.
In the event of dumping or export subsidy practiced by one or
the other of the Contracting Parties, the aggrieved party may provisionally impose
exceptional anti-dumping or countervailing duties of the subsidy to
exports; provided that the value of these rights does not exceed the value of the
prejudice suffered, in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in each of the
two countries.
SECTION 11
The provisions of this Agreement relating to the exemption of
duties and taxes payable, are taken into account in review of
submissions relating to international calls for tenders subject to compliance with the
laws and procedures in force in each of the two countries.
SECTION 12
Payments relating to transactions entered into under this
Agreement will be made in freely convertible currencies, in accordance with the
exchange regulations in force in each of the two countries.
SECTION 13
The Contracting Parties shall grant each other the facilities
necessary for participation in fairs organized in each of the two countries
4
and for the organization in their respective territories of commercial exhibitions,
symposia and other similar actions in accordance with applicable laws and regulations
force in both countries.
SECTION 14
Each Contracting Party shall authorize, in accordance with the laws and regulations
in force in both countries, the importation of the following products, originating in
territory of the other Contracting Party:
a) – Free of customs duties and charges having equivalent effect for
samples of goods and advertising material, without value
commercial and intended exclusively for advertising and the search for
orders ;
b) – Suspension of customs duties and charges having equivalent effect for
goods, products and tools imported temporarily and necessary
the organization of trade fairs and exhibitions, subject to their
re-export as is later.
SECTION 15
Each Contracting Party shall facilitate, subject to applicable laws and regulations
force in both countries.
- Transit for goods from the territory of the other Party
Contracting Party and intended for the territory of a third country;
- Transit for goods coming from the territory of a third country and
destined for the territory of the other Contracting Party.
SECTION 16
A Commercial Technical Committee made up of representatives of the two
Contracting Parties, is established and is responsible for:
a) – draw up and modify lists 1 and 2 appended to this Agreement. These lists
will enter into force on the date of their signature by the Technical Committee
commercial ;
b) – monitor the application of the provisions of this Agreement;
c) – assess bilateral trade;
d) – propose measures likely to promote relations
bilateral trade.
This Committee will meet alternately in Rabat or Conakry, at the request of
either of the two Contracting Parties.
5
SECTION 17
This Agreement shall enter into force provisionally on the date of its
signature and definitively on the date of the last notification relating to
completion of the formalities required for its entry into force,
in accordance with the procedures applicable in each of the two countries.
This Agreement is concluded for a period of three years renewable by
tacit renewal for similar periods unless one of the Parties
Parties notifies the other Party, in writing, of its intention to denounce it, three
months before it expires.
SECTION 18
This Agreement may be amended, if necessary, after consultation
between the Contracting Parties. These amendments will enter into force after their
approvals by both Parties, in accordance with the laws and regulations in force
in each of the two countries and will form an integral part of this agreement.
SECTION 19
The provisions of this Convention will continue to apply,
after its termination, to all contracts concluded during the period of its validity
until their full execution.
SECTION 20
On its entry into force, this Convention repeals and replaces the
Commercial and Tariff Agreement signed between the two countries on January 17, 1979
and its Additional Protocol of September 14, 1990.
SECTION 21
As a transitional measure, goods loaded directly to the
Kingdom of Morocco or the Republic of Guinea, or for which a credit
irrevocable and confirmed documentary has been opened in favor of the Moroccan supplier
or Guinean before the date of signature of this Agreement, remain
governed by the previous provisions.
SECTION 22
Pending the establishment of lists 1 and 2 referred to in article 2 above, the
two Contracting Parties agree to extend provisionally the
provisions contained in the Commercial and Tariff Agreement of January 17
1979 and its additional protocol signed on September 14, 1990.
6
Lists A, B, C and D annexed to the aforementioned Protocol are renewed
until the establishment of lists 1 and 2 provided for by this Agreement.
After establishing lists 1 and 2 cited in the aforementioned article 2, lists A, B,
C and D will be repealed.
Done in Conakry, April 12, 1997 in two original languages
Arabic and French, both texts being equally authentic.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
REPUBLIC OF GUINEA
Mr MADIKABA CAMARA
MINISTER FOR THE PROMOTION OF
PRIVATE SECTOR OF INDUSTRY AND
TRADE
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
KINGDOM