Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States,
the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Venezuela (ACE No. 33)

PREAMBLE
The governments of the Republic of Venezuela, the United Mexican States and the Republic of Colombia,


CONSIDERING:
The condition that their countries have as Contracting Parties in the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the commitments that derive from it for them.
The condition that their countries have as members of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) and the commitments derived from it for them, as well as the will to strengthen said Association as a convergence center of Latin American integration.
The status of Colombia and Venezuela as member countries of the Cartagena Agreement and the commitments derived from it for them
The coincidence in the policies of internationalization and modernization of the economies of their countries, as well as their decision to contribute to the expansion of world trade.
The priority of deepening economic relations between their countries and the decision to promote the process of Latin American integration.
RESOLVED TO:
Strengthen the special bonds of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between their peoples.
Contribute to harmonious development, the expansion of world trade and the expansion of international cooperation.
Create an expanded and secure market for goods and services produced in their territories.
Reduce distortions in trade.
Establish clear and mutually beneficial rules for your commercial exchange.
Ensure a predictable commercial framework for the planning of productive activities and investment.
Strengthen the competitiveness of their companies in world markets.
Encourage innovation and creativity by protecting intellectual property rights.
Create new employment opportunities, improve working conditions and living standards in their respective territories.
Preserve its ability to safeguard the public welfare.
Promote sustainable development.
Promote coordinated action by the Parties in international economic forums, particularly those related to Latin American integration processes.
Encourage the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening economic relations between the Parties and developing and maximizing the possibilities of their joint presence in international markets.
THEY CELEBRATE THIS FREE TRADE AGREEMENT:
In accordance with the GATT and with the character of Partial Scope Agreement for Economic Complementation in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the contracting parties to that treaty.
CHAPTER I: Initial provisions.
Article 1-01: Objectives.
The objectives of this Treaty, developed specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:


a) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;

b) eliminate trade barriers and facilitate the circulation of goods and services between the Parties;

c) promote conditions of fair competition in trade between the Parties;

d) substantially increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

e) protect and enforce intellectual property rights;

f) establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement;

g) create effective procedures for the application and fulfillment of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of controversies;
h) Promote equitable relations between the Parties, recognizing differential treatment based on the categories of countries established in ALADI;


The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.
Article 1-02: Relationship with other international treaties.
The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them in accordance with the GATT, the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and other international treaties and agreements ratified by them.


In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 1-03: Relations between Colombia and Venezuela.
Chapters III, IV, V section A, VI, VIII, IX, XVI and XVIII will not apply between Colombia and Venezuela.


The chapters not included in paragraph 1 will be applied between Colombia and Venezuela, without prejudice to the obligations arising from the legal system of the Cartagena Agreement.


Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not affect the rights that Mexico may have under this Agreement.
Article 1-04: Observance of the Treaty.
Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional provisions, compliance with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory at the central or federal, state or departmental, and municipal levels, except in cases where this Agreement provides otherwise.
Article 1-05: Succession of treaties.
Any reference to another international treaty or agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms to any successor treaty or agreement to which all the Parties are party.
CHAPTER II: General definitions
Article 2-01: Definitions of general application.
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, it shall be understood as:
good of a Party: national products as understood in the GATT, those goods that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating goods; a good of one Party may incorporate materials from other countries.
Customs Valuation Code: the Agreement Related to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade, including its interpretative notes.
Commission: the Administrative Commission established in accordance with article 20-01.
communication: official written communication or notification.
days: continuous, calendar or calendar days.
enterprise: any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and privately or governmentally owned, including partnerships, foundations, companies, branches, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, or other associations. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as obligating a Party to grant or recognize legal personality to entities that do not have legal personality under that Party's law.
state enterprise: an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through equity participation.
existing: existing on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
import tax: any import levy or duty and any charge of any kind applied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of taxation or additional charge on imports, except:
a) any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT with respect to like goods, direct competitors or substitutes of the Party, or with respect to goods from which it has been manufactured or produced in whole or in part the imported good;

b) any anti-dumping duty or quota or countervailing duty that is applied in accordance with the laws of a Party;

c) any duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered; Y

d) any premium offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariffs-quota or tariff preference quotas.
measure: any law, regulation, procedure, administrative provision or practice, among others, adopted by a Party.
national: a physical or natural person who has the nationality of a Party under its law. It shall be understood that the term also extends to persons who, in accordance with the legislation of that Party, have the status of permanent residents in its territory.
originating: that complies with the rules of origin established in Chapter VI.
Party: any State for which this Treaty has entered into force.
Exporting Party: The Party from whose territory a good or service is exported.
Importing Party: The Party into whose territory a good or service is imported.
person: a physical or natural person, or a company.
Reduction Program: the one established in annex 1 to article 3-04.
Protocol: a protocol annexed to this Agreement, the provisions of which have the same hierarchy and binding force as those of this Agreement.
resolution: decision or resolution of an authority.
Harmonized System: the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System, including the General Classification Rules and their explanatory notes.
CHAPTER III: National treatment and market access for goods
Section A - Definitions
Article 3-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
FOB: free on board (LAB).
tariff fraction: an eight- or ten-digit Harmonized System tariff classification code.
samples with no commercial value: goods representative of a class of goods already produced or of a model of goods whose production is projected. It does not include identical goods imported by the same person or sent to a single consignee in such quantity that, taken globally, they constitute an ordinary import subject to the payment of import taxes.
used: those goods that at the time of import show signs of wear or tarnish due to use; those that, even without having been used, have a considerable time since their manufacture; balances, imperfect, second and waste.
Section B - Scope of application and national treatment
Article 3-02: Scope of application.
This Chapter applies to the trade in goods of the Parties, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.
Article 3-03: National Treatment.
Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of another Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
The provisions of paragraph 1 mean, with respect to a state or department, or a municipality, a treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that that state or department, or municipality grants to any similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes, as the case may be. of the Party of which it is a member.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the measures listed in the annex to this article.
Section C - Import Taxes
Article 3-04: Deduction of import taxes.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing import tax, or adopt any new import tax, on originating goods.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its import taxes on originating goods in accordance with the provisions of Annex 1 to this Article.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article are not intended to:
(a) prohibit a Party from increasing an import tax on originating goods to a level no higher than that established in the Reduction Schedule, when previously that Party had unilaterally reduced that import tax to a level lower than that established in that schedule;
(b) prevent a Party from increasing an import tax on originating goods when that increase is authorized as a result of a GATT dispute settlement procedure between those Parties.
(c) prevent a Party from creating a new tariff breakdown or split, provided that the import tax applicable to the corresponding originating goods is not greater than that applicable to the broken or split tariff code.
Unless otherwise provided, this Agreement incorporates the previously negotiated tariff preferences between the Parties, the regional tariff preference (PAR) for the tariff universe and the extension of the PAR between Mexico and Venezuela, as reflected in the Agreement. annex 1 to this article. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the preferences previously negotiated or granted between the Parties within the framework of ALADI shall be without effect.
For purposes of deducting import taxes in accordance with this article, the transition tariff rates or tariffs will be approximated downwards, at least to the nearest tenth of a percent or, if the tariff rate is expressed in monetary units, at least least to the nearest .001 of the official monetary unit of the Party.
In addition to the provisions of Annex 2 to this Article, at the request of any Party, the Commission will hold consultations to examine the possibility of accelerating the deduction of import taxes for one or more goods or of including one or more goods in the Program of Deduction and will make the pertinent recommendations to the Parties. Once the corresponding legal requirements have been met, the accelerated relief of import taxes on a good that is achieved for two or more Parties will prevail over any import tax or relief period for that good between those Parties. The inclusion of assets in the Reduction Program that is achieved between two or more Parties will begin to govern those assets between those Parties once the corresponding legal procedures are fulfilled.
Article 3-05 : Customs valuation.
Except as provided in the annex to this article, the customs value of an imported good shall be determined in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code.
The taxable base on which import taxes will be applied to goods imported from another Party shall not be the value of a good produced in the territory of the importing Party, nor an arbitrary or fictitious value.
In accordance with article 13 of the Customs Valuation Code, if in the course of determining the customs value of imported goods it is necessary to delay the final determination of that value, the importer may withdraw them from customs if, when so requires, provides sufficient security in the form of a bond or, if the importer so chooses, by other means of security provided by the law of the Party. The guarantee will cover the payment of taxes to which the goods may ultimately be subject.
Each Party will establish the appropriate documentation to prove that the customs value is correct, which will not be greater than what can reasonably be requested to comply with the provisions of Article VII of the GATT.
The guarantee granted under the terms of paragraph 3 will be released within a period not to exceed twenty business days from the date on which the importer delivers the appropriate documentation to the customs authority, unless the customs authority itself has initiated the exercise of their powers of verification or verification.
Each Party may determine, in accordance with paragraph 3, the goods imported from another Party that will be subject to the aforementioned guarantee when the customs value declared by the importer is less than the estimated price determined by the customs authority of the importing Party with based on antecedents of transaction values ​​previously obtained and analyzed.
Before adopting the estimated price referred to in paragraph 6, the Party shall communicate to the other Parties the description of the good, its tariff fraction, the estimated price that it intends to establish and the reasons on which it is based to adopt the measure.
The Parties understand that the estimated price referred to in paragraph 6 shall not be considered as the base price for the determination of import taxes.
Article 3-06: Temporary importation of goods.
Each Party shall authorize the temporary importation free of import tax or with suspension of payment thereof, at least for the goods listed below, which are imported from another Party, regardless of their origin and whether they are in the territory of the Party importer similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes are available:
a) professional equipment necessary for the exercise of the activity, trade or profession of a business person;
b) equipment for the press or for the broadcast of radio or television signals and cinematographic equipment;
c) goods imported for sporting purposes or intended for exhibition or demonstration, including components, auxiliary devices and accessories; Y
d) commercial samples and publicity films.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party may subject the temporary importation free of import tax or with suspension of payment thereof, of a good of the type indicated in paragraph 1, literals a), b) or c), to any of the following conditions, without additional conditions being able to be adopted:
a) that are introduced by natural or legal persons legally established in the Party, or by nationals of another Party;
b) that the property is used exclusively by the person who enters temporarily or under his personal supervision, in the performance of his activity, trade or profession;
c) that the property is not sold or leased or transferred in any other way while it remains in its territory;
d) that the temporary importation is guaranteed by a bond or other guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be caused by the final importation of the good, which will be released at the time of re-exportation;
e) that the good is susceptible to identification when re-exported;
f) that the good is re-exported upon departure of the person or within a term that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation, which may not exceed in any case six months extendable to nine months;
g) that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use; Y
h) that the good is re-exported in the same form in which it was imported.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation free of import tax or with suspension of payment thereof, of a good of the type indicated in paragraph 1, literal d) to any of the following conditions , without the possibility of adopting additional conditions:
a) that the good is imported only for the purpose of obtaining orders for goods or services that are supplied from the territory of another Party or from another country that is not a Party;
b) that the property is not subject to sale or lease and is used only for demonstration or exhibition while it remains in its territory;
c) that the good is susceptible to identification when re-exported;
d) that the good be re-exported within a term that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of temporary importation, which may not exceed in any case six months, extendable to nine months; Y
e) that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use.
When a good that is imported temporarily free of import duty pursuant to paragraph 1 fails to meet any of the conditions that a Party imposes pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3, that Party may require payment of import duty and any other charge that would be caused by the definitive importation of the good.
Article 3-07 : Import of samples without commercial value.
Each Party shall authorize the importation free of import duty of samples without commercial value originating from another Party.
Article 3-08: Temporary flexibility levels for certain goods classified in chapters 51 to 63 of the Harmonized System
Until December 31, 1999, the Parties indicated in the annex to this article shall grant to goods classified in chapters 51 to 63 of the Harmonized System that comply with the provisions of article 6-19, the preferential treatment corresponding to originating goods established in the Reduction Program, in accordance with the provisions of that annex.
Section D - Non-tariff measures
Article 3-09: Import and export restrictions.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of another Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of another Party, except as provided in GATT Article XI, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, in all circumstances in which any other type of restriction exists, the establishment of minimum export and import prices, except as permitted for the application of sanctions and commitments regarding antidumping duties and quotas or countervailing duties.
In cases where a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import of goods from a non-Party or on the export of goods destined for a non-Party, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed in the sense of preventing:
a) limit or prohibit the importation of the goods of the country that is not a Party, from the territory of another Party; either
b) require as a condition for the export of goods to the territory of another Party, that they not be directly or indirectly re-exported to the country that is not a Party, without being processed or manufactured in the territory of the other Party in a way that gives rise to a substantial change in the value, form or use thereof or to the production of another good.
In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a good from a country that is not a Party, at the request of either Party, they shall consult in order to minimize undue interference or distortion in the pricing, marketing and distribution mechanisms in another Party.
Paragraphs 1 to 4 shall not apply to the measures set out in the annex to this article.
Article 3-10: Customs duties.
Neither Party shall increase or establish any customs duty for the service provided by customs on originating goods and shall eliminate such duties on originating goods within 5 and a half years after the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 3-11: Export taxes.
Except as provided in this Article, no Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, levy or charge on the export of a good to the territory of another Party, unless they are adopted or maintained on the export of that good to the territory of all other Parties. , and that good, when it is destined for internal consumption.
Each Party may maintain or adopt any tax, levy or charge on the export of the essential goods listed in Annex 1 to this Article, their ingredients, or the goods from which these food products are derived, if such tax , lien or charge is adopted or maintained for the export of those goods to the territory of all other Parties, and is used:
a) so that the benefits of a domestic food assistance program that includes such food are received only by consumers in the Party applying that program; either
b) to ensure the availability of sufficient quantities of the food good for internal consumption, or of sufficient quantities of its ingredients or of the goods from which those food goods are derived for a national processing industry, when the internal price of that food good is maintained below the world price as part of a government stabilization program, provided that such taxes, levies or charges do not have the effect of increasing the protection granted to that national industry, and are maintained only for the period necessary to maintain the integrity of that program.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party may adopt or maintain a tax, levy or charge on the export of any food good to the territory of another Party if such tax, levy or charge is applied temporarily to alleviate a critical shortage of that nutritional good. For purposes of this paragraph, "temporarily" means up to one year, or a longer period agreed by all Parties.
Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 2 to this Article.
Article 3-12: Marking of country of origin.
The annex to this article shall apply to measures related to country of origin marking.
Section E - Publication and communication
Article 3-13: Publication and communication.
Neither Party shall apply before its official publication any measure of a general nature that has the effect of increasing an import tax or other charge on the importation of goods from another Party or the exportation of goods destined for another Party, or that imposes a new or most burdensome measure, restriction or prohibition for the aforementioned imports or exports or for the transfers of funds related to them.
At the request of one Party, another Party will identify, in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them in accordance with the Harmonized System, the measures, restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of goods for reasons of national security, public health, preservation flora or fauna, the environment, phytosanitary and zoosanitary standards, technical standards, labeling, international commitments, public order requirements or any other regulation.
CHAPTER III: National treatment and market access for goods
Annex to Article 3-03: Exceptions to Article 3-03
Colombian Measures
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-03, Colombia reserves the departmental monopoly on the production of liquors and the faculty of the departments to establish taxes on the importation of liquors from other departments or countries.
Article 3-03 shall not apply to measures adopted by Colombia regarding the export or import of energy goods when they are necessary to ensure compliance with a constitutional provision.
For the purposes of paragraph 2, those described in paragraph 2 of Section B of the annex to article 3-09 are considered as energy goods.
Annex 1 to article 3-04: Tax Reduction Program
Except as otherwise provided in this Annex or elsewhere in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its import taxes on originating goods in ten equal stages, as follows:
a) the first reduction will take place on January 1, 1995; Y
b) the residual import tax will be eliminated in nine equal annual stages as of July 1, 1996, so that these goods will be free of import tax as of July 1, 2004.
The rebate described in paragraph 1 shall be applied from the import tax that is specified in the "base rate" column of the list of each Party in the Rebate Schedule.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax applicable to originating goods included in a tariff item marked with the code "P" in the schedule of a Party to the Program of Deduction will be the lesser of:
a) the import tax resulting from applying paragraphs 1 and 2; either
b) 4.4% ad valorem .
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax applicable to originating goods included in a tariff item marked with the code "R" in the schedule of a Party to the Program of Deduction will be the lesser of:
a) the import tax resulting from applying paragraphs 1 and 2 from an import tax of 10% ad-valorem ; either
b) the import tax specified in the "base rate" column.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax applicable to originating goods included in a tariff item marked with the code "B" in the schedule of a Party in the Program of Tax relief will be eliminated in five equal stages according to the following:
a) the first reduction will take place on January 1, 1995; Y
b) the residual import tax will be eliminated in four equal annual stages beginning on July 1, 1996, so that these goods will be free of import tax as of July 1, 1999.
Notwithstanding Article 3-04 and paragraphs 1 and 2, and in accordance with Article 5-04 and Annex 2 to Article 3-04, a Party may adopt or maintain import taxes in accordance with its obligations. and rights derived from GATT, on the goods included in a tariff fraction identified with the code "EXCL" in the list of a Party in the Reduction Program until the moment in which the contrary is agreed between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty. For goods included in a tariff item identified with the code "EXCL" and which, according to the list of a Party in the Reduction Program and paragraph 7, is not identified with the code "PAR",
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 6, the following shall apply to originating goods included in a tariff item identified with the code "PAR" in the list of a Party in the Tariff Reduction Program:
a) Mexico will apply a tariff preference of 28% on that proportion of the current import tax that is expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the imported good ( ad-valorem ), but in no case on that proportion of the current import tax that is Express in monetary units per unit of measure; either
b) Colombia and Venezuela will apply a tariff preference of 12% on that proportion of the current import tax that is expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the imported good ( ad-valorem ), but in no case on that proportion of the current import tax that is expressed in monetary units per unit of measure.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax on originating automotive goods included in the tariff headings marked with the code "M" in the list of a Party in the Program of Deduction will be applied according to the following:
a) before December 31, 2006, as long as there is no agreement in the Automotive Sector Committee in accordance with chapter IV, the import tax applicable to originating goods will be the one specified in the base rate column or, if it exists, the specified in parentheses after the "M" code for each tariff item in the schedule of a Party to the Reduction Schedule;
b) before December 31, 2006 and after, where appropriate, there is an agreement in the Automotive Sector Committee in accordance with chapter IV, the import tax applicable to originating goods will be eliminated in equal annual stages between the date after December 1 § January 1997 determined by that Committee and December 31, 2006, from the base rate specified for each tariff fraction in the "base rate" column of the list of a Party in the Reduction Program; Y
c) As of January 1, 2007, these goods shall be free of import tax, unless the Parties agree to a longer period pursuant to Article 4-04.
The provisions of paragraph 8 shall not apply to originating goods that are not automotive goods.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter VI, in cases where there is no equal tariff treatment between the Parties for the same originating good, in order to determine the import tax applicable by a Party, the following shall apply:
a) Colombia will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with its list in the Tax Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than minor processing, has been carried out in the territory of Mexico.
b) Venezuela will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with its list in the Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than minor processing, has been carried out in the territory of Mexico.
c) Mexico will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with the "Colombia" column of its list in the Tariff Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than processing, has been carried out in the territory of Colombia. minor.
d) Mexico will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with the "Venezuela" column of its list in the Tariff Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than processing, has been carried out in the territory of Venezuela. minor.
For the purposes of paragraph 10, minor processing will include, among others, the following:
a) simple dilution in water or another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the good;
b) cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings;
c) application of preservative or decorative coatings, including lubricants, preservative or decorative paint, or metallic coatings;
d) trimming or roughing small amounts of excess materials;
e) unloading, loading or any other operation necessary to keep the good in good condition;
f) packaging, repackaging, packaging, repackaging or filling of containers in small doses;
g) test, mark, separate, or classify;
h) ornamental or finishing operations incidental to the production of a textile good, the purpose of which is to improve the commercial appeal or ease of care of a product, such as dyeing and printing, embroidery and application of engravings or markings, hemming, pleats or darts, stone or acid wash, permanent press, or sew-on accessories and ornaments;
For the purposes of paragraph 10, production shall be understood as established in article 6-01.
Section A - Colombia Tariff Reduction Schedule [in PDF format, 667 KB]
Section B - Mexico Tariff Reduction Schedule [in PDF format, 1.5 MB]
Section C - Venezuela Tariff Reduction Schedule [in PDF format, 735 KB]
Annex 2 to article 3-04
If the Parties reach an agreement regarding the rules of origin for goods classified in heading 39.03 of the Harmonized System in accordance with the provisions of section C of the annex to article 6-19, they must agree on the tax relief schedule for those goods, which may not exceed 10 years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
If Venezuela and Mexico reach an agreement regarding the rules of origin applicable between them for goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System in accordance with the provisions of Section B of the annex to article 6-19, they must agree on the calendar tax relief for those goods, which may not exceed 10 years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
Annex to Article 3-05: Customs Valuation
Colombia may value a good imported from another Party, for a period of five and a half years from the entry into force of this Agreement, on the basis of official minimum prices established based on:
a) the prices of exclusive distributors or importers of the main brands, communicated to the Directorate of National Taxes and Customs; either
b) international databases, international stock exchanges or specialized magazines on the subject, or other available public sources, when it is not possible to obtain international prices from exclusive distributors or importers of the main brands;
For the purposes set forth in paragraph 1, the following requirements shall be met:
a) that the prices determined in accordance with paragraph 1, literal a) have been consularized in the exporting country and certified by a chamber of commerce of the exporting country;
b) that the prices determined in accordance with paragraph 1, literals a) and b);
i) are obtained based on the average of the most recent quotes from the sources mentioned in paragraph 1, literals a) and b);
ii) are based on FOB prices, port of shipment, country of origin;
iii) have been verified with international sources of recognized reputation;
c) that they be published, through the National Tax and Customs Directorate of Colombia and by means of a resolution; Y
d) that the other Parties be informed, in advance, of the official minimum prices that will enter into force for trade between the Parties.
Annex to article 3-08: Temporary flexibility levels for goods classified in chapters 51 to 63 of the Harmonized System.
As long as they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Mexico will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Reduction Program to goods classified in chapters 51 to 60 of the Harmonized System produced in Colombia, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 1 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 1.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 2 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 2.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Provided that they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Mexico will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Reduction Program for goods classified in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System produced in Colombia, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 3.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 4 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 4.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Provided that they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Colombia will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Reduction Program to goods classified in chapters 51 to 60 of the Harmonized System produced in Mexico, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 1 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 1.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 2 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 2.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Provided that they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Colombia will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Reduction Program to goods classified in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System produced in Mexico, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 3.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 4 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 4.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Colombia and Mexico may not allocate more than 20% of the total amount for each year referred to in paragraphs 1 and 4 to goods classified in the same heading of the Harmonized System.
As of January 1, 2000, the goods referred to in article 3-08 must comply with the corresponding rule of origin established in the annex to article 6-03.
The Parties will grant the tariff preferences established in the Tariff Reduction Program to the goods referred to in article 3-08 that exceed the amounts determined in paragraphs 1 to 4, provided they comply with the specific rule of origin established in the annex to the article 6-03.
Annex to Article 3-09: Exceptions to Article 3-09
Section A - Colombian Measures
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, Colombia may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods. However, Colombia will not prohibit or restrict the temporary importation of used goods, when they are imported to provide cross-border services in accordance with Annex 2 to Article 10-02, or to fulfill a contract in accordance with Chapter XV, as long as the imported goods :
a) are necessary for the provision of the cross-border service or for the performance of the contract awarded to a supplier of another Party;
b) are used exclusively by the service provider or by the supplier that fulfills the contract, or under their supervision;
c) are not subject to sale, lease or loan while they remain in the territory of Colombia;
d) are imported in quantities not greater than what is necessary for the provision of the service or the fulfillment of the contract;
e) are promptly re-exported at the conclusion of the service or contract;
f) comply with the other requirements applicable to the importation of such goods to the extent that such requirements are compatible with this Agreement;
g) comply with the other purposes established in article 3-06 of this chapter.
Article 3-09 shall not apply to measures adopted by Colombia regarding the export or import of energy goods when necessary to ensure compliance with a Colombian constitutional provision.
For the purposes of applying this article, those described in paragraph 2 of Section B of this annex will be considered as energy goods.
Section B - Measures of Mexico
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods. However, Mexico will not prohibit or restrict the temporary importation of used goods, when they are imported to provide cross-border services in accordance with Annex 2 to Article 10-02, or to fulfill a contract in accordance with Chapter XV, as long as the imported goods :
a) are necessary for the provision of the cross-border service or for the performance of the contract awarded to a supplier of another Party;
b) are used exclusively by the service provider or by the supplier that fulfills the contract, or under their supervision;
c) are not subject to sale, lease or loan while they remain in the territory of Mexico;
d) are imported in quantities not greater than what is necessary for the provision of the service or the fulfillment of the contract;
e) are promptly re-exported at the conclusion of the service or contract;
f) comply with the other requirements applicable to the importation of such goods to the extent that such requirements are compatible with this Agreement;
g) comply with the other purposes established in article 3-06 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods described in the following headings and subheadings of the Harmonized System.
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
Section C - Measures of Venezuela
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Venezuela may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods. However, Venezuela will not prohibit or restrict the temporary importation of used goods, when they are imported to provide cross-border services in accordance with Annex 2 to Article 10-02, or to fulfill a contract in accordance with Chapter XV, as long as the imported goods :
a) are necessary for the provision of the cross-border service or for the performance of the contract awarded to a supplier of another Party;
b) are used exclusively by the service provider or by the supplier that fulfills the contract, or under their supervision;
c) are not subject to sale, lease or loan while they remain in the territory of Venezuela;
d) are imported in quantities not greater than what is necessary for the provision of the service or the fulfillment of the contract;
e) are promptly re-exported at the conclusion of the service or contract;
f) comply with the other requirements applicable to the importation of such goods to the extent that such requirements are compatible with this Agreement;
g) comply with the other purposes established in article 3-06 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Venezuela may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of the following items of the Harmonized System:
Annex to Article 3-12: Country of Origin Marking
For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
final buyer: the last person who, in the territory of the importing Party, acquires the good in the form in which it was imported. This buyer is not necessarily the final user of the good.
common container: the container in which the good usually arrives at the final purchaser.
Each Party may require that a good from another Party imported into its territory bear a country of origin mark that indicates the name of the country of origin to the final buyer of the good.
Each Party may require, among its general consumer information measures, that an imported good bear the country of origin mark in the manner prescribed for goods of the importing Party.
By adopting, maintaining and applying any country of origin marking measure, each Party shall minimize the difficulties, costs and inconvenience that such measure may cause to the trade and industry of the other Parties.
Each part:
a) accept any reasonable method of marking a good of another Party, such as the use of adhesive or pressure labels, tags or paint, which ensures that the mark can be seen with ordinary handling of the good or container, which is susceptible to be easily read and remain on the property until it reaches the final purchaser unless intentionally removed;
b) exempt from the origin marking requirement a good of another Party that;
i) is not capable of being marked;
ii) cannot be marked prior to export to the territory of another Party without damaging it;
iii) cannot be marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, so as to discourage its export to the territory of the Party;
iv) cannot be marked without material impairment of its operation or substantial deterioration of its appearance;
v) is in a container marked in such a way that the origin of the good is reasonably indicated to the final buyer;
vi) is raw material;
vii) will be produced in the territory of the importing Party, by the importer or on its behalf, in such a way that the good becomes the good of the importing Party;
viii) due to its nature or the circumstances of its importation, the final buyer can reasonably know its country of origin, even if it is not marked;
ix) has been produced for at least twenty years prior to its importation;
x) has been imported without the required marking and cannot be marked afterwards except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, provided that the omission of marking was not for the purpose of circumventing the country of origin marking requirements ;
xi) is in transit, in guarantee or at the disposal of the customs authority, for purposes of its temporary importation free of tax or with suspension of payment thereof; either
xii) is an original work of art.
With the exception of the goods described in paragraph 5, literal b), numerals vi, vii, viii, ix, xi, and xii, a Party may provide that when a good is exempt from the country of origin marking requirement, in accordance with paragraph 5, literal b), the common outer container is marked so as to indicate the country of origin of the merchandise it contains.
Each Party shall provide that:
a) a common container that is imported empty, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but the container in which the common container is imported may be required to be marked with the country of origin of its content; Y
b) a full common container, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but may be required to be marked with the name of the country of origin of its content, unless its content is already marked and the container can be easily opened for inspection, or the marking of the contents is clearly visible through the container.
Whenever legally and administratively feasible, each Party shall allow the importer to mark a good of a Party after it is imported, but before it is released from the control or custody of customs authorities, unless the importer has committed repeated violations of the requirements of country of origin marking of the Party and has previously been informed that the good must be marked prior to importation.
Each Party shall provide that, except for importers who have been notified in accordance with paragraph 8, no special assessment or penalty shall be imposed for failure to comply with that Party's country of origin marking requirements, unless the Goods are withdrawn from the control or custody of the customs authorities without having been adequately marked, or misleading marks have been affixed to them.
The Parties shall cooperate and consult with each other on matters related to this Annex, including additional exemptions from the country of origin marking requirement.
CHAPTER IV: Automotive Sector
Article 4-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
model-year: the period from November 1 of one year to October 31 of the next.
Integral buses: vehicles without a chassis (frame) and with an integrated body, intended for the transport of more than 16 people, including the driver, and which are classified under heading 8702 (self-supporting buses).
automotive goods: the goods that are classified in annexes 1 and 2 to article 4-02.
trucks and tractor-trailers of more than 15 tons of gross vehicle weight: vehicles with a chassis (frame) for the transport of goods, with a gross vehicle weight of 15,000 kilograms or more and that are classified in subheading 8701.20 or in heading 8704.
gross vehicle weight: the actual weight of the vehicle expressed in kilograms, added to its maximum load capacity according to the manufacturer's specifications and its full fuel tank.
used motor vehicle: a vehicle:
a) sold, leased or lent;
b) handled by more than:
i) 200 kilometers, in the case of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of less than five tons;
ii) 2,000 kilometers, in the case of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight equal to or greater than five tons; either
c) manufactured prior to the current model year and that at least sixty days have elapsed from the date of manufacture.Article 4-02: Scope of application.
The provisions of this chapter apply only to automotive goods that are classified in the tariff codes specified in annex 1 to this article and to automotive goods that are classified in the tariff codes specified in annex 2 to this article, provided that these The latter are used in the automotive goods referred to in annex 1 to this article.
In the event of any inconsistency between any provision of this chapter and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 4-03: Automotive Sector Committee.
The Parties create the Automotive Sector Committee, made up of representatives of the Parties. The Committee will be advised by representatives of the private sector.
It will correspond to the Committee:
a) Submit to the Commission at the end of the first year from the entry into force of this Agreement, a proposal on:
i) a cleared exchange mechanism that promotes trade in this sector;
ii) a methodology for the definition of the origin of automotive goods, taking into account the criteria of change of tariff classification or regional content value, as well as its percentage;
iii) any modification to the scope of application of this chapter; Y
iv) any acceleration in the reduction of import taxes on automotive goods, taking into account the differences in the degree of development of the automotive industries located in the territory of each Party.
b) analyze the evolution of commercial exchange in the automotive sector and propose to the Commission the mechanisms that lead to a better development of this sector;
c) analyze the policies of the automotive industry applied by each Party and make the pertinent recommendations to the Commission in order to achieve the elimination of barriers to trade and a greater economic complementation of this sector; Y
d) ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and make the recommendations it deems pertinent to the Commission.
Article 4-04: Elimination of import taxes.
Each Party shall eliminate its import taxes on trucks and tractor-trailers of more than 15 tons of gross vehicle weight and on integral buses originating in a Party in accordance with the following:
a) may maintain the base tariff rates or tariffs established in Annex 1 to Article 3-04 during the two years following the entry into force of this Agreement; Y
b) will eliminate them in eleven equal annual reductions as of January 1, 1997, to be completely eliminated as of January 1, 2007.
Each Party shall eliminate its import taxes on automotive goods originating in the other Parties not included in paragraph 1, not before January 1, 1997, in accordance with the following:
a) If the Commission reaches an agreement regarding the provisions of Article 4-03, paragraph 2, letter a), numerals i) and ii), the Parties shall eliminate the base tariff rates or tariffs established in Annex 1 to Article 3-04 in equal annual stages from the date determined by the Commission, in such a way that those base tariff rates or tariffs are completely eliminated on January 1, 2007; either
b) If the Commission does not reach an agreement regarding the provisions of Article 4-03, paragraph 2, letter a), numerals i) and ii), the Parties may maintain the base tariff rates or tariffs established in Annex 1 to article 3-04, but will completely eliminate them on January 1, 2007, unless the Parties agree to a longer term.
Article 4-05: Rules of origin.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the annex to article 6-03 and article 6-19, for the goods dealt with in annexes 1 and 2 to article 4-02, the rules of origin established in Resolution 78 of the Committee on Representatives of ALADI, as long as the Parties do not agree on different rules of origin for the aforementioned goods, in accordance with the provisions of article 4-03, paragraph 2, literal a), numeral ii).
Article 4-06: Performance requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 3-03 and 17-04, the Parties may maintain or modify the performance requirements for the automotive industry.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, the Parties may adopt or maintain import permit measures to administer the requirements referred to in paragraph 1.
The Parties shall eliminate the measures referred to in paragraph 2 no later than January 1, 2007.
Article 4-07 : Used automotive goods.
The Parties may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used motor vehicles and other used, rebuilt or refurbished motor goods. These assets are excluded from the Tax Reduction Program.
Article 4-08: Extension of the PAR.
In the event that a Party grants the PAR to a non-Party country, it will extend it to the other Parties under the same access conditions.
Annex 1 to article 4-02
Annex 2 to article 4-02
The provisions of Chapter IV apply to goods that are classified in any of the following tariff codes of the Parties and that are intended for use in goods classified in Annex 1 to Article 4-02.

CHAPTER V : Agricultural sector and phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures
Section A - Agricultural Sector
Article 5-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, it shall be understood as:
tariff-quota: the one that is established by applying a certain rate or tariff rate to imports of a good up to a certain amount (amount within the quota) and a higher rate to imports of that good that exceed that amount (surplus of the fee).
sugar:
a) for imports to Mexico, the goods included in the following tariff fractions of the Mexican General Import Tax Law Tariff: 1701.11.01, 1701.11.99, 1701.12.01, 1701.12.99, 1701.91 (except those that contain flavorings), 1701.99.01 and 1701.99.99;
b) for imports to Colombia and Venezuela, the goods included in the following tariff sections of their respective Customs Tariff: 1701.11.10, 1701.11.90, 1701.12.00, 1701.91.00 and 1701.99.00.
good of the agricultural sector: good included in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System:
a) Chapters 1 to 24, except fish and fish products; Y
b) the goods included in the following headings or subheadings.
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.



Free Trade Agreement between the United Mexican States,
the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Venezuela (ACE No. 33)
 

PREAMBLE
The governments of the Republic of Venezuela, the United Mexican States and the Republic of Colombia,

CONSIDERING:
The condition that their countries have as Contracting Parties in the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the commitments that derive from it for them.
The condition that their countries have as members of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) and the commitments derived from it for them, as well as the will to strengthen said Association as a convergence center of Latin American integration.
The status of Colombia and Venezuela as member countries of the Cartagena Agreement and the commitments derived from it for them
The coincidence in the policies of internationalization and modernization of the economies of their countries, as well as their decision to contribute to the expansion of world trade.
The priority of deepening economic relations between their countries and the decision to promote the process of Latin American integration.
RESOLVED TO:
Strengthen the special bonds of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between their peoples.
Contribute to harmonious development, the expansion of world trade and the expansion of international cooperation.
Create an expanded and secure market for goods and services produced in their territories.
Reduce distortions in trade.
Establish clear and mutually beneficial rules for your commercial exchange.
Ensure a predictable commercial framework for the planning of productive activities and investment.
Strengthen the competitiveness of their companies in world markets.
Encourage innovation and creativity by protecting intellectual property rights.
Create new employment opportunities, improve working conditions and living standards in their respective territories.
Preserve its ability to safeguard the public welfare.
Promote sustainable development.
Promote coordinated action by the Parties in international economic forums, particularly those related to Latin American integration processes.
Encourage the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening economic relations between the Parties and developing and maximizing the possibilities of their joint presence in international markets.
THEY CELEBRATE THIS FREE TRADE AGREEMENT:
In accordance with the GATT and with the character of Partial Scope Agreement for Economic Complementation in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the contracting parties to that treaty.
CHAPTER I: Initial provisions.
Article 1-01: Objectives.
The objectives of this Treaty, developed specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:


a) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;

b) eliminate trade barriers and facilitate the circulation of goods and services between the Parties;

c) promote conditions of fair competition in trade between the Parties;

d) substantially increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

e) protect and enforce intellectual property rights;

f) establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement;

g) create effective procedures for the application and fulfillment of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of controversies;
h) Promote equitable relations between the Parties, recognizing differential treatment based on the categories of countries established in ALADI;


The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.
Article 1-02: Relationship with other international treaties.
The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them in accordance with the GATT, the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and other international treaties and agreements ratified by them.


In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 1-03: Relations between Colombia and Venezuela.
Chapters III, IV, V section A, VI, VIII, IX, XVI and XVIII will not apply between Colombia and Venezuela.


The chapters not included in paragraph 1 will be applied between Colombia and Venezuela, without prejudice to the obligations arising from the legal system of the Cartagena Agreement.


Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not affect the rights that Mexico may have under this Agreement.
Article 1-04: Observance of the Treaty.
Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional provisions, compliance with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory at the central or federal, state or departmental, and municipal levels, except in cases where this Agreement provides otherwise.
Article 1-05: Succession of treaties.
Any reference to another international treaty or agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms to any successor treaty or agreement to which all the Parties are party.
CHAPTER II: General definitions
Article 2-01: Definitions of general application.
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, it shall be understood as:
good of a Party: national products as understood in the GATT, those goods that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating goods; a good of one Party may incorporate materials from other countries.
Customs Valuation Code: the Agreement Related to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade, including its interpretative notes.
Commission: the Administrative Commission established in accordance with article 20-01.
communication: official written communication or notification.
days: continuous, calendar or calendar days.
enterprise: any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and privately or governmentally owned, including partnerships, foundations, companies, branches, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, or other associations. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as obligating a Party to grant or recognize legal personality to entities that do not have legal personality under that Party's law.
state enterprise: an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through equity participation.
existing: existing on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
import tax: any import levy or duty and any charge of any kind applied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of taxation or additional charge on imports, except:
a) any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT with respect to like goods, direct competitors or substitutes of the Party, or with respect to goods from which it has been manufactured or produced in whole or in part the imported good;

b) any anti-dumping duty or quota or countervailing duty that is applied in accordance with the laws of a Party;

c) any duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered; Y

d) any premium offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariffs-quota or tariff preference quotas.
measure: any law, regulation, procedure, administrative provision or practice, among others, adopted by a Party.
national: a physical or natural person who has the nationality of a Party under its law. It shall be understood that the term also extends to persons who, in accordance with the legislation of that Party, have the status of permanent residents in its territory.
originating: that complies with the rules of origin established in Chapter VI.
Party: any State for which this Treaty has entered into force.
Exporting Party: The Party from whose territory a good or service is exported.
Importing Party: The Party into whose territory a good or service is imported.
person: a physical or natural person, or a company.
Reduction Program: the one established in annex 1 to article 3-04.
Protocol: a protocol annexed to this Agreement, the provisions of which have the same hierarchy and binding force as those of this Agreement.
resolution: decision or resolution of an authority.
Harmonized System: the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System, including the General Classification Rules and their explanatory notes.
CHAPTER III: National treatment and market access for goods
Section A - Definitions
Article 3-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
FOB: free on board (LAB).
tariff fraction: an eight- or ten-digit Harmonized System tariff classification code.
samples with no commercial value: goods representative of a class of goods already produced or of a model of goods whose production is projected. It does not include identical goods imported by the same person or sent to a single consignee in such quantity that, taken globally, they constitute an ordinary import subject to the payment of import taxes.
used: those goods that at the time of import show signs of wear or tarnish due to use; those that, even without having been used, have a considerable time since their manufacture; balances, imperfect, second and waste.
Section B - Scope of application and national treatment
Article 3-02: Scope of application.
This Chapter applies to the trade in goods of the Parties, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.
Article 3-03: National Treatment.
Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of another Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
The provisions of paragraph 1 mean, with respect to a state or department, or a municipality, a treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that that state or department, or municipality grants to any similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes, as the case may be. of the Party of which it is a member.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the measures listed in the annex to this article.
Section C - Import Taxes
Article 3-04: Deduction of import taxes.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing import tax, or adopt any new import tax, on originating goods.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its import taxes on originating goods in accordance with the provisions of Annex 1 to this Article.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article are not intended to:
(a) prohibit a Party from increasing an import tax on originating goods to a level no higher than that established in the Reduction Schedule, when previously that Party had unilaterally reduced that import tax to a level lower than that established in that schedule;
(b) prevent a Party from increasing an import tax on originating goods when that increase is authorized as a result of a GATT dispute settlement procedure between those Parties.
(c) prevent a Party from creating a new tariff breakdown or split, provided that the import tax applicable to the corresponding originating goods is not greater than that applicable to the broken or split tariff code.
Unless otherwise provided, this Agreement incorporates the previously negotiated tariff preferences between the Parties, the regional tariff preference (PAR) for the tariff universe and the extension of the PAR between Mexico and Venezuela, as reflected in the Agreement. annex 1 to this article. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the preferences previously negotiated or granted between the Parties within the framework of ALADI shall be without effect.
For purposes of deducting import taxes in accordance with this article, the transition tariff rates or tariffs will be approximated downwards, at least to the nearest tenth of a percent or, if the tariff rate is expressed in monetary units, at least least to the nearest .001 of the official monetary unit of the Party.
In addition to the provisions of Annex 2 to this Article, at the request of any Party, the Commission will hold consultations to examine the possibility of accelerating the deduction of import taxes for one or more goods or of including one or more goods in the Program of Deduction and will make the pertinent recommendations to the Parties. Once the corresponding legal requirements have been met, the accelerated relief of import taxes on a good that is achieved for two or more Parties will prevail over any import tax or relief period for that good between those Parties. The inclusion of assets in the Reduction Program that is achieved between two or more Parties will begin to govern those assets between those Parties once the corresponding legal procedures are fulfilled.
Article 3-05 : Customs valuation.
Except as provided in the annex to this article, the customs value of an imported good shall be determined in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code.
The taxable base on which import taxes will be applied to goods imported from another Party shall not be the value of a good produced in the territory of the importing Party, nor an arbitrary or fictitious value.
In accordance with article 13 of the Customs Valuation Code, if in the course of determining the customs value of imported goods it is necessary to delay the final determination of that value, the importer may withdraw them from customs if, when so requires, provides sufficient security in the form of a bond or, if the importer so chooses, by other means of security provided by the law of the Party. The guarantee will cover the payment of taxes to which the goods may ultimately be subject.
Each Party will establish the appropriate documentation to prove that the customs value is correct, which will not be greater than what can reasonably be requested to comply with the provisions of Article VII of the GATT.
The guarantee granted under the terms of paragraph 3 will be released within a period not to exceed twenty business days from the date on which the importer delivers the appropriate documentation to the customs authority, unless the customs authority itself has initiated the exercise of their powers of verification or verification.
Each Party may determine, in accordance with paragraph 3, the goods imported from another Party that will be subject to the aforementioned guarantee when the customs value declared by the importer is less than the estimated price determined by the customs authority of the importing Party with based on antecedents of transaction values ​​previously obtained and analyzed.
Before adopting the estimated price referred to in paragraph 6, the Party shall communicate to the other Parties the description of the good, its tariff fraction, the estimated price that it intends to establish and the reasons on which it is based to adopt the measure.
The Parties understand that the estimated price referred to in paragraph 6 shall not be considered as the base price for the determination of import taxes.
Article 3-06: Temporary importation of goods.
Each Party shall authorize the temporary importation free of import tax or with suspension of payment thereof, at least for the goods listed below, which are imported from another Party, regardless of their origin and whether they are in the territory of the Party importer similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes are available:
a) professional equipment necessary for the exercise of the activity, trade or profession of a business person;
b) equipment for the press or for the broadcast of radio or television signals and cinematographic equipment;
c) goods imported for sporting purposes or intended for exhibition or demonstration, including components, auxiliary devices and accessories; Y
d) commercial samples and publicity films.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party may subject the temporary importation free of import tax or with suspension of payment thereof, of a good of the type indicated in paragraph 1, literals a), b) or c), to any of the following conditions, without additional conditions being able to be adopted:
a) that are introduced by natural or legal persons legally established in the Party, or by nationals of another Party;
b) that the property is used exclusively by the person who enters temporarily or under his personal supervision, in the performance of his activity, trade or profession;
c) that the property is not sold or leased or transferred in any other way while it remains in its territory;
d) that the temporary importation is guaranteed by a bond or other guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be caused by the final importation of the good, which will be released at the time of re-exportation;
e) that the good is susceptible to identification when re-exported;
f) that the good is re-exported upon departure of the person or within a term that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation, which may not exceed in any case six months extendable to nine months;
g) that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use; Y
h) that the good is re-exported in the same form in which it was imported.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation free of import tax or with suspension of payment thereof, of a good of the type indicated in paragraph 1, literal d) to any of the following conditions , without the possibility of adopting additional conditions:
a) that the good is imported only for the purpose of obtaining orders for goods or services that are supplied from the territory of another Party or from another country that is not a Party;
b) that the property is not subject to sale or lease and is used only for demonstration or exhibition while it remains in its territory;
c) that the good is susceptible to identification when re-exported;
d) that the good be re-exported within a term that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of temporary importation, which may not exceed in any case six months, extendable to nine months; Y
e) that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use.
When a good that is imported temporarily free of import duty pursuant to paragraph 1 fails to meet any of the conditions that a Party imposes pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3, that Party may require payment of import duty and any other charge that would be caused by the definitive importation of the good.
Article 3-07 : Import of samples without commercial value.
Each Party shall authorize the importation free of import duty of samples without commercial value originating from another Party.
Article 3-08: Temporary flexibility levels for certain goods classified in chapters 51 to 63 of the Harmonized System
Until December 31, 1999, the Parties indicated in the annex to this article shall grant to goods classified in chapters 51 to 63 of the Harmonized System that comply with the provisions of article 6-19, the preferential treatment corresponding to originating goods established in the Reduction Program, in accordance with the provisions of that annex.
Section D - Non-tariff measures
Article 3-09: Import and export restrictions.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of another Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of another Party, except as provided in GATT Article XI, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, in all circumstances in which any other type of restriction exists, the establishment of minimum export and import prices, except as permitted for the application of sanctions and commitments regarding antidumping duties and quotas or countervailing duties.
In cases where a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import of goods from a non-Party or on the export of goods destined for a non-Party, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed in the sense of preventing:
a) limit or prohibit the importation of the goods of the country that is not a Party, from the territory of another Party; either
b) require as a condition for the export of goods to the territory of another Party, that they not be directly or indirectly re-exported to the country that is not a Party, without being processed or manufactured in the territory of the other Party in a way that gives rise to a substantial change in the value, form or use thereof or to the production of another good.
In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a good from a country that is not a Party, at the request of either Party, they shall consult in order to minimize undue interference or distortion in the pricing, marketing and distribution mechanisms in another Party.
Paragraphs 1 to 4 shall not apply to the measures set out in the annex to this article.
Article 3-10: Customs duties.
Neither Party shall increase or establish any customs duty for the service provided by customs on originating goods and shall eliminate such duties on originating goods within 5 and a half years after the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 3-11: Export taxes.
Except as provided in this Article, no Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, levy or charge on the export of a good to the territory of another Party, unless they are adopted or maintained on the export of that good to the territory of all other Parties. , and that good, when it is destined for internal consumption.
Each Party may maintain or adopt any tax, levy or charge on the export of the essential goods listed in Annex 1 to this Article, their ingredients, or the goods from which these food products are derived, if such tax , lien or charge is adopted or maintained for the export of those goods to the territory of all other Parties, and is used:
a) so that the benefits of a domestic food assistance program that includes such food are received only by consumers in the Party applying that program; either
b) to ensure the availability of sufficient quantities of the food good for internal consumption, or of sufficient quantities of its ingredients or of the goods from which those food goods are derived for a national processing industry, when the internal price of that food good is maintained below the world price as part of a government stabilization program, provided that such taxes, levies or charges do not have the effect of increasing the protection granted to that national industry, and are maintained only for the period necessary to maintain the integrity of that program.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party may adopt or maintain a tax, levy or charge on the export of any food good to the territory of another Party if such tax, levy or charge is applied temporarily to alleviate a critical shortage of that nutritional good. For purposes of this paragraph, "temporarily" means up to one year, or a longer period agreed by all Parties.
Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 2 to this Article.
Article 3-12: Marking of country of origin.
The annex to this article shall apply to measures related to country of origin marking.
Section E - Publication and communication
Article 3-13: Publication and communication.
Neither Party shall apply before its official publication any measure of a general nature that has the effect of increasing an import tax or other charge on the importation of goods from another Party or the exportation of goods destined for another Party, or that imposes a new or most burdensome measure, restriction or prohibition for the aforementioned imports or exports or for the transfers of funds related to them.
At the request of one Party, another Party will identify, in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them in accordance with the Harmonized System, the measures, restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of goods for reasons of national security, public health, preservation flora or fauna, the environment, phytosanitary and zoosanitary standards, technical standards, labeling, international commitments, public order requirements or any other regulation.
CHAPTER III: National treatment and market access for goods
Annex to Article 3-03: Exceptions to Article 3-03
Colombian Measures
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-03, Colombia reserves the departmental monopoly on the production of liquors and the faculty of the departments to establish taxes on the importation of liquors from other departments or countries.
Article 3-03 shall not apply to measures adopted by Colombia regarding the export or import of energy goods when they are necessary to ensure compliance with a constitutional provision.
For the purposes of paragraph 2, those described in paragraph 2 of Section B of the annex to article 3-09 are considered as energy goods.
Annex 1 to article 3-04: Tax Reduction Program
Except as otherwise provided in this Annex or elsewhere in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its import taxes on originating goods in ten equal stages, as follows:
a) the first reduction will take place on January 1, 1995; Y
b) the residual import tax will be eliminated in nine equal annual stages as of July 1, 1996, so that these goods will be free of import tax as of July 1, 2004.
The rebate described in paragraph 1 shall be applied from the import tax that is specified in the "base rate" column of the list of each Party in the Rebate Schedule.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax applicable to originating goods included in a tariff item marked with the code "P" in the schedule of a Party to the Program of Deduction will be the lesser of:
a) the import tax resulting from applying paragraphs 1 and 2; either
b) 4.4% ad valorem .
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax applicable to originating goods included in a tariff item marked with the code "R" in the schedule of a Party to the Program of Deduction will be the lesser of:
a) the import tax resulting from applying paragraphs 1 and 2 from an import tax of 10% ad-valorem ; either
b) the import tax specified in the "base rate" column.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax applicable to originating goods included in a tariff item marked with the code "B" in the schedule of a Party in the Program of Tax relief will be eliminated in five equal stages according to the following:
a) the first reduction will take place on January 1, 1995; Y
b) the residual import tax will be eliminated in four equal annual stages beginning on July 1, 1996, so that these goods will be free of import tax as of July 1, 1999.
Notwithstanding Article 3-04 and paragraphs 1 and 2, and in accordance with Article 5-04 and Annex 2 to Article 3-04, a Party may adopt or maintain import taxes in accordance with its obligations. and rights derived from GATT, on the goods included in a tariff fraction identified with the code "EXCL" in the list of a Party in the Reduction Program until the moment in which the contrary is agreed between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty. For goods included in a tariff item identified with the code "EXCL" and which, according to the list of a Party in the Reduction Program and paragraph 7, is not identified with the code "PAR",
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 6, the following shall apply to originating goods included in a tariff item identified with the code "PAR" in the list of a Party in the Tariff Reduction Program:
a) Mexico will apply a tariff preference of 28% on that proportion of the current import tax that is expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the imported good ( ad-valorem ), but in no case on that proportion of the current import tax that is Express in monetary units per unit of measure; either
b) Colombia and Venezuela will apply a tariff preference of 12% on that proportion of the current import tax that is expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the imported good ( ad-valorem ), but in no case on that proportion of the current import tax that is expressed in monetary units per unit of measure.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the import tax on originating automotive goods included in the tariff headings marked with the code "M" in the list of a Party in the Program of Deduction will be applied according to the following:
a) before December 31, 2006, as long as there is no agreement in the Automotive Sector Committee in accordance with chapter IV, the import tax applicable to originating goods will be the one specified in the base rate column or, if it exists, the specified in parentheses after the "M" code for each tariff item in the schedule of a Party to the Reduction Schedule;
b) before December 31, 2006 and after, where appropriate, there is an agreement in the Automotive Sector Committee in accordance with chapter IV, the import tax applicable to originating goods will be eliminated in equal annual stages between the date after December 1 § January 1997 determined by that Committee and December 31, 2006, from the base rate specified for each tariff fraction in the "base rate" column of the list of a Party in the Reduction Program; Y
c) As of January 1, 2007, these goods shall be free of import tax, unless the Parties agree to a longer period pursuant to Article 4-04.
The provisions of paragraph 8 shall not apply to originating goods that are not automotive goods.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter VI, in cases where there is no equal tariff treatment between the Parties for the same originating good, in order to determine the import tax applicable by a Party, the following shall apply:
a) Colombia will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with its list in the Tax Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than minor processing, has been carried out in the territory of Mexico.
b) Venezuela will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with its list in the Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than minor processing, has been carried out in the territory of Mexico.
c) Mexico will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with the "Colombia" column of its list in the Tariff Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than processing, has been carried out in the territory of Colombia. minor.
d) Mexico will apply the provisions of this annex in accordance with the "Venezuela" column of its list in the Tariff Reduction Program to originating goods for which the last substantial production process, other than processing, has been carried out in the territory of Venezuela. minor.
For the purposes of paragraph 10, minor processing will include, among others, the following:
a) simple dilution in water or another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the good;
b) cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings;
c) application of preservative or decorative coatings, including lubricants, preservative or decorative paint, or metallic coatings;
d) trimming or roughing small amounts of excess materials;
e) unloading, loading or any other operation necessary to keep the good in good condition;
f) packaging, repackaging, packaging, repackaging or filling of containers in small doses;
g) test, mark, separate, or classify;
h) ornamental or finishing operations incidental to the production of a textile good, the purpose of which is to improve the commercial appeal or ease of care of a product, such as dyeing and printing, embroidery and application of engravings or markings, hemming, pleats or darts, stone or acid wash, permanent press, or sew-on accessories and ornaments;
For the purposes of paragraph 10, production shall be understood as established in article 6-01.
Section A - Colombia Tariff Reduction Schedule [in PDF format, 667 KB]
Section B - Mexico Tariff Reduction Schedule [in PDF format, 1.5 MB]
Section C - Venezuela Tariff Reduction Schedule [in PDF format, 735 KB]
Annex 2 to article 3-04
If the Parties reach an agreement regarding the rules of origin for goods classified in heading 39.03 of the Harmonized System in accordance with the provisions of section C of the annex to article 6-19, they must agree on the tax relief schedule for those goods, which may not exceed 10 years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
If Venezuela and Mexico reach an agreement regarding the rules of origin applicable between them for goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System in accordance with the provisions of Section B of the annex to article 6-19, they must agree on the calendar tax relief for those goods, which may not exceed 10 years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
Annex to Article 3-05: Customs Valuation
Colombia may value a good imported from another Party, for a period of five and a half years from the entry into force of this Agreement, on the basis of official minimum prices established based on:
a) the prices of exclusive distributors or importers of the main brands, communicated to the Directorate of National Taxes and Customs; either
b) international databases, international stock exchanges or specialized magazines on the subject, or other available public sources, when it is not possible to obtain international prices from exclusive distributors or importers of the main brands;
For the purposes set forth in paragraph 1, the following requirements shall be met:
a) that the prices determined in accordance with paragraph 1, literal a) have been consularized in the exporting country and certified by a chamber of commerce of the exporting country;
b) that the prices determined in accordance with paragraph 1, literals a) and b);
i) are obtained based on the average of the most recent quotes from the sources mentioned in paragraph 1, literals a) and b);
ii) are based on FOB prices, port of shipment, country of origin;
iii) have been verified with international sources of recognized reputation;
c) that they be published, through the National Tax and Customs Directorate of Colombia and by means of a resolution; Y
d) that the other Parties be informed, in advance, of the official minimum prices that will enter into force for trade between the Parties.
Annex to article 3-08: Temporary flexibility levels for goods classified in chapters 51 to 63 of the Harmonized System.
As long as they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Mexico will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Reduction Program to goods classified in chapters 51 to 60 of the Harmonized System produced in Colombia, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 1 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 1.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 2 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 2.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Provided that they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Mexico will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Reduction Program for goods classified in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System produced in Colombia, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 3.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 4 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 4.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Provided that they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Colombia will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Reduction Program to goods classified in chapters 51 to 60 of the Harmonized System produced in Mexico, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 1 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 1.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 2 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 2.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Provided that they comply with the provisions of section A of the annex to article 6-19, Colombia will apply the preferential tariff rate corresponding to originating goods established in the Tariff Reduction Program to goods classified in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System produced in Mexico, up to the annual amounts specified below:
a) 3 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1995;
b) 3.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1996;
c) 4 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1997;
d) 4.5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1998; Y
e) 5 million US dollars from January 1 to December 31, 1999.
Colombia and Mexico may not allocate more than 20% of the total amount for each year referred to in paragraphs 1 and 4 to goods classified in the same heading of the Harmonized System.
As of January 1, 2000, the goods referred to in article 3-08 must comply with the corresponding rule of origin established in the annex to article 6-03.
The Parties will grant the tariff preferences established in the Tariff Reduction Program to the goods referred to in article 3-08 that exceed the amounts determined in paragraphs 1 to 4, provided they comply with the specific rule of origin established in the annex to the article 6-03.
Annex to Article 3-09: Exceptions to Article 3-09
Section A - Colombian Measures
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, Colombia may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods. However, Colombia will not prohibit or restrict the temporary importation of used goods, when they are imported to provide cross-border services in accordance with Annex 2 to Article 10-02, or to fulfill a contract in accordance with Chapter XV, as long as the imported goods :
a) are necessary for the provision of the cross-border service or for the performance of the contract awarded to a supplier of another Party;
b) are used exclusively by the service provider or by the supplier that fulfills the contract, or under their supervision;
c) are not subject to sale, lease or loan while they remain in the territory of Colombia;
d) are imported in quantities not greater than what is necessary for the provision of the service or the fulfillment of the contract;
e) are promptly re-exported at the conclusion of the service or contract;
f) comply with the other requirements applicable to the importation of such goods to the extent that such requirements are compatible with this Agreement;
g) comply with the other purposes established in article 3-06 of this chapter.
Article 3-09 shall not apply to measures adopted by Colombia regarding the export or import of energy goods when necessary to ensure compliance with a Colombian constitutional provision.
For the purposes of applying this article, those described in paragraph 2 of Section B of this annex will be considered as energy goods.
Section B - Measures of Mexico
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods. However, Mexico will not prohibit or restrict the temporary importation of used goods, when they are imported to provide cross-border services in accordance with Annex 2 to Article 10-02, or to fulfill a contract in accordance with Chapter XV, as long as the imported goods :
a) are necessary for the provision of the cross-border service or for the performance of the contract awarded to a supplier of another Party;
b) are used exclusively by the service provider or by the supplier that fulfills the contract, or under their supervision;
c) are not subject to sale, lease or loan while they remain in the territory of Mexico;
d) are imported in quantities not greater than what is necessary for the provision of the service or the fulfillment of the contract;
e) are promptly re-exported at the conclusion of the service or contract;
f) comply with the other requirements applicable to the importation of such goods to the extent that such requirements are compatible with this Agreement;
g) comply with the other purposes established in article 3-06 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods described in the following headings and subheadings of the Harmonized System.
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
Heading or Description
subheading

27.07 Oils and other products of the distillation of
             high temperature coal tars; products
             analogues in which the aromatic constituents
             predominate by weight over non-aromatics.
27.09 Crude petroleum oils or oils from bituminous minerals.
27.10 Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals, except
             crude oils; preparations not expressed nor
             included elsewhere, containing oils
             of petroleum or bituminous minerals, by weight,
             greater than or equal to 70% and in which these oils
             are the base element.
27.11 Petroleum gas and other gaseous hydrocarbons.
27.12 Vaseline, paraffin, microcrystalline petroleum wax,
             slack wax, ozokerite, lignite wax,
             peat and other mineral waxes and similar products
             obtained post synthesis or by other procedures,
             even colored.           
27.13 Petroleum coke, petroleum bitumen
             and other residues of petroleum oils
             or bituminous minerals.
27.14 Bitumens and natural asphalts; slates and sands
             bituminous; asphaltites and asphaltic rocks.
2901.10 Saturated acyclic hydrocarbons.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods described in the following headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System.
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
Heading or Description
subheading

8407.34 Reciprocating Type Piston Engines
               of those used for the propulsion of vehicles
               of chapter 87, of Displacement Greater than 1,000 cm3.
8701.20 Road Tractors for Semi-trailers.
87.02 Motor Vehicles for Transportation
               of Ten or More People.
87.03 Passenger Cars and Other Motor Vehicles
               Mainly Designed for the Transportation of
               Persons (Except those of Item 8702), Including
               Vehicles of the Family Type ("Break" or "Station  
               Wagon") and those of Racing.    
87.04 Motor Vehicles for Transportation
               of Goods.
8705.20 Automobile Trucks for Surveys or Perforations.
8705.40 Concrete Mixer Trucks.
87.06 Chassis of Motor Vehicles of the
               Items 8701 to 8705, Equipped with its Engine.

Section C - Measures of Venezuela
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Venezuela may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods. However, Venezuela will not prohibit or restrict the temporary importation of used goods, when they are imported to provide cross-border services in accordance with Annex 2 to Article 10-02, or to fulfill a contract in accordance with Chapter XV, as long as the imported goods :
a) are necessary for the provision of the cross-border service or for the performance of the contract awarded to a supplier of another Party;
b) are used exclusively by the service provider or by the supplier that fulfills the contract, or under their supervision;
c) are not subject to sale, lease or loan while they remain in the territory of Venezuela;
d) are imported in quantities not greater than what is necessary for the provision of the service or the fulfillment of the contract;
e) are promptly re-exported at the conclusion of the service or contract;
f) comply with the other requirements applicable to the importation of such goods to the extent that such requirements are compatible with this Agreement;
g) comply with the other purposes established in article 3-06 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Venezuela may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of the following items of the Harmonized System:
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
Heading or Description
subheading

27.05 Coal gas, water gas, producer gas and similar gases,
             excluding petroleum gas and other hydrocarbons
             gaseous
27.06 Coal, lignite, peat and other tars
             mineral tars, including dehydrated or  
             beheaded, and reconstituted.
27.07 Oils and other products of the distillation of
             high temperature coal tars; products
             analogues in which the aromatic constituents  
             predominate by weight over non-aromatics.
27.08 Pitch and pitch coke from coal tar or other
             mineral tars.
27.09 Crude petroleum oils or oils from bituminous minerals.
27.10 Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals, except
             crude oils; preparations not expressed nor  
             included elsewhere, containing oils  
             of petroleum or bituminous minerals, by weight,
             greater than or equal to 70% and in which these oils
             are the base element.
27.11 Petroleum gas and other gaseous hydrocarbons.
27.12 Vaseline, paraffin, microcrystalline petroleum wax,
             slack wax, ozokerite, lignite wax, peat wax
             and other mineral waxes and similar products obtained
             by synthesis or by other procedures, including
             colored.
27.13 Petroleum coke, petroleum bitumen and other residues
             of petroleum oils or bituminous minerals.
27.14 Bitumens and natural asphalts; slates and sands  
             bituminous; asphaltites and asphaltic rocks.            
27.15 Bituminous mixtures based on asphalt or bitumen,
             natural, petroleum bitumen, mineral tar,  
             or pitch, mineral tar (for example: mastics  
             bituminous and cutbacks ).
Annex 1 to article 3-11: Basic necessities
Section A - Colombia's basic necessities
For the purposes of paragraph 2 of Article 3-11, for Colombia, "essential goods" means:
Vegetable oil
Rice
Vetch
Sugar
Coffee
Chicken meat
boneless beef
bighead onion
Onion branch
Beer
Chocolate
Beans
Cornmeal
Egg
pasteurized milk
Milk powder
Corn
Vegetable and animal butter
brown sugar
father
pasta
Cheese
Salt
Tomatoes
Carrot

Section B - Basic necessities of Mexico
For purposes of paragraph 2 of Article 3-11, for Mexico, "essential goods" means:
Vegetable oil
Rice
Canned tuna
White sugar
brown sugar
Steak or meat pulp
soluble coffee
Toasted coffee
ground beef
Beer
packaged chilli
powdered chocolate
chicken concentrate
Bean
popular sweet cookies
Pretzels
jellies
Cornmeal
Wheat flour
Cow liver
Oats flakes
Egg
Cooked ham
Condensed milk
Milk powder
Powdered milk for children
Evaporated milk
pasteurized milk
Vegetable shortening
Margarine
corn dough
White bread
Box bread
Pasta for soup
tomato puree
bottled soft drinks
patch with bone
Salt
canned sardine
Corn tortilla

Section C - Goods of First Necessity of Venezuela
For the purposes of paragraph 2 of Article 3-11, for Venezuela, "essential goods" means:
Wheat flour or semolina for industrial and domestic use
pasta
Rice
Cornmeal
Canned sardines
Milk powder
pasteurized milk
Whole and sliced ​​chicken
chicken eggs
Standing pork
Vegetable oil
household sugar
white cheeses
Baby formula
legumes
Balanced animal feed
Coffee
Salt
Margarine
fertilizers
3rd class toilet paper. and 4th. category
essential medicines
Annex 2 to article 3-11: Exceptions to article 3-11
Section A - Colombian Measures
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-11, Colombia may maintain the stabilization fund mechanism for agricultural products for export.
Colombia may maintain taxes or charges on the export of goods described in the following headings or tariff fractions:
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
Item Description
or fraction 

1701.11.10.00 Brown sugar
09.01 Coffee
2701.12.00.10/90 Coal
2709.00.00.00 Crude oil
2711.11.00.10/90 Natural gas
7202.60.00.00 Ferronickel
Section B - Measures of Mexico
Mexico may maintain its current tax on the export of goods described in tariff section 4001.30.02 of the Tariff of the General Export Tax Law for up to 10 years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Annex to Article 3-12: Country of Origin Marking
For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
final buyer: the last person who, in the territory of the importing Party, acquires the good in the form in which it was imported. This buyer is not necessarily the final user of the good.
common container: the container in which the good usually arrives at the final purchaser.
Each Party may require that a good from another Party imported into its territory bear a country of origin mark that indicates the name of the country of origin to the final buyer of the good.
Each Party may require, among its general consumer information measures, that an imported good bear the country of origin mark in the manner prescribed for goods of the importing Party.
By adopting, maintaining and applying any country of origin marking measure, each Party shall minimize the difficulties, costs and inconvenience that such measure may cause to the trade and industry of the other Parties.
Each part:
a) accept any reasonable method of marking a good of another Party, such as the use of adhesive or pressure labels, tags or paint, which ensures that the mark can be seen with ordinary handling of the good or container, which is susceptible to be easily read and remain on the property until it reaches the final purchaser unless intentionally removed;
b) exempt from the origin marking requirement a good of another Party that;
i) is not capable of being marked;
ii) cannot be marked prior to export to the territory of another Party without damaging it;
iii) cannot be marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, so as to discourage its export to the territory of the Party;
iv) cannot be marked without material impairment of its operation or substantial deterioration of its appearance;
v) is in a container marked in such a way that the origin of the good is reasonably indicated to the final buyer;
vi) is raw material;
vii) will be produced in the territory of the importing Party, by the importer or on its behalf, in such a way that the good becomes the good of the importing Party;
viii) due to its nature or the circumstances of its importation, the final buyer can reasonably know its country of origin, even if it is not marked;
ix) has been produced for at least twenty years prior to its importation;
x) has been imported without the required marking and cannot be marked afterwards except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, provided that the omission of marking was not for the purpose of circumventing the country of origin marking requirements ;
xi) is in transit, in guarantee or at the disposal of the customs authority, for purposes of its temporary importation free of tax or with suspension of payment thereof; either
xii) is an original work of art.
With the exception of the goods described in paragraph 5, literal b), numerals vi, vii, viii, ix, xi, and xii, a Party may provide that when a good is exempt from the country of origin marking requirement, in accordance with paragraph 5, literal b), the common outer container is marked so as to indicate the country of origin of the merchandise it contains.
Each Party shall provide that:
a) a common container that is imported empty, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but the container in which the common container is imported may be required to be marked with the country of origin of its content; Y
b) a full common container, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but may be required to be marked with the name of the country of origin of its content, unless its content is already marked and the container can be easily opened for inspection, or the marking of the contents is clearly visible through the container.
Whenever legally and administratively feasible, each Party shall allow the importer to mark a good of a Party after it is imported, but before it is released from the control or custody of customs authorities, unless the importer has committed repeated violations of the requirements of country of origin marking of the Party and has previously been informed that the good must be marked prior to importation.
Each Party shall provide that, except for importers who have been notified in accordance with paragraph 8, no special assessment or penalty shall be imposed for failure to comply with that Party's country of origin marking requirements, unless the Goods are withdrawn from the control or custody of the customs authorities without having been adequately marked, or misleading marks have been affixed to them.
The Parties shall cooperate and consult with each other on matters related to this Annex, including additional exemptions from the country of origin marking requirement.
CHAPTER IV: Automotive Sector
Article 4-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
model-year: the period from November 1 of one year to October 31 of the next.
Integral buses: vehicles without a chassis (frame) and with an integrated body, intended for the transport of more than 16 people, including the driver, and which are classified under heading 8702 (self-supporting buses).
automotive goods: the goods that are classified in annexes 1 and 2 to article 4-02.
trucks and tractor-trailers of more than 15 tons of gross vehicle weight: vehicles with a chassis (frame) for the transport of goods, with a gross vehicle weight of 15,000 kilograms or more and that are classified in subheading 8701.20 or in heading 8704.
gross vehicle weight: the actual weight of the vehicle expressed in kilograms, added to its maximum load capacity according to the manufacturer's specifications and its full fuel tank.
used motor vehicle: a vehicle:
a) sold, leased or lent;
b) handled by more than:
i) 200 kilometers, in the case of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of less than five tons;
ii) 2,000 kilometers, in the case of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight equal to or greater than five tons; either
c) manufactured prior to the current model year and that at least sixty days have elapsed from the date of manufacture.Article 4-02: Scope of application.
The provisions of this chapter apply only to automotive goods that are classified in the tariff codes specified in annex 1 to this article and to automotive goods that are classified in the tariff codes specified in annex 2 to this article, provided that these The latter are used in the automotive goods referred to in annex 1 to this article.
In the event of any inconsistency between any provision of this chapter and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 4-03: Automotive Sector Committee.
The Parties create the Automotive Sector Committee, made up of representatives of the Parties. The Committee will be advised by representatives of the private sector.
It will correspond to the Committee:
a) Submit to the Commission at the end of the first year from the entry into force of this Agreement, a proposal on:
i) a cleared exchange mechanism that promotes trade in this sector;
ii) a methodology for the definition of the origin of automotive goods, taking into account the criteria of change of tariff classification or regional content value, as well as its percentage;
iii) any modification to the scope of application of this chapter; Y
iv) any acceleration in the reduction of import taxes on automotive goods, taking into account the differences in the degree of development of the automotive industries located in the territory of each Party.
b) analyze the evolution of commercial exchange in the automotive sector and propose to the Commission the mechanisms that lead to a better development of this sector;
c) analyze the policies of the automotive industry applied by each Party and make the pertinent recommendations to the Commission in order to achieve the elimination of barriers to trade and a greater economic complementation of this sector; Y
d) ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and make the recommendations it deems pertinent to the Commission.
Article 4-04: Elimination of import taxes.
Each Party shall eliminate its import taxes on trucks and tractor-trailers of more than 15 tons of gross vehicle weight and on integral buses originating in a Party in accordance with the following:
a) may maintain the base tariff rates or tariffs established in Annex 1 to Article 3-04 during the two years following the entry into force of this Agreement; Y
b) will eliminate them in eleven equal annual reductions as of January 1, 1997, to be completely eliminated as of January 1, 2007.
Each Party shall eliminate its import taxes on automotive goods originating in the other Parties not included in paragraph 1, not before January 1, 1997, in accordance with the following:
a) If the Commission reaches an agreement regarding the provisions of Article 4-03, paragraph 2, letter a), numerals i) and ii), the Parties shall eliminate the base tariff rates or tariffs established in Annex 1 to Article 3-04 in equal annual stages from the date determined by the Commission, in such a way that those base tariff rates or tariffs are completely eliminated on January 1, 2007; either
b) If the Commission does not reach an agreement regarding the provisions of Article 4-03, paragraph 2, letter a), numerals i) and ii), the Parties may maintain the base tariff rates or tariffs established in Annex 1 to article 3-04, but will completely eliminate them on January 1, 2007, unless the Parties agree to a longer term.
Article 4-05: Rules of origin.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the annex to article 6-03 and article 6-19, for the goods dealt with in annexes 1 and 2 to article 4-02, the rules of origin established in Resolution 78 of the Committee on Representatives of ALADI, as long as the Parties do not agree on different rules of origin for the aforementioned goods, in accordance with the provisions of article 4-03, paragraph 2, literal a), numeral ii).
Article 4-06: Performance requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 3-03 and 17-04, the Parties may maintain or modify the performance requirements for the automotive industry.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, the Parties may adopt or maintain import permit measures to administer the requirements referred to in paragraph 1.
The Parties shall eliminate the measures referred to in paragraph 2 no later than January 1, 2007.
Article 4-07 : Used automotive goods.
The Parties may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used motor vehicles and other used, rebuilt or refurbished motor goods. These assets are excluded from the Tax Reduction Program.
Article 4-08: Extension of the PAR.
In the event that a Party grants the PAR to a non-Party country, it will extend it to the other Parties under the same access conditions.
Annex 1 to article 4-02
The provisions of Chapter IV apply to goods that are classified in any of the following tariff codes of the Harmonized System:
8701.20
8702
8703 (excludes subheading 8703.10)
8704 (excludes subheading 8704.10)
8705
8706
8716.31
8716.39
8716.40
Annex 2 to article 4-02
The provisions of Chapter IV apply to goods that are classified in any of the following tariff codes of the Parties and that are intended for use in goods classified in Annex 1 to Article 4-02.
Mexico Colombia Venezuela

4009 4009 4009
4010.10 4010.10 4010.10
4011.10 4011.10 4011.10
4011.20 4011.20 4011.20
4011.91 4011.91 4011.91
4011.99 4011.99 4011.99
4012 4012 4012
4013.10 4013.10 4013.10
4016.93 4016.99.20 4016.99.20
4016.99 4016.99.40 4016.99.40
4504.10.02 4504.90.20 4504.90.20
4504.90.99 6813 6813
6813 7007.11 7007.11
7007.11 7009.10 7009.10
7009.10 7320.10 7320.10
7320.10 7320.20.10 7320.20.10
7320.20.04 8301.20 8301.20
7320.20.99 8302.10.10 8302.10.10
8301.20 8302.30 8302.30
8302.10.02 8407.31 8407.31
8302.30 8407.32 8407.32
8407.31 8407.33 8407.33
8407.32 8407.34 8407.34
8407.33 8408.20 8408.20
8407.34 8409.91 8409.91
8408.20 8409.99 8409.99
8409.91 8413.30 8413.30
8409.99 8413.50/1 8413.50/1
8413.30 8414.30.40 8414.30.40
8413.50/1 8414.80.10 8414.80.10
8413.60.02 8414.90/2 8414.90/2
8413.60.05 8415.82.10 8415.82.10
8414.30 8415.83.10 8415.83.10
8414.80 8421.23 8421.23
8414.90/2 8421.29 8421.29
8415.82.02 8421.31 8421.31
8415.83.02 8421.39.90/3 8421.39.903/5
8421.23 8421.99 8421.99
8421.29 8424.89.10 8424.89.10
8421.31 8425.42 8425.42
8421.39.09/5 8425.49 8425.49
8421.99 8431.10/4 8431.104
8425.42 8481.80.30 8481.80.30/6
8425.49 8482 8482
8431.10/6 8483 8483
8481.80 8484 8484
8482 8485.90.20 8485.90.20
8483 8501.32.10 8501.32.10
8484 8501.32.30 8501.32.30
8485.90.01 8503/5 8503/7
8501.32.99 8507 8507
8503/7 8511 8511
8507 8512.20 8512.20
8511 8512.30 8512.30
8512.20 8512.40 8512.40
8512.30 8512.90 8512.90
8512.40 8527.21 8527.21
8512.90 8527.29 8527.29
8527.21 8539.10 8539.10
8527.29 8539.21 8539.21
8539.10 8539.29.10 8539.29.10
8539.21 8544.30 8544.30
8539.29 8547.10.10 8547.10.10
8544.30 8707 8707
8547.10.02 8708 8708
8707 8716.90 8716.90
8708 9025.10.20 9025.10.20
8716.90 9025.10.40 9025.10.40
9025.19.01 9025.90.10 9025.90.10
9025.90.01 9025.90.20 9025.90.20
9026.10.02 9026.10.10 9026.10.10
9026.20 9026.10.20 9026.10.20
9026.90 9026.20.10 9026.20.10
9029.20 9026.90.10 9026.90.10
9104 9026.90.20 9026.90.20
9401.20 9029.20 9029.20
9401.90 9104 9104
                    9401.20 9401.20
                    9401.90 9401.90

/one. For brake master hydraulic cylinders only.
/2. Only parts for automotive goods of subheading 8414.30 and 8414.80.
/3. For catalytic converters only.
/4. Only for automotive goods of subheading 8425.42 and 8425.49
/5. Only the parts for automotive goods of the Mexican tariff fraction 8501.32.06 and of the Colombian tariff fractions 8501.32.10 and 8501.32.30.
CHAPTER V : Agricultural sector and phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures
Section A - Agricultural Sector
Article 5-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, it shall be understood as:
tariff-quota: the one that is established by applying a certain rate or tariff rate to imports of a good up to a certain amount (amount within the quota) and a higher rate to imports of that good that exceed that amount (surplus of the fee).
sugar:
a) for imports to Mexico, the goods included in the following tariff fractions of the Mexican General Import Tax Law Tariff: 1701.11.01, 1701.11.99, 1701.12.01, 1701.12.99, 1701.91 (except those that contain flavorings), 1701.99.01 and 1701.99.99;
b) for imports to Colombia and Venezuela, the goods included in the following tariff sections of their respective Customs Tariff: 1701.11.10, 1701.11.90, 1701.12.00, 1701.91.00 and 1701.99.00.
good of the agricultural sector: good included in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System:
a) Chapters 1 to 24, except fish and fish products; Y
b) the goods included in the following headings or subheadings.
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
heading or description
subheading   

2905.43 mannitol
2905.44 sorbitol
33.01 essential oils
35.01 to 35.05 Albuminoidal substances, starch-based products
                  or modified starch
3809.10 dressings and finishing products
3823.60 sorbitol nos
41.01 to 41.03 hides and skins
43.01 raw fur
44.01 to 44.07 wood
50.01 to 50.03 raw silk and silk waste
51.01 to 51.03 wool and animal hair
52.01 to 52.03 Seed cotton, cotton waste and cotton           
                  carded or combed
53.01 raw linen
53.02 raw hemp
53.03 to 53.05 jute, sisal, coconut and abaco fibers

fish and fish products: fish or crustacean, mollusc or any other aquatic invertebrate, marine mammal and its derivatives, included in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System:
Descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
chapter, description
heading or subheading

03 fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other invertebrates
             aquatic
05.07, antlers, horns, ivory, marine mammals, marine mammals,
             hooves, hooves, nails, claws and beaks, and products thereof
05.08 coral and similar products
05.09 natural sponges of animal origin
05.11 fish products or crustaceans, molluscs or any other
             invertebrate marine; the dead animals of chapter 3
15.04 Fats or oils and their fractions, of fish or mammals
             marine
16.03 Extracts and juices other than meat
16.04 Prepared or preserved fish
16.05 Prepared or preserved crustaceans or molluscs and others
             marine invertebrates
2301.20 meals, feed, fish pellets
export subsidy:
a) the granting, by a government or a public body, to a branch of production, to producers of a good in the agricultural sector, to a cooperative or other association of such producers, to a marketing council or to any other type of company, direct subsidies, including payments in kind, subject to export performance;
b) the sale or placement for export, by a government or by a public body, of non-commercial stocks of goods from the agricultural sector at a price lower than the comparable price charged for a similar good to buyers in the domestic market;
c) payments for the export of goods in the agricultural sector financed by virtue of government measures, regardless of whether or not such payments imply a charge in the public budget, including those financed from income derived from a lien imposed on the property of the agricultural sector in question or to the good of the agricultural sector from which the exported good is obtained;
d) the granting of subsidies to reduce the marketing costs of exports of goods from the agricultural sector, except generally available services in the area of ​​export promotion and advice, including handling costs, and the costs of international transport and freight ;
e) the costs of transportation and internal freight of export shipments, established or imposed by a government in more favorable terms than for internal shipments; either
f) subsidies for goods in the agricultural sector subject to their incorporation into exported goods.
Article 5-02: Scope of application.
This section applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party related to trade in goods from the agricultural sector.
In the event of any inconsistency between any provision of this section and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this section shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 5-03: Intergovernmental Agreements.
A Party, before adopting a measure under an intergovernmental agreement on an agricultural sector good under GATT Article XX(h) that may affect trade in an agricultural sector good between the Parties, shall consult with the other Parties to avoid the annulment or impairment of a concession granted by that Party in its Reduction Schedule.
Article 5-04: Access to markets.
The Parties will facilitate access to their respective markets by reducing or eliminating import and export barriers in the reciprocal trade of goods from the agricultural sector, such as: import restrictions, import taxes, and technical and quality standards. agricultural marketing.
The Parties renounce the use of quantitative restrictions on imports, price bands or price stabilization mechanisms and variable tariffs for the goods included in the Tariff Reduction Program in their reciprocal trade, without prejudice to the provisions of Annex 1 to this article.
The Parties exempt from the Reduction Program the goods of the agricultural sector in accordance with annex 2 to this article.
Once a year from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Agricultural Trade Committee established in article 5-10, will review the possibility of incorporating into the Reduction Program the goods of the agricultural sector contained in annex 2 to this article. and will make the pertinent recommendations to the Parties. This incorporation can be done in accordance with the methodologies described in Annex 1 to this article.
The trade of goods included in annexes 3 and 4 to this article will be governed by the provisions of the same.
Article 5-05: Special Safeguards.
Mexico and Venezuela may, according to their list contained in the Reduction Program, maintain or adopt a special safeguard in the form of tariffs-quota on a good of the agricultural sector that is included in their section of the annex to this article. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-04, a Party may not apply a duty rate or tariff on the excess quota under a special safeguard that exceeds the lesser of the following:
a) the most favored nation rate or tariff in effect at the entry into force of this Agreement; Y
b) the most favored nation rate or tariff prevailing at that time.
With respect to the same good of the agricultural sector and to the same Party, no Party may simultaneously apply a rate or tariff rate on the surplus of the quota in accordance with paragraph 1 and adopt a safeguard measure provided for in Chapter VIII.
Article 5-06: Refund of import taxes on products exported in identical or similar conditions.
As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party may refund the amount of import taxes paid, nor exempt or reduce the amount of import taxes owed, in relation to any good of the agricultural sector imported into its territory that is:
a) replaced by a good of the agricultural sector of that Party, identical or similar, subsequently exported to the territory of another Party;
b) substituted by a good of the agricultural sector of that Party, identical or similar used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of another Party.
Article 5-07: Internal Support Measures.
The Parties recognize the existence of internal support measures for the agricultural sector and that these measures can distort trade and affect production. In addition, they recognize that commitments on the reduction of internal support may arise in the multilateral negotiations on agriculture within the framework of the GATT. Therefore, when a Party decides to support its agricultural producers, it shall endeavor to move towards domestic support policies that:
a) have no or minimal distorting effects on trade or production; either
b) are exempt from any commitment to reduce internal support that could be negotiated under the GATT.
Any Party may modify its domestic support measures, including those that may be subject to reduction commitments, in accordance with its rights and obligations under the GATT.
Article 5-08: Export subsidies.
The Parties share the objective of achieving the multilateral elimination of export subsidies for goods in the agricultural sector and will cooperate in the effort to reach agreements within the GATT framework.
The Parties will gradually eliminate export subsidies for agricultural sector goods included in the Reduction Program as follows:
a) from the incorporation into the Tax Reduction Program of a good from the agricultural sector, the Parties may maintain the export subsidy prevailing the year prior to its incorporation for up to three years;
b) from the fourth year after the good of the agricultural sector has been incorporated into the Tax Reduction Program, the corresponding export subsidies will be eliminated in equal stages until they reach zero when the tax relief for that good ends.
Once the tax relief has ended, neither Party may maintain or introduce export subsidies for goods from the agricultural sector in their reciprocal trade. Likewise, the Parties renounce the rights that the GATT confers on them to use export subsidies of goods from the agricultural sector in their reciprocal trade, as well as the rights regarding the use of these subsidies that could result from multilateral negotiations on agricultural matters in the GATT framework.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, a Party may, if so requested by another Party and there is an agreement between both, adopt or maintain an export subsidy for a good in the agricultural sector that is exported to that other Party.
Article 5-09: Technical standards and agricultural marketing.
The Parties create an Agricultural Technical and Marketing Standards Working Group made up of representatives of each of them, which will meet annually or as agreed. The Working Group will review the application and effects of the technical or marketing standards for goods in the agricultural sector that affect trade between the Parties, and will recommend possible solutions to the issues that may arise in relation thereto. This Group will present a report to the Committee on Agricultural Trade after each meeting.
Each Party shall grant to goods imported from another Party a treatment no less favorable than that granted to its goods in the application of technical or commercialization standards to goods of the agricultural sector in the aspects of packaging, grades, quality and size of the goods.
Article 5-10: Committee on Agricultural Trade.
The Parties create a Committee on Agricultural Trade, made up of representatives of each Party.
It will correspond to the Committee:
a) monitoring and fostering cooperation to apply and administer this chapter;
b) the establishment of a forum for the Parties to consult on aspects related to this chapter;
c) submitting an annual report to the Commission on the implementation of this section.
The Committee will meet at least once a year and when so agreed.
Section B - Phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures
Article 5-11: Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, it shall be understood as:
animal: among others, domestic animals, fish and wildlife;
good: animals, plants, their products and by-products.
contaminant: among others, residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs and other foreign substances.
disease: the more or less serious alteration of the animal body.
risk assessment: an assessment of:
a) the probability of introduction, establishment and spread of a pest or disease and the possible biological and economic consequences;
b) the probability of adverse effects to human and animal life or health from the presence of an additive, contaminant, toxin, or disease-causing organism in a food or feed.
scientific information: data or information derived from the use of scientific principles and methods.
phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure: a measure, including a criterion related to the final good; a process or production method directly related to the good; a test, inspection, certification, or approval procedure; a relevant statistical method; a sampling procedure; a risk assessment method; a packaging and labeling requirement directly related to food safety; and a quarantine regime, such as a relevant requirement associated with the transport of animals or plants, or with material necessary for their survival during transport, that a Party adopts, maintains or applies to:
a) protect animal life and health and plant health in its territory from the risks arising from the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease;
b) protect human and animal life and health in their territory from risks arising from the presence of an additive, contaminant, toxin or disease-causing organism in food or feed;
c) protect human life and health in its territory from risks arising from an organism that causes disease or a pest carried by an animal or plant or a derivative thereof; either
d) prevent or limit other damage in its territory from the introduction, establishment and spread of a pest or disease.
adequate level of phytosanitary or zoosanitary protection: the level of protection that the Party that establishes the phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure deems appropriate to protect the life or health of people and animals or to preserve plant health in its territory.
international standard, guideline or recommendation: a standard, guideline or recommendation, relating to:
a) food safety, established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, including that related to product spoilage, prepared by the Codex Alimentarius Committee on Fish and Fishery Products, food additives, contaminants, hygienic practices and methods analysis and sampling;
b) animal health and zoonoses, prepared under the auspices of the International Office of Epizootics;
c) plant health, prepared under the auspices of the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention; Y
d) what is established by other international organizations agreed upon by the Parties or developed in accordance with those organizations.
pest: without limitation , any living state of any insect, mite, nematode, slug, snail, protozoan, or other invertebrate animal, bacteria, fungus, other parasitic plant or reproductive part thereof, virus, mycoplasma, weed, or any similar organism or the same associated with any of the above or any infectious substance that may directly or indirectly cause damage to plants or animals or their products or by-products.
approval procedure: any registration, communication or any other mandatory administrative procedure.
control or inspection procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine whether a phytosanitary or animal health measure is being complied with, including sampling, testing, inspection, evaluation, verification, monitoring, auditing, evaluation of the application of phytosanitary and animal health measures , accreditation, registration, certification, other procedures that involve the physical examination of a good, its packaging or the equipment or facilities directly related to the production, commercialization or use of the good. Approval procedures are excluded from this definition.
transport: among others, the means of mobilization, the form of packaging and the mode of transportation.
vegetable: among other crops of economic, scientific, medicinal, ornamental and wild flora interest.
zone: a country, part of a country, parts of several countries, or all parts of several countries.
area of ​​low pest or disease prevalence: an area in which a specific pest or disease occurs at low levels.
pest or disease free zone: an area in which a specific pest or disease is not present.
Article 5-12: Scope of application.
In order to establish a framework of disciplines and rules that guide the development, adoption, and compliance of phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures, the provisions of this section apply to any such measure that, when adopted by a direct Party or indirectly, may affect trade between the Parties.
This section applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party related to trade in goods from the agricultural sector.
In the event of any inconsistency between any provision of this section and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this section shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 5-13: Right to adopt phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures.
Each Party may, in accordance with this section, adopt, apply or maintain any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure necessary for the protection of human, animal and plant health and life in its territory. The measure may be stricter than an international standard, guideline or recommendation.
Article 5-14: Right to set the level of protection.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, each Party may, in order to protect human, animal and plant health and life, set its appropriate levels of protection, in accordance with the provisions of Article 5-22.
Article 5-15: Scientific principles.
Each Party shall ensure that any phytosanitary or animal health measure it adopts, applies or maintains:
a) is based on scientific principles, taking into account, where appropriate, relevant factors, such as different geographical conditions;
b) is not maintained when there is no longer a scientific basis to support it; Y
c) is based on a risk assessment appropriate to the circumstances that gave rise to it.
Article 5-16: Non-discriminatory treatment.
Each Party shall ensure that a phytosanitary or animal health measure it adopts, applies or maintains does not arbitrarily or unreasonably discriminate between its goods and similar goods of another Party, or between goods of another Party and similar goods of any other country, when phytosanitary conditions exist. or identical or similar animal health.
Article 5-17: Unnecessary obstacles.
Each importing Party shall ensure that any phytosanitary or animal sanitary measure it adopts, applies or maintains is put into practice only to the degree necessary to achieve its appropriate level of protection, taking into account technical and economic feasibility.
Article 5-18: Covert restrictions.
No Party may adopt, apply or maintain any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure that has the purpose or consequence of creating a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 5-19: Action of non-governmental organizations.
Each Party shall ensure that any non-governmental body that it relies on for the application of a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure acts in a manner consistent with this section.
Article 5-20: International standards and international standardization organizations.
Without reducing the level of protection of human, animal and plant health and life, each Party shall use, as a basis for its phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures, international standards, guidelines or recommendations, in order to make them equivalent or, when corresponds, identical to those of the other Parties.
A phytosanitary or animal health measure of a Party that is equal to an international standard, guideline or recommendation shall be considered consistent with Articles 5-13 to 5-19. A measure by a Party that provides a level of phytosanitary or animal health protection different from that which would be achieved by a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation is not, for that reason alone, considered inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
Nothing in paragraph 1 shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting, applying, or maintaining, in accordance with the other provisions of this section, a phytosanitary or animal health measure that is stricter than the international standard, guideline, or recommendation. relevant.
When a Party has reason to assume that a phytosanitary or animal health measure of another Party affects or may adversely affect its exports, and the measure is not based on relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, it may request to be informed of the reasons for the measure and the other Party will inform in writing within a period of forty days.
Each Party shall participate, to the fullest extent possible, in relevant international standard-setting organizations, including the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the International Office of Epizootics, and the International Plant Protection Convention, for the purpose of promoting the development and periodic review of international standards, guidelines and recommendations.
Article 5-21: Equivalence.
Without reducing the level of protection of human, animal and plant health and life, the Parties shall seek, to the greatest extent possible and in accordance with this section, the equivalence of their respective phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures.
The importing Party:
a) treat a phytosanitary or animal sanitary measure adopted, applied or maintained by an exporting Party as equivalent to its own when the exporting Party, in cooperation with the importing Party, provides it with scientific or other information, in accordance with quality assessment methods; risks agreed by the Parties, to objectively demonstrate, in accordance with subparagraph b), that the measure of the exporting Party achieves the appropriate level of protection of the importing Party;
b) may, when there is a scientific basis for it, determine that the measure of the exporting Party does not reach the level of protection that the importing Party deems appropriate; Y
c) provide the exporting Party in writing, upon request, with its reasons for a finding in accordance with subparagraph b).
For the purpose of establishing equivalence between the measures, the exporting Party, at the request of the importing Party, shall adopt the mechanisms available to it to facilitate access to its territory for purposes of inspection, testing and other pertinent procedures.
The Parties may consider, when developing a phytosanitary or animal health measure, the relevant existing or proposed phytosanitary or animal health measures of the Parties.
Article 5-22: Risk assessment and adequate level of protection.
Each Party shall take into account, when carrying out a risk assessment:
a) relevant risk assessment methods and techniques developed by international standard-setting organizations;
b) relevant scientific information;
c) relevant production, processing, handling and packaging methods;
d) suitable methods of inspection, sampling and testing;
e) the existence of pests or diseases that must be taken into account, including the existence of pest- or disease-free areas, and areas of low prevalence of these, recognized by the Parties;
f) ecological and other environmental conditions that need to be considered; Y
g) the quarantine measures and applicable treatments that satisfy the importing Party, such as quarantines, chemical and physical treatments, destruction, reshipment and others accepted by the Parties.
In addition to paragraph 1, in establishing its appropriate level of protection in relation to the risk associated with the introduction, establishment, or spread of an animal or plant pest or disease, and in assessing the risk, each Party shall also take into account account, where relevant, of the following economic factors:
a) loss of production or sales that could be a consequence of the pest or disease;
b) costs of control or eradication of the pest or disease in its territory; Y
c) the cost-effectiveness of other options to limit risks.
Each Party, in establishing its appropriate level of protection:
a) take into account the objective of minimizing negative effects on trade; Y
b) will avoid, in order to achieve consistency in the practical application of the concept of adequate level of protection, making arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions, under different circumstances, that may cause arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against a good of another Party or constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 and Article 5-15, letter c), when carrying out a risk assessment a Party concludes that the corresponding scientific information available or other information is insufficient to After completing the assessment, it may adopt a provisional phytosanitary or animal health measure, based on available pertinent information, such as that from international standard-setting organizations and the other Parties' phytosanitary or animal health measures. The Party shall conclude the evaluation within a period of sixty days from the date sufficient information is presented to it to complete it, review the provisional measure and, when appropriate, modify it.
An importing Party may achieve its appropriate level of protection through the application of phytosanitary and animal health measures immediately or gradually. When the application of this last modality is requested by one Party, the other may grant such application or make specific exceptions, taking into account the export interests of the requesting Party.
Article 5-23: Adaptation to regional conditions.
Each Party shall adapt any of its phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures related to the introduction, establishment or spread of an animal or plant pest or disease, to the phytosanitary or zoosanitary characteristics of the area where a good subject to such measure is produced and the area in which it is produced. its territory to which the good is destined, taking into account the pertinent conditions, including those related to the transportation and handling of cargo between those zones. When evaluating such characteristics of an area, taking into account whether it is an area free of pests or diseases and can be conserved as such, or it is an area with a low prevalence of these, each Party shall take into account, among other factors:
a) the prevalence of pests or diseases in that area;
b) the existence of eradication or control programs in that area; Y
c) any relevant standard, guideline or recommendation.
In addition to the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party, when establishing whether an area is an area free of pests or diseases, or an area of ​​low prevalence of these, shall base its opinion on factors such as geographic conditions, ecosystems, surveillance epidemiological and the effectiveness of phytosanitary or zoosanitary controls in that area.
Each importing Party shall recognize that an area in the territory of the exporting Party is, and may be conserved as, a pest-free or disease-free area or an area of ​​low pest prevalence, where the exporting Party provides the importing Party with scientific or of another class sufficient to demonstrate it to the satisfaction of the importing Party. To this end, each exporting Party shall allow the importing Party, upon request, access to its territory for inspection, testing, and other pertinent procedures.
Each Party, taking into account any relevant conditions, including those related to the transportation and handling of cargo, may, in accordance with this section:
a) adopt, apply or maintain a different risk assessment procedure for an area free of pests or diseases than for an area of ​​low pest or disease prevalence; Y
b) make a different determination for the disposition of a good produced in an area free of pests or diseases than for one produced in an area of ​​low prevalence of these.
When adopting, applying or maintaining a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure in relation to the introduction, establishment or spread of an animal or plant pest or disease, each Party shall grant to a good obtained in a pest or disease free zone in the territory of another Party , a treatment no less favorable than that granted to a good obtained in an area free of pests or diseases in another country that presents the same level of risk. The Party shall use equivalent risk assessment techniques to assess relevant conditions and controls in the pest or disease free zone and in the area adjacent to that zone, and shall take into account any relevant conditions, including those related to transport and storage. load.
Each importing Party shall seek agreement with the exporting Party, upon request, on specific requirements compliance with which allows a good obtained in an area of ​​low pest or disease prevalence in the territory of an exporting Party to be imported into the territory of the importing Party. .
Article 5-24: Control, inspection and approval procedures.
Each Party, in relation to any control or inspection procedure that it carries out:
a) initiate and conclude the procedure in the most expeditious manner possible and no less favorable for an asset of the other Party than for a similar asset of the Party or of any other country;
b) will publish the normal duration of the procedure or communicate to whoever requests it, the expected duration of the procedure;
c) ensure that the competent body:
i) upon receipt of an application, promptly examine the documentation for completeness and inform the applicant accurately and fully of any insufficiencies;
(ii) as soon as possible, convey to the applicant the results of the procedure accurately and completely, so that the applicant can take any necessary corrective action;
iii) when the request is insufficient, continue, as far as possible, with the procedure if the requester so requests; Y
iv) report, at the request of the applicant, on the status of the application and the reasons for any delay;
d) limit the information that the applicant must present to that necessary to carry out the procedure;
e) will grant to the confidential or reserved information that derives from the conduct of the procedure for an asset of the other Party or that is presented in relation to it:
i) treatment no less favorable than for an asset of the Party; Y
(ii) in any case, treatment that protects the legitimate business interests of the applicant to the extent provided by the law of that Party;
f) limit to what is reasonable or necessary any requirement regarding individual specimens or samples of a property;
g) by carrying out the procedure, it shall not impose a duty that is greater for a good of another Party than is equitable in relation to any duty it charges on its own goods or on the goods of any other country, taking into account the costs communication, transportation and other related costs;
h) will use criteria to select the location of the facilities where the procedure is carried out, in such a way that it does not cause inconvenience to an applicant or his representative;
i) use criteria to select samples of goods that do not cause unnecessary inconvenience to an applicant or his representative; Y
j) in the case of a good that has been modified after the determination that it complies with the requirements of the applicable phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure, it will limit the procedure to what is necessary to establish that it continues to comply with the requirements of that measure.
When a phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of the importing Party requires carrying out a control or inspection procedure at the production stage, the exporting Party shall adopt, at the request of the importing Party, the measures available to facilitate access to its territory and shall provide the necessary assistance to facilitate the importing Party to carry out its control or inspection procedure.
The Parties will apply, with the necessary modifications, regarding their approval procedures, the pertinent provisions of paragraph 1, letters a) to h).
An importing Party that maintains an approval procedure may require that its authorization for the use of an additive, or the establishment of a tolerance level for a contaminant in a food or feed, be obtained in accordance with that procedure, before granting approval. access to their domestic market to a food or feed that contains that additive or contaminant. When that Party so requires, it may authorize a relevant international standard, guideline or recommendation, as a basis for granting access to such assets until it completes the procedure.
Article 5-25: Communication, publication and provision of information.
When proposing the adoption or modification of a phytosanitary or animal health measure of general application in their respective territories, each Party:
a) at least 60 days in advance, publish a notice and communicate to the other Parties of its intention to adopt or modify that measure, when it is not a law, and publish and provide to the other Parties the full text of the proposed measure, in a way that allows interested parties to become familiar with the proposal;
b) will identify in the notice and in the communication the good to which the measure would be applied, and will include a brief description of the objective and the reasons for it;
c) provide a copy of the proposed measure to any Party or any interested party that so requests and, where possible, identify any provision that deviates materially from relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations; Y
d) without discrimination, allow other Parties and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, discuss them and take into account the results of those discussions.
Through appropriate measures, each Party shall seek to ensure, with respect to any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of a competent authority of a state or department, or of a municipality of that Party:
a) That the notice and communication of the type required in paragraph 1, literals a) and b) be made at an appropriate initial stage, prior to its adoption; Y
b) that the provisions of paragraph 1, letters c) and d) be observed.
When a Party considers it necessary to address an urgent problem related to plant or animal health protection, it may omit any of the steps set out in paragraphs 1 or 2 provided that, once a phytosanitary or animal health measure has been adopted:
a) notify the other Parties immediately, in accordance with the requirements established in paragraph 1, letter b), including a brief description of the emergency;
b) deliver a copy of the measure to any of the Parties or interested parties who so request; Y
c) allow, without discrimination, the other Parties and interested parties to submit comments in writing and, upon request, discuss them and take into account the results of those discussions.
Each Party shall allow, except when necessary to deal with an urgent problem referred to in paragraph 3, a reasonable period of time to elapse between the publication of a phytosanitary or animal sanitary measure of general application and the date of its entry into force, with the in order to allow time for the interested parties to adapt to the measure.
Each Party shall designate a governmental authority responsible for the implementation, in its territory, of the communication provisions of this article and shall communicate it to the other Parties. When a Party designates two or more government authorities for this purpose, it shall provide the other Parties with complete and unambiguous information on the scope of responsibilities of those authorities.
When an importing Party denies entry into its territory to a good of another Party because it does not comply with a phytosanitary or animal health measure, the importing Party shall provide, upon request, a written explanation to the exporting Party, identifying the corresponding measure. as well as the reasons why the good does not comply with that measure.
Article 5-26: Information centers.
Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one information center capable of answering all reasonable questions from the other Parties and interested parties, as well as providing relevant documentation in relation to:
a) any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure of general application, including any control or inspection procedure, or approval, proposed, adopted or maintained in its territory;
b) the Party's risk assessment processes and the factors it takes into consideration in conducting the assessment and in establishing its appropriate level of protection;
c) the Party's membership and participation in international and regional phytosanitary and animal health agencies and systems, and in bilateral and multilateral agreements within the scope of this section, as well as the provisions of those agencies, systems, or agreements; Y
d) the location of notices published pursuant to this section, or where such information may be obtained.
Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with the provisions of this section, when another Party or an interested party requests copies of documents, they are provided at a price no higher than their internal sale price, in addition to the cost of shipping.
Article 5-27: Technical cooperation.
Each Party, at the request of another Party, shall facilitate the provision of technical advice, information and assistance, under mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen phytosanitary and animal health measures and related activities with that other Party, including research, processing technologies, infrastructure and the establishment of national regulatory bodies. Such assistance may include credits, grants, and funds for the acquisition of technical skills, training, and equipment that will facilitate the Party's adjustment to and compliance with a Party's phytosanitary or animal health measure.
Each Party, at the request of another Party:
a) provide that Party with information on its technical cooperation programs concerning phytosanitary or zoosanitary measures in areas of particular interest; Y
b) may consult with that Party, during the elaboration of any phytosanitary or zoosanitary measure, or prior to the adoption of that measure or a change in its application.
Article 5-28: Limitations on the provision of information.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a Party to provide any information the disclosure of which it believes would impede compliance with its laws, be contrary to the public interest, or be detrimental to any legitimate business interest.
Article 5-29: Committee on Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Measures.
The Parties create a Committee on Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Measures, made up of representatives of each Party with responsibilities in phytosanitary and zoosanitary matters.
Each Party, when designating its representatives, will communicate it to the other Parties. When a Party designates more than one representative for this purpose, it shall provide the other Parties with complete and unambiguous information on the scope of responsibilities of those representatives.
The Committee will facilitate and encourage:
a) expedited consultations on specific phytosanitary or animal health matters;
b) the activities of the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this section, particularly the provisions of Articles 5-20 and 5-21;
c) technical cooperation between the Parties, including cooperation in the development, application and enforcement of phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures; Y
d) improvement of phytosanitary and zoosanitary conditions in the territory of the Parties.
The committee:
a) seek, to the greatest extent possible, the assistance of relevant international standard-setting organizations, in order to obtain available scientific and technical advice and to minimize duplication of effort in the exercise of its functions;
b) may establish the modalities, which it deems appropriate, for the coordination and expeditious solution of matters that are referred to it, among others:
i) draw on experts and expert organizations; Y
ii) establish working groups and determine their objectives and fields of action;
c) will comply with the instructions of the Commission;
d) report annually to the Commission on the application of this section; Y
e) will meet at least once a year, unless otherwise agreed.
Article 5-30: Technical consultations.
A Party may request consultations with another Party on any issue covered by this section.
Each Party may use the good offices of relevant international standard-setting organizations, including those mentioned in Article 5-20, for advice and assistance on phytosanitary and animal health matters within the framework of their respective mandates.
A Party that asserts that a phytosanitary or animal sanitary measure of another Party is inconsistent with this section will have to prove that inconsistency.
When the Parties involved have resorted to consultations facilitated by the Committee, they will constitute, if they so agree, the consultations provided for in Chapter XIX.
Annex 1 to article 5-04: Methodology for the incorporation of goods from the agricultural sector to the Tax Reduction Program.
For the goods of the agricultural sector described in paragraph 1 of annex 2 to article 5-04 that, at the time of the meetings provided for in article 5-04, paragraph 4, are subject to a prior import license or permit in Colombia or Mexico , the Tariff Reduction Program for Colombia and Mexico may be developed through a tariffication methodology in which a minimum access and an equivalent tariff are negotiated. The tax relief term of the latter may not exceed ten years from the incorporation of the asset to the Tax Relief Program.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph:
a) If Mexico tariffifies a good in the agricultural sector on the basis of the most favored nation in the GATT after having incorporated it into the Tariff Elimination Program, Colombia and Venezuela will be entitled to the best treatment between the most favored nation in the GATT and the one that these countries have agreed to the incorporation made in accordance with paragraph 1;
b) If Colombia tariffifies a good in the agricultural sector on the basis of the most favored nation in the GATT after having incorporated it into the Tariff Elimination Program, Mexico will be entitled to the best treatment between the most favored nation in the GATT and the one that this country has. according to the incorporation made pursuant to paragraph 1.
If a good of the agricultural sector included in paragraph 1, of annex 2 to article 5-04, is tariffied prior to the meetings provided for in article 5-04, paragraph 4 on the basis of the most favored nation rate or tariff in the GATT, its incorporation into the Tariff Reduction Program in this Agreement will be done as follows:
a) In the case of prior import permits from Mexico, by negotiating a minimum access and an equivalent tariff for Colombia and Venezuela and a reduction that does not exceed ten years from the incorporation of the good into the Reduction Program ;
b) In the case of prior import licenses from Colombia, by negotiating a minimum access and an equivalent tariff for Mexico and a reduction that does not exceed ten years from the date of incorporation into the Reduction Program.
For the goods of the agricultural sector included in paragraph 2, of annex 2, to article 5-04 that, at the time of the meetings provided for in article 5-04, paragraph 4, are subject to price bands or price stabilization programs In Colombia and Venezuela, the Tax Reduction Program for Colombia and Venezuela with respect to Mexico may be developed through the total reduction of both the rate or tariff applicable to the most favored nation for that good of the agricultural sector at the time of its incorporation into the Program of Deduction, such as the variable tariff rate or tariff applicable according to the stabilization system in force in Colombia and Venezuela on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.The reduction will be made in a term not to exceed ten years from the incorporation of the asset to the Reduction Program.
If a good of the agricultural sector included in paragraph 2 of annex 2 to article 5-04, is tariffied on the basis of the most favored nation rate or tariff in the GATT, prior to the meetings provided for in article 5-04 , paragraph 4, its incorporation into the Reduction Program will be made using the most favored nation rate or tariff applicable the day prior to tariffication and the average of the variable tariff rates or tariffs applicable during the sixty months prior to tariffication or, if their validity is less, during the term that they have been applicable in Colombia and Venezuela prior to the tariffication, through a reduction that does not exceed ten years from the incorporation of the good to the Reduction Program.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 5, if at the time of the incorporation of a good of the agricultural sector in the Tariff Reduction Program, the treatment that results from the tariffication that has been carried out in accordance with paragraph 5, turns out to be a better treatment for Mexico than the mechanism provided in paragraph 4, Mexico will be entitled to the rate or tariff resulting from the tariffication which will be eliminated through a reduction that does not exceed ten years from the incorporation of the good to the Reduction Program.
For the goods of the agricultural sector included in paragraph 3, of annex 2 to article 5-04, the Reduction Program will be applied by means of the elimination of the import tax, immediately or in a term that does not exceed ten years from from the date on which it is incorporated into the Tax Reduction Program. The Party that incorporates the good into the Reduction Program, prior agreement between the Parties, may make use of a tariff-quota type safeguard, as long as it does not exceed ten years. The quota will be subject to the import tax that would correspond to it according to the Reduction Program. The excess of the quota will be subject to an import tax that will not exceed the most favored nation rate or tariff applicable for that good of the agricultural sector,
In any case, for the goods subject to a prior import license in Colombia included in the Colombian list in paragraph 1 of annex 2 to article 5-04, their incorporation into the Reduction Program may only be done in accordance with paragraph 1 or 3.
The Parties shall establish the rules of origin for the goods of the agricultural sector described in Annex 2 to Article 5-04, at the time of their incorporation into the Reduction Program.
Annex 2 to article 5-04: Assets Excluded from the Reduction Program.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, Colombia and Mexico may maintain their prior import licenses or permits for the following goods in the agricultural sector:
Prior permits from Mexico
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
Fraction Description

Annex 3 to Article 5-04: Trade in sugar
The Parties create a Sugar Analysis Committee made up of the Secretary of Commerce and Industrial Development and the Secretary of Agriculture and Hydraulic Resources on behalf of Mexico, by the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Foreign Trade on the part of Colombia and by the Minister of Agriculture and Breeding and the President of the Institute of Foreign Trade on behalf of Venezuela or by whom they designate. Its function will be to seek an agreement by consensus on sugar trade between the Parties.
The Committee will seek, within the six months following the entry into force of this Agreement, to define the participation of sugar originating in and coming from Colombia and Venezuela in the tariff-quota that Mexico undertakes, in case of agreement by consensus in the Committee, to be adopted within the two years following the entry into force of this Treaty. The Committee will also define the mechanism by which sugar originating in and coming from Mexico will participate in the Colombian and Venezuelan markets, respectively.
The Committee will seek to obtain an agreement between the Parties regarding the size of the quota and its distribution between Colombia, Venezuela and Central America, without prejudice to the commitments that Mexico has with third countries in commercial agreements, including the Free Trade Agreement of North America and the agreements derived from the Uruguay Round of the GATT. In the event that Mexico is not an importer of sugar in a particular year, the quota will be zero, therefore, for that year there will be no concession of preferential access for Colombia and Venezuela.
For the establishment of the tariff-quota for sugar by Mexico described in paragraph 2 and, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 5-04, paragraph 2, Mexico may maintain its rights and obligations under the GATT. In addition, and notwithstanding the provisions of article 5-04 paragraph 2 and the preferential access to sugar that would be granted to Mexico by Colombia and Venezuela, in the event of an agreement in the Committee, they may maintain the mechanism of price bands for sugar. prices or price stabilization.
In case the Committee reaches an agreement:
a) the minimum tariff preference for sugar will be equivalent to the PAR;
b) the assets included in annex 4 to article 5-04 will continue definitively in the Reduction Program.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 5, in the event that the Committee does not reach an agreement:
a) The Parties will not grant any preferential concession of access to sugar in their reciprocal trade nor will there be any commitments derived from this annex, therefore sugar will form part of the list of exclusions as follows:
i) for Colombia and Venezuela those mentioned in paragraph 2 of annex 2 to article 5-04; Y
ii) for Mexico, the one mentioned in paragraph 3 of annex 2 to article 5-04.
b) the goods included in annex 4 to article 5-04, will be excluded from the Tax Reduction Program and the most favored nation rate or rate or the preferential rate or rate will be applied to them if there is a tariff preference on these goods before the entry into force of this Agreement and will be included in the list of exclusions in paragraph 3 of Annex 2 to Article 5-04.
The Committee, within the period indicated in paragraph 2, shall submit a report to the Commission.
Annex 4 to article 5-04: Temporary incorporation into the Tax Reduction Program
Subject to the provisions of Annex 3 to Article 5-04, the Parties shall deduct, as of the entry into force of this Agreement, the goods of the agricultural sector included in paragraph 4 in the following manner:
a) in the following 6 years, the tariff rate or rate applicable on that date will be reduced by a total of 15% proportionally and in equal stages;
b) from the seventh to the tenth year, the tariff preference achieved at the end of the sixth year will be maintained;
c) from the eleventh to the fifteenth year, the applicable rate or tariff rate in accordance with literal b) will be reduced linearly in equal stages until it is totally eliminated.
From the eleventh to the fourteenth year, the Parties may adopt a special safeguard in the form of a tariff-quota for the goods included in paragraph 4 as follows:
a) In the eleventh year, the corresponding rate or tariff rate will be applied according to the Deduction Program to the amount established in literal b), corresponding to the amount within the deduction quota. From the twelfth to the fourteenth year that amount will increase by 10% annually;
b) the amount within the quota will be equal to the imports of the good in question, originating and coming from that Party in the tenth year plus 10%. In the event that imports originating in and coming from that Party have not been registered in the tenth year, the amount will be the average of said imports made from the sixth to the ninth year. If this average is zero, the Agricultural Trade Committee will set an amount in the last fifteen days of the tenth year;
c) the importing Party may apply the tariff rate or rate corresponding to the tenth year to the surplus of the quota.
With respect to the same property and the same Party, no Party may simultaneously:
a) apply a rate or tariff rate on the surplus of the quota in accordance with paragraph 2, literal c); Y
b) adopt a safeguard measure provided for in Chapter VIII.
The following goods will be temporarily included in the Reduction Program:
Temporary inclusions of Mexico
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
Fraction Description
Annex to article 5-05: Goods of the agricultural sector subject to special safeguards
Assets of the Mexican agricultural sector subject to safeguards by Venezuela.
The corresponding descriptions are provided for reference purposes only.
CHAPTER VI: Rules of origin
Article 6-01: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
fungible goods: goods that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical, and it is impractical to distinguish them by simple visual examination from one another.
non-originating good or non-originating material: a good or a material that does not qualify as originating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more Parties:
a) minerals extracted in the territory of one or more Parties;
b) products of the vegetable kingdom, harvested in the territory of one or more Parties;
c) live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or more Parties;
d) goods obtained from hunting or fishing in the territory of one or more Parties;
e) goods such as fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained from the sea by ships registered, enrolled, flagged or reputed as such, by any of the Parties, according to their legislation, through modalities such as affiliation, lease or charter;
f) Goods produced on board factory ships of any of the Parties, from the goods identified in literal e), provided that such factory ships are registered, enrolled, flagged or reputed as such, by any of the Parties, according to its legislation, through modalities such as affiliation, leasing or chartering;
g) property obtained by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;
h) waste and scrap derived from:
i) production in the territory of one or more Parties; either
ii) used goods, collected in the territory of one or more Parties, provided that such goods serve only for the recovery of raw materials; and
i) goods produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties exclusively from the goods mentioned in subparagraphs a) to h) or their derivatives, at any stage of production.
shipping containers and packaging materials: goods that are used to protect a good during transportation, other than retail containers and materials.
total cost: in relation to a good, the sum of the following elements, in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article:
a) the cost or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;
b) the cost of direct labor used in the production of the good; Y
c) a reasonable amount for direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the good.
FOB: free on board (LAB).
place where the producer is located: in relation to a good, the production plant of that good.
material: a good used in the production of another good.
self-made material: a material produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good.
fungible materials: materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical.
indirect material: a good used in the production, testing or inspection of a good, but not physically incorporated into the good; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of a good, including:
a) fuel and power;
b) tools, dies and molds;
c) spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;
d) lubricants, greases, compound materials and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;
e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;
f) equipment, devices and attachments used for the verification or inspection of the goods;
g) catalysts and solvents; Y
h) any other good that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be part of that production.
intermediate material: self-produced materials used in the production of a good, and designated in accordance with article 6-07.
related person: "link between people" as established in article 15.4 of the Customs Valuation Code.
production: the growing, extracting, harvesting, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or assembling of a good.
producer: a person who grows, mines, harvests, fishes, hunts, manufactures, processes, or assembles a good.
used: employed or consumed in the production of goods.
transaction value of a good: the price paid or payable for a good related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 thereof, without considering that the good is sold for export.
transaction value of a material: the price paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 thereof, without considering that the material is sold for export.
Article 6-02: Interpretation and application.
For the purposes of this chapter:
a) the basis of tariff classification is the Harmonized System;
b) the determination of the transaction value of a good or a material will be made in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code;
c) when applying the Customs Valuation Code to determine the origin of a good:
i) the principles of the Customs Valuation Code will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications that circumstances require, as they would be applied to international ones; Y
ii) the provisions of this chapter and chapter VII, will prevail over the Customs Valuation Code, in that in which they are incompatible;
d) for purposes of the definition of transaction value of a good established in article 6-01, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good;
e) For purposes of defining the transaction value of a material established in article 6-01, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the supplier of the material, and the buyer referred to in the Valuation Code Customs will be the producer of the good;
f) all costs mentioned in this chapter shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced; Y
g) The provisions of Articles 6-10 and 6-11 shall prevail over the specific rules of origin indicated in the annex to Article 6-03.
Article 6-03: Original goods.
A good shall originate in the territory of a Party when:
a) is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more Parties as defined in Article 6-01;
b) is produced in the territory of one or more Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Article;
c) is produced in the territory of one or more Parties from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements as specified in the annex to this article and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;
d) is produced in the territory of one or more Parties from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification and other requirements, and meets a regional value content requirement, as specified in the annex to this article, as well as with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;
e) is produced in the territory of one or more Parties and complies with a regional value content requirement as specified in the annex to this article, as well as with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;
f) except for goods included in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System, is produced in the territory of one or more Parties, but one or more of the non-originating materials used in the production of the good do not comply with a change in tariff classification because:
i) the good has been imported into the territory of a Party without assembly or disassembly, but has been classified as an assembled good in accordance with General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System; either
(ii) the heading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and that heading is not divided into subheadings or the subheading is the same for both the good and its parts;
provided that the regional content value of the good, determined in accordance with article 6-04, is not less than the percentage established in the annex to this article or in article 6-18, and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of This chapter.
For the purposes of this chapter, the production of a good from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in the annex to this article, must be made entirely in the territory of one or more Parties, and any regional content requirement for a good must be fully satisfied in the territory of one or more Parties.
Article 6-04: Regional value content.
Each Party shall provide that the regional value content of a good be calculated by the exporter or producer in accordance with the transaction value method provided in paragraph 2.
To calculate the regional content value of an asset based on the transaction value method, the following formula will be applied:
 	VCR= [(VT-VMN)/VT]100

where

 	VCR: regional content expressed as a percentage.

 	VT: transaction value of a good adjusted on the basis
 	FOB, except as provided in paragraph 6.

 	VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the
 	producer in the production of the determined good in accordance
 	with the provisions of article 6-05.
Each Party shall provide that the transaction value of an asset shall be calculated:
a) in accordance with the principles of articles 1 and 8 of the Customs Valuation Code; either
b) in the event that there is no transaction value or that the transaction value of the good cannot be determined in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5, in accordance with the principles of article 6.1 of the Customs Valuation Code, except paragraph 1 of the interpretative note to that article.
For the purposes of paragraph 3, there will be no transaction value when the good is not the subject of a sale.
For the purposes of Paragraph 3, the transaction value of the asset cannot be determined when:
a) there are restrictions on the transfer or use of the asset by the buyer, except for those that:
i) imposed or required by the law or the authorities of the Party in which the buyer of the good is located;
ii) limit the geographic territory where the good can be resold; either
iii) do not significantly affect the value of the property;
b) the sale or the price depend on a condition or consideration whose value cannot be determined in relation to the good;
c) reverts directly or indirectly to the seller any part of the proceeds of the resale or any subsequent assignment or use of the good by the buyer, unless the due adjustment can be made in accordance with the provisions of article 8 of the Customs Valuation Code ; either
d) the buyer and seller are related persons and the relationship between them influences the price, except as provided in article 1.2 of the Customs Valuation Code.
For purposes of determining the transaction value of a good, when the producer of the good does not export it directly, the transaction value will be adjusted up to the point within the territory of the producer where the buyer receives the good.
Article 6-05: Value of non-originating materials.
The value of a non-originating material used in the production of a good:
a) will be the transaction value of the material, calculated in accordance with the principles of articles 1 and 8 of the Customs Valuation Code; either
b) in the event that there is no transaction value or the transaction value of the material cannot be determined in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, it will be calculated in accordance with the principles of articles 2 to 7 of the Customs Valuation Code; Y
c) include, when they are not considered in literals a) or b):
i) freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred for the transportation of the material to the port authorized for importation in the Party where the producer of the good is located, except as provided in paragraph 2 ; Y
ii) the cost of waste and scrap resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less any recovery of these costs, provided that the recovery does not exceed 30% of the value of the material determined in accordance with subparagraphs a) and b).
When the producer of the good acquires the non-originating material within its territory, the value of the material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred for the transportation of the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located.
For purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with Article 6-04, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good will not include:
a) the value of non-originating materials used by another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either
b) the value of non-originating materials used by the producer of the good in the production of an originating material of its own manufacture and designated by the producer as an intermediate material in accordance with Article 6-07.
Article 6-06: De Minimis.
A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good that do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 6-03 does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the good. determined in accordance with section 6-04. When the same good is also subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of those non-originating materials will be taken into account in the calculation of the regional value content of the good.
Paragraph 1 does not apply to:
a) goods included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, except as provided in paragraph 3.
b) a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 1 through 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading than the good for which origin is being determined in accordance with this article.
A good classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System that is not originating because the fibers, threads or yarns used in the production of that good do not comply with the change in tariff classification provided in the annex to article 6-03, it will be considered as originating provided that, in the case of:
a) thread or yarn, the fiber that does not comply with the tariff classification change established in article 6-03, used in the production of thread or yarn does not exceed 7% of the total weight of the yarn;
b) fabric, the fiber, thread or yarn that does not comply with the tariff classification change established in article 6-03, used in the production of fabric does not exceed 7% of the total weight of the fabric; Y
c) garments, fiber, thread or yarn that do not comply with the tariff classification change established in article 6-03, used in the production of the fabric that contains the material that determines the tariff classification of the good does not exceed 7% of the total weight of that fabric.
Article 6-07: Intermediate materials.
For purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with Article 6-04, the producer of a good may designate as an intermediate material any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good provided that, if such intermediate material is subject to a regional value content requirement, no other self-produced material subject to the regional value content requirement used in the production of that intermediate material may itself be designated by the producer as an intermediate material.
The value of an intermediate material will be:
a) the total cost incurred with respect to all goods produced by the producer of the good, which can be reasonably allocated to that intermediate material in accordance with the provisions of the annex to article 6-01; either
b) the sum of each cost that is part of the total cost incurred with respect to the intermediate material, that can be reasonably assigned to that intermediate material in accordance with the provisions of the annex to article 6-01.
When an intermediate material is designated and is subject to a regional content value requirement, for purposes of calculating the regional content value of the intermediate material, the transaction value referred to in article 6-04 shall be the value indicated in paragraph 2 .
Article 6-08: Accumulation.
For the purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, an exporter or producer may accumulate the production, with one or more producers in the territory of one or more Parties, of materials that are incorporated into the good so that the production of the materials is considered as carried out by that exporter or producer, provided that the provisions of Article 6-03 are complied with.
When an exporter or producer chooses to accumulate the production of materials in accordance with paragraph 1 and the good is subject to a regional value content requirement, for purposes of calculating the regional value content of the good, the value of the materials does not originating materials used by the producer of the good shall be the sum of the value of those materials determined in accordance with Article 6-05, less any of the elements of the total cost of the producer of the material except the value of the non-originating materials used by the producer of the material.
Article 6-09: Expendable goods and materials.
For the purposes of establishing whether a good is originating:
a) where originating and non-originating fungible materials are used in the production of a good that are physically mixed or blended in inventory, the origin of the materials need not be established by identifying a specific fungible material, but may be defined through one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 2; Y
b) when originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory, and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of another Party, the origin of the good may be established based on one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 2.
The inventory management methods applicable to materials or consumables will be the following:
a) "PEPS" (first in, first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were first received in inventory is considered as the origin in equal number of units of the materials or consumables that first come out of inventory;
b) "LUEP" (last in-first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were received last in inventory is considered as the origin in equal number of units of the materials or consumables first removed from inventory; either
c) "averaging" is the inventory management method by which:
i) The determination as to whether the materials or consumables are original shall be made, except as provided in numeral ii), through the application of the following formula:
 	PMO = (TMO/TMOYN)100

where

 	PMO: average of materials or consumables
 	originating.

 	TMO: total units of materials or goods 
 	originating consumables that are part of the inventory  
 	prior to departure.

 	TMOYN: total sum of units of materials or 
 	originating and non-originating fungible goods that form 
 	part of pre-departure inventory.
ii) in the case in which the good is subject to a regional content value requirement, the determination of the value of non-originating materials will be made through the application of the following formula:
 	PMN= (TMN/TMOYN)100

where

 	PMN: average of non-originating materials.

 	TMN: total value of non-expendable materials
 	originating that are part of the inventory prior to the
 	exit.
    

 	TMOYN: total value of expendable materials
 	originating and non-originating that are part of the
 	pre-departure inventory.
Once one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 2 has been selected, it must be used throughout the fiscal year.
Article 6-10: Games or assortments.
The goods that are classified as sets or assortments according to the provisions of General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, as well as the goods whose description according to the Harmonized System nomenclature is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating provided that each one of the goods contained in the game or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each good in this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the set or assortment, determined in accordance with article 6-04.
Article 6-11: Operations and practices that do not confer origin.
A good will not be considered as originating when it is only subject to the following operations or practices:
a) dilution in water or in another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the good;
b) simple operations intended to ensure the conservation of goods during transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, removal of damaged parts, drying or addition of substances;
c) dusting, screening, classification, selection, washing, cutting;
d) packaging, repackaging or packaging for retail sale;
e) assembly of goods to form sets or assortments;
f) application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;
g) cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings; Y
h) any activity or practice of price fixing, in respect of which it can be demonstrated based on sufficient evidence that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 6-12: Transhipment and direct dispatch.
A good shall not be considered as originating even when it has been produced in accordance with the requirements of article 6-03, if after that production, the good undergoes a subsequent process or is subject to any other operation outside the territories of the Parties. , except for unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep it in good condition or transport it to the territory of a Party.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a good shall not lose its originating status when, while in transit through the territory of one or more non-Party countries, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the surveillance of the customs authority competent in those countries:
a) the transit is justified for geographical reasons or for considerations related to transport requirements;
b) is not intended for trade, use or employment in the transit country(ies); Y
c) during its transport and storage it is not subjected to operations other than packaging, packaging, loading, unloading or handling to ensure its conservation.
Article 6-13: Indirect materials.
Indirect materials will be considered as originating without taking into account the place of their production and the value of these materials will be their cost that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.
Article 6-14: Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools.
Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools delivered with the good as part of the good's usual accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are considered to be originating if the good is originating and will not be taken into account in determining whether all materials non-originating goods used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 6-03, provided that:
a) the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the good, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately in the invoice itself; Y
b) the quantities and value of those accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the good.
When the good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools will be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, when calculating the regional value content of the good. .
Article 6-15: Containers and packaging materials for retail sale.
Containers and packaging materials in which a good is presented for retail sale, when classified with the good they contain, shall not be taken into account in deciding whether all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 6-03. When the good is subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of the containers and packaging materials for retail sale will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good.
Article 6-16: Shipping containers and packing materials.
The containers and packaging materials in which a good is packed for transport will not be taken into account for the purposes of establishing whether all the non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to the article 6-03. When the good is subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of the shipping packaging materials in which a good is packaged for transport shall be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the value content. area of ​​the good
When the good is subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of the shipping packaging material will be the cost of that material that is reported in the records of the producer of the good.
Article 6-17: Consultation and modifications.
The Parties create a Rules of Origin Working Group, made up of representatives of each Party that will meet at least twice a year, as well as at the request of any Party.
It will correspond to the Working Group:
a) ensure the effective implementation and administration of this chapter;
b) reach agreements on the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter; Y
c) attend to any other matter agreed upon by the Parties.
The Parties shall consult regularly to ensure that this Chapter is applied effectively, uniformly and in accordance with the spirit and objectives of this Agreement and shall cooperate in the application of this Chapter.
Any Party that considers that this chapter needs to be modified due to changes in the development of production processes or other matters, may submit to the Working Group for its consideration a proposal for modification and the reasons and studies that support it. The Working Group will submit a report to the Commission for it to make the pertinent recommendations to the Parties.
The Parties indicated in the annex to this article may carry out consultations through the Rules of Origin Working Group in accordance with the provisions of that annex.
Article 6-18: Provisions on regional content.
The regional content expressed as a percentage will be:
a) for goods classified in chapters 28 to 40 of the Harmonized System:
i) 40% during the first three years from the entry into force of this Agreement;
ii) 45% during the fourth and fifth year from the entry into force of this Agreement; Y
iii) 50% from the first day of the sixth year from the entry into force of this Agreement;
b) for goods classified in chapters 72 to 85 and 90 of the Harmonized System, 50% from the entry into force of this Agreement;
c) for goods not included in subparagraphs a) and b):
i) 50% during the first five years from the entry into force of this Agreement; Y
ii) 55% from the first day of the sixth year from the entry into force of this Agreement.
d) The regional content percentages established in subparagraph c) do not apply to goods for which a different percentage is specified in the annex to article 6-03, section B.
Article 6-19: Special provisions.
For the purposes of the preferences indicated in the Reduction Program for goods that do not have a specific rule of origin in this Agreement, as well as for goods included in a fraction or tariff heading identified with the code "EXCL" in the Reduction Program , Resolution No. 78 of the ALADI Representatives Committee will be applied. The provisions of Chapter VII shall apply with respect to the assets referred to in this paragraph.
The annex to this article applies to the Parties indicated therein.
Article 6-20: Regional Inputs Integration Committee.
The Parties establish the Committee for the Regional Integration of Inputs (CIRI).
Each Party shall designate, for each case that arises, a representative of the public sector and a representative of the private sector to integrate the CIRI, except in the case of goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 in which the CIRI will be integrated only by representatives of Colombia and Mexico, until the rules of origin are agreed between Mexico and Venezuela for the goods classified in those chapters.
The CIRI will operate for a period of 10 years from the entry into force of this Agreement. However, if during the last three years waivers have been granted under the terms of paragraph 2 of article 6-23, the term will be extended for the period and for the goods agreed upon by the Parties.
Article 6-21: Functions of the CIRI.
The CIRI will evaluate the real and proven incapacity in the territory of the Parties of a producer of goods, to dispose under normal commercial conditions, of opportunity, volume, quality and prices, for equivalent transactions, of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 used by the producer in the production of a good.
For purposes of paragraph 1, producer means a producer of goods for export to the territory of another Party under preferential tariff treatment.
The materials used in the production of a good referred to in paragraph 1 are only those specified in the annex to this article.
Article 6-22: Procedure.
For the purposes of Article 6-21, the CIRI will carry out an investigation procedure that may be initiated at the request of the Party or at the request of the Commission. This procedure will begin within five days of receipt of the request and supporting documentation.
During this procedure, the CIRI will evaluate the evidence presented to it.
Article 6-23: Opinion to the Commission.
The CIRI will issue an opinion to the Commission within forty days from the date of initiation of the investigation procedure.
The CIRI will rule:
a) on the inability of the producer to dispose of materials in the terms indicated in paragraph 1 of article 6-21; Y
b) when the disability referred to in subparagraph a) is established, on the amounts and terms of the waiver required in the use of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 of article 6-21, so that a good can receive tariff treatment preference.
The CIRI will forward its opinion to the Commission within five days of its issuance.
Article 6-24: Resolution of the Commission.
If the CIRI issues an opinion under the terms of article 6-23, the Commission will issue a resolution within a period of no more than ten days from receipt of the opinion, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of article 6-23. , unless you agree to a different term.
When the disability referred to in paragraph 1 of article 6-21 is established, the resolution of the Commission will establish a waiver, in the amounts and terms agreed upon by the CIRI in its opinion, for the use of the materials referred to in the paragraph 3 of article 6-21, with the modifications it deems appropriate.
If the Commission has not ruled within the period indicated in paragraph 1, the opinion of the CIRI will be considered ratified.
The resolution referred to in paragraph 2 will be valid for a maximum of one year from its issuance. The Commission may extend, at the request of the interested Party, within the six months prior to its expiration and prior review by the CIRI, its resolution for an equal term if the causes that gave rise to it persist.
Any Party may request, at any time during its validity, the review of the resolution of the Commission.
Article 6-25: Referral to the Commission.
If the CIRI does not issue the opinion referred to in article 6-23 within the periods mentioned therein, because there is insufficient information or consensus on the case being dealt with, the consultations referred to in article 19 will be considered concluded. -05 and will forward it to the Commission within the five days following the expiration of that term.
The Commission will issue a resolution in the terms of paragraph 2 of article 6-23 within a period of 10 days. If the Commission does not issue a resolution, the provisions of articles 19-07 to 19-17 shall apply, subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3 to 7.
The term for the installation and issuance of the final resolution of the arbitral tribunal referred to in article 19-07, will be fifty days.
For the purposes of paragraph 2, it will be understood that the mission of the arbitral tribunal will be to issue a decision in the terms of literals a) and b) of paragraph 2 of article 6-23.
The final decision of the arbitral tribunal will be binding on the Parties and, if it decides on the waiver referred to in subparagraph b) of paragraph 2 of article 6-23, it will be valid for a maximum of one year. The Commission may extend, at the request of the interested Party within the six months prior to its expiration and prior review by the CIRI, the resolution of the arbitral tribunal for an equal term, if the causes that gave rise to it persist.
The complaining Party may avail itself of the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 of article 19-17, if the arbitral tribunal rules in its favor and the defendant Party does not comply with the final resolution within the term that the arbitral tribunal has set.
The defendant Party may avail itself of the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5 of article 19-17.
Article 6-26: Regulation of operation.
By January 1, 1995 at the latest, the Parties will agree on CIRI operating regulations.
The regulation will include the operating rules of the CIRI and the conditions regarding delivery times, quantity, quality and prices of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 of article 6-21.
Annex to article 6-01: Calculation of the total cost
For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
allocation base: any of the following allocation bases that can be used by the producer to calculate the percentage of the cost in relation to the good:
a) the sum of the direct labor cost and the direct material cost or value of the good;
b) the sum of the cost of direct labor, the cost or value of the direct material and the direct costs and expenses of manufacturing the good;
c) direct labor hours or costs;
d) units produced;
e) machine hours;
f) amount of sales;
g) plant area; Y
h) any other bases that are considered reasonable and quantifiable.
direct manufacturing costs and expenses: the costs and expenses incurred in a period that are directly related to the good, other than direct material costs or value and direct labor costs.
manufacturing overhead costs and expenses: Costs and expenses incurred in a period other than direct manufacturing costs and expenses, direct labor costs, and direct material costs or value.
for internal management purposes: any allocation procedure used for tax filing, financial statements or reports, internal control, financial planning, decision making, pricing, cost recovery, cost control management, or performance measurement.
When the producer of a good uses a cost allocation method for internal management purposes to calculate the total cost for the good to allocate direct material costs, direct labor costs, or direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, or portions thereof, and that method reasonably reflects direct material costs, direct labor costs, or direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses incurred in the production of the good , that method will be considered a method of reasonable allocation of costs and expenses and may be used to allocate costs to the good.
For purposes of calculating the total cost, the producer of the good may determine a reasonable amount for costs and expenses that have not been assigned to the good, as follows:
a) for direct material costs and direct labor costs, based on any method that reasonably reflects the direct material and direct labor costs used in the production of the good; Y
b) in relation to direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, based on the provisions of paragraph 6.
Any method of reasonable allocation of costs and expenses that a producer chooses for the purposes of this chapter, will be used throughout his fiscal year.
The following concepts will not be assigned to a good and these concepts will be considered as excluded costs and expenses:
a) costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to the good;
b) costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the producer's company, which constitutes a discontinued operation;
c) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of accounting principles;
d) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good;
e) costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure; Y
f) profits obtained by the producer of the good regardless of whether they were retained by the producer or paid to other persons, such as dividends or taxes paid on these profits, including taxes on capital gains.
In order to allocate direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, the producer may choose one or more allocation bases that reflect a relationship between direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses and the good.
In relation to each base chosen, the producer may calculate a percentage of the cost for each good produced, in accordance with the following formula:
         	PC = (BA/BTA)100

 	where

 	PC: the percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good.

 	BA: the allocation base for the good.

 	BTA: the total allocation base for all assets
      	produced by the producer of the good.
The costs or expenses with respect to which an allocation base is chosen, are assigned to a good according to the following formula:
           	CAB = AC x PC

 	where

 	CAB: the costs or expenses assigned to the good.

 	CA: the costs or expenses that will be assigned.

 	PC: the percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good.
When the costs or expenses mentioned in paragraph 5 are included in the costs or expenses assigned to the good, the percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good used to assign that cost or expense to the good will be used to determine the amount of the costs. or excluded expenses that will be subtracted from the costs or expenses that were assigned to the property.
Any cost or expense assigned in accordance with any reasonable cost allocation method used for internal administration purposes will not be considered reasonably assigned when it can be shown from sufficient evidence that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Annex to article 6-03: Specific rules of origin
Section A - General interpretative note
For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
chapter: a chapter of the Harmonized System.
tariff fraction: an eight- or ten-digit Harmonized System tariff classification code.
Heading: A four-digit Harmonized System tariff classification code.
section: a section of the Harmonized System.
subheading: a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the six-digit level.
The specific rule or set of rules that applies to a heading, subheading, or tariff item is stated next to the heading, subheading, or tariff item.
The rule applicable to a tariff fraction shall have priority over the rule applicable to the heading or subheading that includes that tariff fraction.
A change of classification requirement applies only to non-originating materials.
Any reference to weight in the rules for goods included in chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized System, means net weight unless otherwise specified in the Harmonized System.
For any reference to a regional content value requirement in the specific rules of origin, the provisions of article 6-18 shall be taken into account.
For the tariff fractions described in annex 2 to article 5-04, the rules of origin will apply in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of annex 1 to article 5-04.
The description of the tariff fractions expressed with letters in the text of the specific rules of origin is contained in section C.
Section B - Specific rules of origin
Section I
Live Animals; products of the animal kingdom (Chapter 1 to 5)
Chapter 1
Live animals
01.01-01.06
A change to heading 01.01 through 01.06 from any other chapter.


Episode 2
Meats and Edible Offals
02.04-02.10
A change to heading 02.04 through 02.10 from any other chapter, except from chapter 01.


Chapter 3
Fish and Crustaceans and Mollusks and other Aquatic Invertebrates
03.01-03.07
A change to heading 03.01 through 03.07 from any other chapter.


Chapter 4
Milk and Dairy Products; Bird Egg; Natural honey; Edible Products of Animal Origin not elsewhere specified or included
04.02-04.03
A change to heading 04.02 through 04.03 from any other chapter, except from Colombian Tariff 1901.90.90, Mexican Tariff 1901.90.03, or Venezuelan Tariff 1901.90.90.
04.05-04.06
A change to heading 04.05 through 04.06 from any other chapter, except from Colombian Tariff 1901.90.90, Mexican Tariff 1901.90.03, or Venezuelan Tariff 1901.90.90.
04.09-04.10
A change to heading 04.09 through 04.10 from any other chapter, except from Colombian Tariff 1901.90.90, Mexican Tariff 1901.90.03, Venezuelan Tariff 1901.90.90.


Chapter 5
Other Products of Animal Origin not specified or included in other headings.
05.01-05.11
A change to heading 05.01 through 05.11 from any other chapter.

Section II
Products of the Vegetable Kingdom (Chapter 6 to 14)
Note: Agricultural and horticultural goods grown in the territory of a Party must be treated as originating in the territory of that Party, even if they were grown from seeds, bulbs, cuttings, grafts, buds or other live plant parts imported from a non-country. Treaty member.
Chapter 6
Live plants and floricultural products
06.01-06.04
A change to heading 06.01 through 06.04 from any other chapter.


Chapter 7
Vegetables, roots and tubers
07.01-07.14
A change to heading 07.01 through 07.14 from any other chapter.


Chapter 8
Edible Fruits; Citrus or Melon rinds
08.01-08.02
A change to heading 08.01 through 08.02 from any other chapter.
08.04-08.14
A change to heading 08.04 through 08.14 from any other chapter.


Chapter 9
Coffee, Tea, Yerba Mate and Spices
09.01-09.10
A change to heading 09.01 through 09.10 from any other chapter.


Chapter 10
Cereals
10.02-10.05
A change to heading 10.02 through 10.05 from any other chap​​ter.
10.08 
A change to heading 10.08 from any other chapter.

​​
Annex to article 6-17
From the 1st January 2000, Colombia and Mexico may carry out consultations through the Rules of Origin Working Group to evaluate the conditions of supply availability of fibers, threads and fabrics in Colombia or Mexico to produce goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System and, where appropriate, design rules of origin that resolve possible supply problems that may have arisen.
Annex to article 6-19: Special provisions related to goods classified in chapters 50 to 63 and in heading 39.03 of the Harmonized System
Section A - Colombia and Mexico
For the purposes of applying the temporary flexibility levels established in article 3-08, the treatment of originating goods will be granted to goods classified as:
a) Chapters 51 to 60 of the Harmonized System that meet the following conditions:
i) Threads and yarns classified in headings 51.06 to 51.10, 52.04 to 52.07, 53.07 to 53.08 and 55.08 to 55.11 of the Harmonized System must be entirely produced in the territory of the exporting Party from fiber or filament imported or not from outside the the territories of Colombia or Mexico;
ii) textile goods classified in headings 54.01 to 54.06 of the Harmonized System must be entirely produced in the territory of the exporting Party from materials imported or not from outside the territories of Colombia or Mexico;
iii) fabrics classified in headings 51.11 to 51.13, 52.08 to 52.12, 53.10 to 53.11, 54.07 to 54.08, 55.12 to 55.16 and 60.01 to 60.02 of the Harmonized System must be entirely produced in the territory of the exporting Party from fiber, yarn or yarns imported or not from outside the territories of Colombia or Mexico; Y
iv) textile goods classified in chapters 56 to 59 of the Harmonized System must be entirely produced in the territory of the exporting Party from fiber, thread, yarns or cloth imported or not from outside the territories of Colombia or Mexico;
b) Chapters 61 through 63 of the Harmonized System referred to in Article 3-08 that are wholly cut (or woven to shape) and sewn or otherwise assembled in the territory of the exporting Party from fiber, yarn, yarns or fabric imported or not from outside the territories of Colombia or Mexico and must comply with a regional content requirement of not less than 50%, in accordance with the provisions of article 6-04.
For the purposes of determining the origin of a good classified in chapters 50 to 63, Venezuela will be considered as a non-Party country.
Section B - Mexico and Venezuela
During the first two years from the entry into force of this Agreement, Mexico and Venezuela will carry out negotiations and will do their best to reach an agreement regarding the applicable rules of origin between them for goods classified in chapters 50 to 63. of the Harmonized System.
Section C - Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela
During the first two years from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will carry out negotiations and make their best effort to reach an agreement regarding the applicable rules of origin between them for goods classified in heading 39.03 of the Harmonized System. .
Annex to article 6-21
For a good classified in the tariff codes of the Harmonized System described below, the materials referred to in paragraph 1 of article 6-21, are those used in the production of the good classified in those tariff codes when their use is required by the rule of origin established in the annex to article 6-03 for that good:
CHAPTER VII: Customs procedures
Article 7-01: Definitions.
The definitions of chapter VI are incorporated into this chapter.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
competent authority: the authority that, according to the internal legislation of each Party, is responsible for the administration of its laws and its customs, tax or commercial regulations.
Identical Goods: Goods that are the same in all respects, including their physical characteristics, quality, and goodwill. Small differences in appearance do not prevent them from being considered identical;
preferential tariff treatment: the application of the import tax to an originating good in accordance with the annex to article 3-04.
Article 7-02: Declaration and certification of origin.
The certificate of origin established in annex 1 to this article, will serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party, qualifies as originating. This certificate may be modified by agreement of the Parties.
Each Party shall provide that for the export to another Party of a good for which the importer is entitled to claim preferential tariff treatment, the exporter completes and signs a certificate of origin with respect to that good. The exporter's certificate of origin will require validation by the competent authority of the exporting Party.
In the event that the exporter is not the producer of the good, he will fill out and sign the certificate of origin based on a declaration of origin in accordance with annex 2 to this article that covers the good that is the object of export, filled out and signed by the exporter. producer of the good and provided voluntarily to the exporter. The declaration of origin filled out and signed by the producer will not be validated under the terms of paragraph 2.
The authority of the exporting Party:
a) will maintain the administrative mechanisms for the validation of the certificate of origin filled out and signed by the exporter;
b) provide, at the request of the importing Party, information regarding the origin of imported goods with preferential tariff treatment; Y
c) shall notify the other Parties of the list of officials authorized to validate the certificates of origin with their corresponding seals, signatures and facsimile. Modifications to this relationship will take effect thirty days after receipt of the respective communication.
Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin filled out and signed by the exporter and validated by the competent authority of the exporting Party may cover a single importation of one or more goods and shall be valid for 1 year from the date of its signature.
Article 7-03: Obligations regarding imports.
Each Party shall require the importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good of another Party, that:
a) declare in writing, in the import document based on a valid certificate of origin, that the good qualifies as originating;
b) have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time of making that declaration; Y
c) present or deliver the certificate of origin when requested by the competent authority.
Each Party will require the importer to present or deliver a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding import taxes, when the importer has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which his import declaration is based contains incorrect information. If you submit the aforementioned declaration spontaneously, in accordance with the internal legislation of each Party, you will not be penalized.
Each Party shall provide that when the importer does not comply with any of the requirements established in paragraph 1, preferential tariff treatment shall be denied to the good imported from another Party for which preference has been requested.
The request referred to in paragraph 1, literal c) will not prevent the customs clearance or release of the merchandise under conditions of preferential tariff treatment requested in the import declaration.
Article 7-04: Obligations regarding exports.
Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer of that Party who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin, deliver a copy of the validated certificate or declaration of origin to the competent authority upon request.
An exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin and has reason to believe that this certificate or declaration contains incorrect information, must communicate without delay and in writing, any changes that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate. or declaration to all persons to whom it has been delivered as well as, in accordance with the legislation of the Party in question, to the competent authority of the exporting Party. In this case, you will not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certificate or statement.
Each Party shall provide that a false certificate or declaration of origin made by an exporter or a producer shall have the same administrative consequences as false declarations or declarations made in its territory by an importer in contravention of its customs laws and regulations, with the modifications that circumstances may require.
Article 7-05: Exceptions.
The certificate of origin shall not be required in the case of the importation of a good for which the Party into whose territory it is imported has waived the requirement of presentation of a certificate of origin.
Article 7-06: Accounting records.
Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate or declaration of origin, keep for a minimum of five years from the date of signing the certificate or declaration, all records and documents relating to the origin of the good. , including those referring to:
a) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the good that is exported from its territory;
b) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials used in the production of the good that is exported from its territory; Y
c) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory.
Each Party shall provide that the exporter or producer shall provide to the competent authority of the importing Party the records and documents referred to in paragraph 1. When the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or producer, the exporter or producer may request the producer or supplier of the materials, the records and documents so that they are delivered through it to the competent authority that performs the verification.
Each Party shall provide that an importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good imported from another Party, shall keep for a minimum of five years from the date of importation, the certificate of origin and all documentation related to the importation. required by the importing Party.
Article 7-07: Procedures to verify origin.
Before carrying out a verification in accordance with the provisions of this article, the competent authority of the importing Party may request information regarding the origin of the exported goods from the competent authority of the exporting Party.
To determine whether a good imported from another Party qualifies as originating, each Party may, through the competent authority, verify the origin of the good by:
a) written questionnaires addressed to exporters or producers in the territory of the other Party; either
b) verification visits to an exporter or a producer in the territory of the other Party, with the purpose of examining the records and documents that prove compliance with the rules of origin in accordance with Article 7-06, and inspecting the facilities that used in the production of the good and, where appropriate, those used in the production of the material.
The provisions of this paragraph shall be done without prejudice to the powers of inspection or review of the importing Party over its own importers, exporters or producers.
When the exporter or producer receives a questionnaire in accordance with paragraph 2, literal a), it will respond and return that questionnaire within a period of thirty days. During this period, the exporter or producer may request in writing to the importing Party that is carrying out the verification, an extension which shall not exceed thirty days. This request shall not entail the denial of preferential tariff treatment.
In the event that the exporter or producer does not return the duly answered questionnaire within the corresponding period, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment in accordance with paragraph 11.
The importing Party that carries out a verification by means of a questionnaire, will have a period of 45 days from the receipt of the response to it, to send the notification referred to in paragraph 6, if it deems it appropriate.
Before carrying out a verification visit in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2, literal b), the importing Party shall be obliged, through its competent authority, to communicate in writing its intention to carry out the visit at least thirty days of anticipation. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer to be visited, to the competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit is to take place and, if requested by the latter, to the embassy of the latter Party in the territory of the importing party. The competent authority of the importing Party shall obtain the written consent of the exporter or the producer whom it intends to visit.
The communication referred to in paragraph 6 will contain:
a) the identification of the competent authority making the communication in writing;
b) the name of the exporter or producer you intend to visit;
c) the date and place of the proposed verification visit;
d) the purpose and scope of the proposed verification visit, making specific mention of the good or goods subject to verification to which the certificate(s) of origin refer;
e) the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; Y
f) the legal basis of the verification visit.
Any change in the number, name or position of the officials referred to in subparagraph e) of paragraph 7, shall be communicated in writing to the exporter or producer and to the authority of the exporting Party before the verification visit. Any modification of the information referred to in subparagraphs a), b), c), d) and f) of paragraph 7, will be notified in the terms of paragraph 6.
If within thirty days of receipt of the communication regarding the verification visit proposed in accordance with paragraph 6, the exporter or producer does not give its written consent for the verification visit, the importing Party may deny tariff treatment. preferential to the good or goods that would have been the reason for the visit.
Each Party will allow the exporter or producer whose good is the subject of a verification visit, to designate two witnesses who are present during the visit, provided that the witnesses intervene only in that capacity. If there is no designation of witnesses by the exporter or the producer, this omission will not result in the postponement of the visit.
The Party that has carried out a verification shall provide the exporter or producer whose good or goods have been subject to verification, a document containing the decision in which it determines whether or not the good or goods qualify as originating, and includes the grounds. factual and legal determination.
When the verification carried out by a Party indicates that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, the Party may suspend preferential tariff treatment to identical goods that that Party person exports or produces, until it proves that it complies with the provisions of Chapter VI.
Each Party shall provide that the decision that determines that a certain good imported into its territory does not qualify as originating in accordance with the tariff classification or with the value applied by the Party to one or more materials used in the production of the good, and this differs from the tariff classification or the value applied to the materials by the exporting Party, does not take effect until it is communicated in writing to both the importer of the good and the exporter or producer who has completed and signed the certificate or declaration of origin that covers it.
The Party shall not apply the decision adopted in accordance with paragraph 13, to an import made before the date on which the decision takes effect when the competent authority of the exporting Party has issued a resolution or an advance criterion on the tariff classification or the value of materials, about which certainty can be obtained under the customs laws and regulations of that exporting Party.
When a Party denies preferential tariff treatment to a good pursuant to a decision made in accordance with paragraph 13, that Party shall postpone the effective date of the denial for a period not to exceed ninety days, provided that the importer of the good or The exporter or producer who has completed and signed the certificate or declaration of origin that protects it, accredits having relied in good faith, to its own detriment, on the tariff classification or the value applied to the materials by the competent authority of the exporting Party.
Each Party will maintain the confidentiality of the information collected in the origin verification process in accordance with the provisions of the domestic legislation of the Parties involved.
Article 7-08: Review and challenge.
Each Party shall grant exporters and producers of another Party the same rights to review and challenge decisions to determine origin and advance criteria provided for importers in its territory who:
a) fill out and sign a certificate or declaration of origin covering a good that has been the subject of an origin determination decision in accordance with paragraph 11 of Article 7-07; either
b) has received advance judgment in accordance with Article 7-10.
Each Party, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1, shall grant access to at least one level of independent administrative review of the official or agency responsible for the decision subject to review, and access to one level of judicial review of the initial decision. or the decision made at the final level of administrative review. The administrative or judicial review shall be made in accordance with the internal legislation of each Party.
Article 7-09: Sanctions.
Each Party shall establish or maintain criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this chapter.
Article 7-10: Advance criteria.
Each Party shall provide that, through its competent authority, advance criteria be promptly issued in writing, prior to the importation of a good from another Party into its territory. The anticipated criteria will be issued at the request of the importer in its territory or of the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by them regarding whether the goods qualify as originating in accordance with the rules of origin. of chapter VI.
a) if the non-originating materials used in the production of a good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification indicated in the annex to article 6-03 of chapter VI as a result of the production being carried out in the territory of one or more Parties;
b) if the good complies with the regional content value requirement established in the annex to article 6-03 of chapter VI;
c) if the method for calculating the value of a good or of the materials used in the production of a good, which must be applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code and with the in order to determine if the good meets the regional value content requirement in accordance with the annex to article 6-03 of chapter VI; either
d) other matters that the Parties agree.
Each Party shall adopt or maintain, upon publication, procedures for the issuance of advance criteria that include:
a) a detailed description of the information reasonably required to process a request;
b) the power of its competent authority to request additional information at any time from the person requesting the early judgment during the application evaluation process;
c) the obligation to issue the advance judgment within a period of one hundred and twenty days counted from the moment in which the authority has obtained all the necessary information from the person requesting it; Y
d) the obligation to fully explain the well-founded and motivated reasons for the anticipated criterion when it is unfavorable for the applicant.
Each Party shall apply advance criteria to imports on or after the date of issuance of the criteria, unless the advance criteria is modified or revoked in accordance with paragraph 6.
Each Party shall grant the same treatment, the same interpretation and application of the provisions of Chapter VI, referring to the determination of origin, to all who request early judgment, when the facts and circumstances are identical in all substantial aspects.
The advance judgment may be modified or revoked by the issuing Party in the following cases:
a) when it contains or is based on an error:
i) in fact;
ii) in the tariff classification of a good or materials;
iii) whether the good meets the regional value content requirement;
b) when the anticipated criterion is not in accordance with an interpretation agreed between the Parties with respect to the rules of origin of this Agreement;
c) to comply with a judicial decision; Y
d) when the circumstances or facts that support the anticipated criterion change.
Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance ruling shall take effect from the date it is issued or on a later date established therein. The modification or revocation of an advance criterion may not be applied to imports of a good made before those dates, unless the person to whom the criterion was issued has not acted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the initially issued criterion.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 7, the Party issuing the advance directive shall postpone the effective date of the modification or revocation for a period not to exceed ninety days, when the person to whom the advance directive was issued has supported this criterion in good faith and to his detriment.
Each Party shall provide that, when considering the regional value content of a good for which advance ruling has been issued, the competent authority shall assess whether:
a) the exporter or producer complies with the terms and conditions of the advance judgment;
b) the exporter's or producer's operations are consistent with the circumstances and substantial facts that support that criterion; Y
c) the supporting data and calculations used in applying the method to calculate the value are correct in all material respects.
Each Party shall provide that when the competent authority determines that any of the requirements established in paragraph 9 has not been met, it may modify or revoke the advance judgment, as the circumstances warrant.
Each Party shall provide that, when the competent authority decides that the advance judgment has been based on incorrect information, the party that issued it shall not be penalized, if it demonstrates that it acted with reasonable care and in good faith when stating the facts and circumstances that motivated the judgment. advance judgment.
Each Party may apply the measures that the circumstances warrant, when the competent authority has issued an advance judgment to a person who has falsely stated or omitted facts or substantial circumstances on which the advance judgment is based, or has not acted in accordance with the terms and conditions thereof.
The validity of an advance criterion will be subject to the permanent obligation of the person to whom it was issued to inform the competent authority of any substantial change in the facts or circumstances on which it was based to issue that criterion.
Article 7-11: Customs Procedures Working Group.
The Parties create a Customs Procedures Working Group made up of representatives of each Party that will meet at least twice a year, or at the request of any of the Parties.
It will correspond to the Working Group:
a) ensure that agreements are reached on:
i) the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter;
ii) tariff classification and valuation issues related to origin determinations;
iii) the procedures for the request, approval, modification, revocation and application of the anticipated criteria;
iv) changes to the certificate or declaration of origin; Y
v) any other matter submitted to it by a Party.
b) examine proposals for administrative or operational changes in customs matters that may affect the flow of trade between the Parties.
Chapter VIII : Safeguards
Article 8-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
Similar good: one that, although it does not coincide in all its characteristics with the good with which it is compared, has some identical characteristics, mainly in terms of its nature, use, function and quality.
serious damage: a general and significant impairment to a national production.
global measures: emergency measures on the importation of goods under Article XIX of the GATT.
national production: producer or producers of identical, similar or direct competitive goods that operate within the territory of one of the Parties and represent a substantial proportion of the total national production of those goods. From the fourth year after the entry into force of this Agreement, that substantial proportion will be at least 40%.
Article 8-02 : Safeguards regime.
The Parties may apply to imports of goods carried out in accordance with this Agreement a safeguard regime whose application will be based on clear, strict criteria and with a defined temporality. The safeguard regime provides for measures of a bilateral or global nature.
Section A - Bilateral measures.
Article 8-03 : Conditions of application.
If, as a result of the application of the Reduction Program, the importation of one or several goods originating from any of the Parties is carried out in quantities and under such conditions that, by themselves, they are the substantial cause of serious damage or threat of serious damage to domestic production of identical, similar or direct competitive goods, the importing Party may adopt bilateral safeguard measures, which shall be applied in accordance with the following rules:
a) when it is strictly necessary to counteract serious damage or the threat of serious damage caused by imports originating in the other Party, a Party may adopt safeguard measures within a period of fifteen years from the entry into force of this Treaty;
b) the measures will be exclusively of a tariff nature. The tariff determined in no case may exceed the one in force against third countries for that good at the time the safeguard is adopted;
c) the measures may be applied for a period of up to one year and may be extended only once, up to an equal and consecutive term, as long as the conditions that motivated them persist;
d) Upon completion of the measure, the rate or tariff will be the one that corresponds to the good object of the measure according to the Reduction Program.
Article 8-04 : Compensation for bilateral measures.
When the cause of the application of the bilateral safeguard measure is a threat of serious injury or when the Party intends to extend the measure, it will grant the exporting Party mutually agreed compensation, which will consist of temporary additional tariff concessions, whose effects on the trade of the exporting Party are equivalent to the impact of the safeguard measure.
The Parties will agree on the terms of the compensation referred to in paragraph 1 at the prior consultation stage established in Article 8-14.
If the Parties do not reach an agreement regarding compensation, the Party proposing to take the measure shall be empowered to do so and the exporting Party may take tariff measures that have trade effects equivalent to those of the measure taken.
Section B - Global measures
Article 8-05 : Rights under GATT.
The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT, in relation to any emergency measure adopted by a Party in the application of this Agreement.
Article 8-06 : Criteria for the adoption of a measure.
When a Party decides to adopt a global safeguard measure, it may only apply it to the other Party when imports of a good from the latter, considered individually, represent a substantial part of total imports and contribute significantly to serious injury or threat of damage. serious injury to the domestic production of the importing Party.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, the following criteria shall be taken into account:
a) Normally, imports from the other Party will not be considered substantial, if it is not one of the five main suppliers of the good subject to the procedure, based on its participation in those imports during the immediately preceding 3 years;
b) normally imports from the other Party shall not be considered to contribute significantly to serious injury or the threat of serious injury, if their growth rate during the period in which the injurious increase occurred is substantially less than the growth rate of total imports of the good to the Party proposing to take the measure, from all sources, during the same period.
Article 8-07 : Compensation for global measures.
The Party that adopts a global safeguard measure shall grant the exporting Party compensation in accordance with the provisions of the GATT.
Section C - Procedure
Article 8-08 : Adoption procedure.
The Party that intends to adopt a bilateral or global safeguard measure in accordance with this chapter, will comply with the procedure set forth in this section.
Article 8-09 : Investigation.
To determine the origin of the application of a safeguard measure, the competent authority of the importing Party will carry out an investigation, which may be ex officio or at the request of a party.
The purpose of the investigation referred to in the paragraph is:
a) Evaluate the volume and conditions in which the imports of the good in question are carried out;
b) verify the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury to domestic production;
c) verify the existence of a direct causal relationship between the increase in imports of the good and the serious damage or the threat of serious damage to national production.
Article 8-10 : Determination of damage.
For the purposes of verifying the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage, the competent authorities will evaluate the factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that are related to the national production affected, in particular the rate and amount of the increase in the imports of the good in question, in absolute and relative terms; the part of the internal market absorbed by the increase in imports; changes in the level of sales; internal prices; production; productivity; utilization of installed capacity; Profits; losses and employment.
Article 8-11 : Effect of other factors.
If there are other factors, other than the increase in imports from the other Party, that simultaneously harm or threaten to harm domestic production, the damage caused by those factors cannot be attributed to the referred imports.
Article 8-12 : Publication and communication.
The resolution that provides for the initiation of a safeguard investigation will be published in the respective official dissemination body of the importing Party and will be communicated to the interested parties, within ten business days following that publication.
Article 8-13 : Content of the communication.
The competent authority will make the communication referred to in article 8-12, which will contain sufficient information to support and motivate the initiation of the investigation, including:
a) the available name and address of national producers of identical or similar goods or direct competitors representative of national production; their participation in the national production of those goods and the reasons why they are considered representative of that sector;
b) the clear and complete description of the goods subject to the investigation, the tariff fractions in which they are classified and the current tariff treatment, as well as the identification of the identical, similar or direct competitive goods;
c) data on imports corresponding to the three years prior to the initiation of the investigation;
d) the data on the total national production of identical, similar or direct competitive goods, corresponding to the three years prior to the initiation of the proceeding;
e) the data that demonstrates that there are reasonable indications of serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by the imports to the domestic industry in question, and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports of those goods, in relative or absolutes in relation to national production, is the cause of it; Y
f) If applicable, the criteria and objective information that demonstrate that the assumptions for the application of a global safeguard measure to the other Party established in this chapter are met.
Article 8-14 : Prior consultations.
If, as a result of the safeguard investigation, the competent authority determines, based on objective evidence, that the assumptions set forth in this chapter are met, the Party that decides to initiate a procedure that could result in the adoption of a safeguard measure, shall do so. communicate to the other Party, requesting consultations as provided in this chapter.
A third Party that expresses a substantial interest in the application of a bilateral safeguard measure because its trade could be affected by its application, may participate in the consultations referred to in paragraph 1.
The importing Party shall provide adequate opportunities for prior consultations to take place. The period for prior consultations will begin on the day after the exporting Party receives the communication containing the request to hold these consultations. The communication will contain the data that demonstrates the serious injury or the threat of serious injury caused by the imports subject to investigation, and the pertinent information on the safeguard measures that are intended to be adopted and their duration.
The period for prior consultations will be forty-five days, unless the Parties agree on another term.
Safeguard measures may only be adopted once the prior consultation period has concluded.
Article 8-15 : Confidential information.
The consultation procedure will not oblige the Parties to reveal the information that has been provided confidentially, the disclosure of which may violate their laws that regulate the matter or harm commercial interests.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the importing Party that intends to apply the measure shall provide a non-confidential summary of the information that is confidential.
Article 8-16 : Observations of the exporting Party.
During the consultation period, the exporting Party will formulate the observations it deems pertinent, in particular the admissibility of invoking the safeguard and the proposed measures.
Article 8-17 : Extension.
If the importing Party determines that the reasons that gave rise to the application of the safeguard measure subsist, it shall notify the exporting Party of its intention to extend it, at least sixty days prior to the expiration of the validity of those measures. The extension procedure will be carried out in accordance with the provisions established in this chapter for the adoption of safeguard measures.
CHAPTER IX : Unfair international trade practices
Article 9-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
countervailing duty: antidumping duties and countervailing duties or duties, as the case may be.
Interested party: the producers, importers and exporters of the good subject to investigation, as well as foreign moral or legal persons that have a direct interest in the investigation in question.
final resolution: the resolution of the authority that decides whether or not to impose definitive countervailing duties.
Initial resolution: the resolution of the competent authority that formally declares the initiation of the investigation.
preliminary resolution: the resolution of the competent authority that decides whether or not to impose a provisional countervailing duty.
Article 9-02 : Export subsidies.
As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will not grant subsidies to the exports of industrial goods destined for the markets of the Parties. Subsidies for the export of goods from the agricultural sector will be governed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V, Section A.
Article 9-03 : Compensatory quotas.
The importing Party, in accordance with its legislation and in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, in the GATT, in the Agreement Regarding the Application of Article VI of the GATT (Anti-dumping Code), in the Agreement Regarding the Interpretation and Application of Articles VI, XVI and XXIII of the GATT (Subsidies and Countervailing Duties Code), may establish and apply countervailing duties in the event of situations in which, through an objective examination based on positive evidence:
a) the existence of imports is determined:
i) in dumped conditions; either
ii) goods that have received export subsidies, including subsidies other than those granted to exports, which adversely influence normal competition conditions; Y
b) the existence of damage or threat of damage to the domestic production of identical or similar goods in the importing Party or the significant delay in the start of that production is verified, as a consequence of those imports of identical or similar goods from another Party .
Article 9-04 : Minimum margins.
The Party shall terminate the investigations referred to in Article 9-03, when the dumping margin is less than 2% of the normal value of the investigated good or when the amount of the subsidy is less than 1% ad valorem.
In addition, the investigations referred to in Article 9-03 will be terminated when the volume of the dumped or subsidized imports represents less than 1% of the domestic market for the similar good in the importing Party, except in the case in which the The volume of imports from the exporting Party is lower, individually considered, but accumulated, than imports at dumping or subsidized prices from other countries, representing more than 2.5% of that market.
Article 9-05 : Communications and deadlines.
Each Party shall communicate the resolutions on the matter directly to its importers and to the exporters of the other Party of which it is aware and, where appropriate, to the government of the exporting Party, to the responsible national body referred to in Chapter XX , and to the diplomatic mission of the exporting Party accredited to the Party conducting the investigation. Likewise, the actions tending to identify and locate the interested parties in the procedure will be carried out in order to guarantee the exercise of the right of defense.
The communication of the initial resolution shall be made within eight business days following its publication in the official dissemination body of the importing Party.
The communication of the initial resolution will contain, at least, the following information:
a) the terms and place for the presentation of allegations, evidence and other documents; Y
b) the name, address and telephone number of the office where information can be obtained, consultations made and the case file inspected.
With the communication, the exporters will be sent a copy of the respective publication in the official publication of the importing Party, as well as a copy of the public version of the complaint document and its annexes.
The Party will grant the interested parties of which it is aware, a response period of not less than thirty business days, counted from the publication of the initial resolution in the respective official dissemination body, in order for them to appear to state what they their right agrees, and will grant the interested parties an equal term for the same purposes counted from the publication of the preliminary resolution in that body.
Article 9-06 : Content of the resolutions.
The initial, preliminary and final resolution will contain at least the following:
a) the name of the applicant;
b) the indication of the imported good subject to the procedure and its tariff classification;
c) the elements and evidence used to determine the existence of the unfair practice, damage or threat of damage, and their causal relationship;
d) the factual and legal considerations that led the authority to initiate an investigation or to impose a countervailing duty; Y
e) the legal arguments, data, facts or circumstances that found and motivate the decision in question.
Article 9-07 : Rights and obligations of the interested parties.
For the purposes of the rights and obligations established in this chapter, each Party shall ensure that the parties interested in the administrative investigation have the same rights and obligations. The rights and obligations of the interested parties will be respected and observed, both in the course of the procedure and in the administrative and contentious instances that are instituted against the final resolutions.
Article 9-08 : Clarifications.
Once a compensatory, provisional or final quota has been imposed, the interested parties may request the authority that has issued the act, to decide whether a certain asset is subject to the imposed measure, or to clarify any aspect of the corresponding resolution.
Article 9-09 : Conciliation hearings.
In the course of the investigation, any interested party may request the competent authority to hold conciliatory hearings in order to reach a satisfactory solution.
Article 9-10 : Review.
Definitive countervailing duties may be reviewed by the competent authority before a change of circumstances in the market of the importing Party and the export market.
Article 9-11 : Validity of compensatory quotas.
A definitive compensatory quota will be eliminated automatically when after five years, counted from the validity of that quota, none of the interested parties has requested its review nor has the competent authority initiated it ex officio.
Article 9-12 : Access to the file.
Interested parties will have access to the administrative file of the procedure in question, except for the confidential information it contains.
Article 9-13 : Sending copies.
The parties interested in the investigation may send the other interested parties copies of each of the reports, documents and means of evidence that they present to the investigating authority in the course of the investigation.
Article 9-14 : Information meetings.
The competent authority of the importing Party, upon request of the interested parties, will hold information meetings, in order to disseminate the pertinent information on the content of the provisional and final resolutions.
With respect to a preliminary ruling, the request referred to in paragraph 1 may be submitted at any time during the investigation. In the case of a final resolution, this request must be submitted within five business days following the publication of the resolution in the respective official dissemination body. In both cases, the competent authority will hold the meeting within a period of fifteen business days from the presentation of the request.
In the information meetings referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the interested parties will have the right to review the reports or technical reports, the methodology, the spreadsheets and, in general, any element on which the corresponding resolution has been based, except confidential information.
Article 9-15 : Other rights of interested parties.
The competent authorities will hold, at the request of a party, conciliatory meetings in which the interested parties may appear and listen to their counterparts regarding the information or evidence that the investigating authority deems appropriate.
Interested parties will be given the opportunity to present their arguments after the evidence period. The allegations will consist of the written presentation of conclusions related to the information and arguments rendered in the course of the investigation.
Article 9-16 : Publication.
Each Party shall publish the following resolutions in its respective official dissemination body:
a) the initial, preliminary and final resolution;
b) the one that declares the administrative investigation concluded:
i) due to commitments with the exporting Party or with the exporters, as the case may be;
ii) due to commitments derived from the holding of conciliation hearings; either
iii) for any other reason.
c) those that reject the complaints; Y
d) those for which the withdrawals of the complainants are accepted.
Article 9-17 : Access to other files.
The competent authority of each Party will allow the interested parties, in the course of an investigation, access to the public information contained in the administrative files of any other investigation, once sixty business days have elapsed from the final resolution of this investigation. .
Article 9-18 : Reimbursement or reimbursement.
If a compensatory quota is determined in a final resolution that is lower than the one that has been provisionally determined, the competent authority of the importing Party shall return the amounts paid in excess.
Article 9-19 : Deadlines for provisional measures.
No Party shall impose a provisional compensatory duty until after sixty business days have elapsed from the date of publication of the initial resolution in its respective official dissemination body.
Article 9-20 : Amendments to national legislation.
When a Party decides to amend, add or repeal its legal provisions regarding unfair international trade practices, it shall notify the other Parties immediately after its publication in their respective official dissemination body.
The reforms, additions or abrogations will be compatible with the international regulations mentioned in article 9-03.
The Party that considers that the reforms, additions or abrogations are in violation of the provisions of this chapter, may resort to the dispute resolution mechanism of chapter XIX.
Article 9-21 : Substantiation of the procedure.
The Parties will substantiate the investigation procedures on unfair practices, through the competent national agencies, agencies or public entities, exclusively.
Article 9-22 : Settlement of disputes.
When the final decision of an arbitral tribunal declares that the application of a countervailing fee by a Party is inconsistent with any provision of this chapter, the Party shall cease to apply or adjust the countervailing fee in question with respect to the property of the Party or Complaining parties.
CHAPTER X : General principles on trade in services
Article 10-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
trade in services: the provision of a service:
a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;
b) in the territory of a Party to a consumer of another Party;
c) through the presence of companies providing services of one Party in the territory of another Party;
d) by physical or natural persons of a Party in the territory of another Party.
enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party, including branches located in the territory of a Party that carry out economic activities in that territory;
measures that a Party adopts or maintains: measures adopted or maintained by:
a) federal or central, state or departmental governments; Y
b) non-governmental organizations that exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated to them by those governments.
service provider of a Party: a person of a Party who intends to provide or provides a service;
quantitative restriction: a non-discriminatory measure that imposes limitations on:
a) the number of service providers, whether through a quota, monopoly or an economic necessity test or by any other quantitative means; either
b) the operations of any service provider, whether through a fee or an economic need test, or by any other quantitative means.
professional services: services that require education or higher education or training for their provision and whose exercise is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by those who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft.
Article 10-02 : Scope of application.
This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains on trade in services carried out by service providers of another Party, including those related to:
a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a service;
b) the purchase, use or payment of a service;
c) access to and use of distribution and transportation systems;
d) access to public telecommunications services and the use of their networks;
e) the presence in its territory of a service provider of another Party; Y
f) The granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.
This chapter does not apply to:
a) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance;
b) non-commercial services or government functions such as law enforcement, social rehabilitation services, income security or insurance, social security or insurance, social welfare, public education, public training, health and care for children;
c) financial services.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a) impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of another Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in the territory of the receiving Party, nor to confer any right on that national, with respect to that access or job;
b) impose any obligation or grant any right to a Party, with respect to government purchases made by a Party or a State enterprise referred to in Chapter XV.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the measures related to the services contemplated in annexes 1 and 2 to this article, only to the extent and terms established in those annexes.
Article 10-03 : Transparency.
Each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency situations, no later than the date of its entry into force, all relevant laws, regulations, administrative guidelines and other decisions, resolutions or measures of general application that refer to or affect the operation of this chapter, and have been put into effect by governmental institutions of the Party or by a non-governmental regulatory body of the Party. International agreements that refer to trade in services or affect it and those that are a development of this Agreement will also be published.
When the publication of the information referred to in paragraph 1 is not feasible or practical, it will be made available to the public in another way.
Each Party shall promptly inform the other Parties, at least annually, of the establishment of new laws, regulations or administrative guidelines that significantly affect the trade in services covered by its specific commitments under this Chapter, or of the modifications that it introduces. .
Each Party shall respond promptly to all requests for specific information made by the other Parties about all the measures mentioned in paragraph 1. In addition, each Party shall establish one or more centers to provide specific information to the other Parties that request it on all these issues, as well as those that are subject to the information obligation provided for in paragraph 3.
Article 10-04 : National treatment.
Each Party shall grant the services, as well as the providers of those services of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted, in similar circumstances, to its services or service providers.
Treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1 means, with respect to a state or department, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that state or department accords, in like circumstances, to service providers of the Party. Part of which is a member.
Article 10-05 : Most favored nation treatment.
Each Party shall accord to the services, as well as to the providers of those services, of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that accorded, in similar circumstances, to the services and to the providers of services of any other Party or of any country that is not Part.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to prevent a Party from conferring or granting advantages to countries with which it has a land border for the purpose of facilitating exchanges, limited to contiguous border areas, of services that are produced and consumed locally. .
Article 10-06 : Non-mandatory local presence.
No Party shall require a service provider of another Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of business, or to reside in its territory as a condition of providing a service.
Article 10-07 : Consolidation of measures.
No Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of its existing measures with respect to Articles 10-04 to 10-06. Any amendment to these measures will not decrease the degree of compliance of the measure as it was in effect immediately prior to the amendment.
Within the eight months following the signing of the Treaty, the Parties will sign a Protocol that will consist of two lists that will contain the agreements of the negotiations that the Parties carry out during those eight months.
List 1 will contain the sectors and subsectors that each Party will reserve from compliance with the obligations established in paragraph 1.
List 2 will contain the federal and central measures inconsistent with articles 10-04 to 10-06 that each Party decides to maintain.
Within the two years following the signing of the Treaty, the Parties will sign a Protocol in which they will record state and departmental measures that do not conform to articles 10-04 to 10-06.
The Parties will not have the obligation to register the municipal measures.
Article 10-08 : Non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions.
The Parties will seek to negotiate periodically, at least every two years, the release or elimination of existing quantitative restrictions that they maintain at the federal or central, state or departmental level.
Within the year following the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will sign a Protocol that will contain the quantitative restrictions referred to in paragraph 1.
Each Party shall notify the other Parties of any quantitative restrictions, other than those at the municipal government level, that it adopts after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and shall record the restriction in the Protocol referred to in paragraph 2.
The agreements resulting from the negotiation for the release referred to in paragraph 1 will be registered in Protocols.
Article 10-09 : Future release.
Through future negotiations that will be convened by the Commission, the Parties will deepen the liberalization achieved in the different service sectors, with a view to achieving the elimination of the remaining restrictions registered in accordance with article 10-07, paragraphs 3 to 5, and a global balance in the commitments.
Article 10-10 : Release of non-discriminatory measures.
The Parties may negotiate the release of quantitative restrictions, licensing requirements and other non-discriminatory measures. The commitments acquired will be recorded in a Protocol signed by the Parties.
Article 10-11 : Reciprocity and global balance.
The Parties, in the negotiations referred to in articles 10-07, 10-08 and 10-10, will seek to reach agreements on the basis of reciprocity, aimed at achieving a global balance in the concessions granted.
Article 10-12 : Procedures.
No later than one month after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall jointly establish procedures to carry out the negotiations that will lead to the elaboration of the Protocols mentioned in articles 10-07, 10-08 and 10- 10, as well as for the communication of the measures contemplated in articles 10-07, paragraph 6 and 10-08, paragraphs 2 and 3.
Article 10-13 : Technical cooperation.
The Parties, within the following twenty-four months from the entry into force of this Agreement, shall establish a system to provide service providers with information regarding their markets in relation to:
a) the commercial and technical aspects of the provision of services;
b) the possibility of obtaining technology in terms of services; Y
c) those aspects that the Commission considers pertinent on this subject.
The Commission will recommend to the Parties the adoption of the necessary measures for due compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1.
Article 10-14 : Granting of licenses and certificates.
In order to ensure that any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the requirements and procedures for the granting of licenses or certifications to nationals of another Party does not constitute an unnecessary barrier to trade, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that such measures:
a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as the capacity and aptitude to provide a service;
b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of a service; Y
c) do not constitute a disguised restriction on the cross-border provision of a service.
When a Party revalidates or recognizes, unilaterally or by agreement with another country, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of another Party or of any country that is not a Party:
a) nothing in Article 10-05 shall be construed to require that Party to revalidate or recognize education or studies, licenses or certificates or degrees obtained in the territory of another Party; Y
b) the Party shall provide any other Party with an adequate opportunity to demonstrate the reasons why the education or studies, licences, certificates or titles obtained in the territory of that Party should also be revalidated or recognized, or to negotiate or enter into an agreement have equivalent effects.
Each Party, within a period of two years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, shall eliminate any requirement of nationality or permanent residence that it maintains for the granting of licenses, certificates or titles to professional service providers. from elsewhere. When a Party fails to comply with this obligation with respect to a particular sector, any other Party shall have, in the same sector and for the same period of time as the non-compliant Party, as its sole remedy the right to:
a) maintain a requirement equivalent to that included in the list referred to in article 10-07, paragraph 5.
b) reset:
i) any such requirements at the central or federal level that it has eliminated in accordance with this article; either
ii) any of those requirements at the state or departmental level that would have been in force on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, by means of communication to the non-compliant Party.
The annex to article 10-02 establishes procedures for the recognition of studies or education and experience, as well as other rules and requirements that govern professional service providers.
Article 10-15 : Denial of benefits.
A Party may, prior communication and consultation, deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of another Party, when it determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out important business activities in the territory of any of the Parties. Parties and that, in addition, is owned or controlled by persons of a country that is not a Party.
Annex 1 to article 10-02 : Professional services
For the purposes of this annex, professional practice shall mean: the habitual performance of any professional act or the provision of any service specific to each profession that requires authorization in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
This annex will apply to all measures related to the criteria for the granting and mutual recognition of:
a) certificates or academic titles required in each Party for professional practice;
b) professional certificates or cards or any other type of authorization or requirement necessary for professional practice in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
The purpose of this annex is to establish the rules that the Parties will observe to gradually reduce and eliminate in their territory the barriers to the provision of professional services between them;
The Parties agree that the granting and mutual recognition processes referred to in paragraph 2 will be based on raising the quality of professional services through the establishment of standards and criteria for these processes while protecting consumers and safeguarding the public interest.
Each Party shall ensure that the relevant bodies, including the competent government agencies and professional associations and colleges, develop such criteria and standards referred to in paragraph 4 and formulate and submit recommendations on mutual recognition.
The elaboration of criteria and norms referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5, may consider the following elements: education or studies, examinations, experience, conduct and ethics, professional development and updating, renewal or updating of the documents or acts to which refers to paragraph 2, field of action, local knowledge and consumer protection.
In order to facilitate recognition or revalidation with the appropriate legality and justification, within six months from the entry into force of this Treaty, the Commission will establish a working group with the participation of the competent educational authorities of the Parties to establish a university information system that contains at least the following elements:
a) Higher Education institutions authorized by each Party;
b) academic programs and degrees offered;
c) characteristics and content of the academic programs; Y
d) other elements that the working group considers pertinent.
In order to put into practice the provisions of paragraphs 4 to 6, the Parties will provide the detailed and necessary information for the granting and mutual recognition of the documents and acts referred to in paragraph 2, including that corresponding to: academic courses, guides and study materials, payment of rights, exam dates, schedules, locations, affiliation with societies and/or professional associations. This information will include federal or central, state or departmental legislation, administrative guidelines and measures of general application and those prepared by governmental and non-governmental organizations.
Each Party shall endeavor to have the competent authority adopt the recommendations made pursuant to paragraph 5 to the extent that they are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement.
The Parties shall review at least once every three years, the application of the provisions of this annex.
Annex 2 to article 10-02 : Transport
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to air services, including national and international air transport, with and without a fixed itinerary, nor to auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:
a) aircraft repair and major maintenance services, subject to reciprocity;
b) specialized air services; Y
c) computerized reservation systems.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Parties undertake to develop and expand passenger and cargo air transport relations between them, in order to seek free market access. This will be carried out within the framework of the bilateral agreements between the Parties.
The Parties will have free access to cargo of any nature, transported by sea, generated by their foreign trade through national flag vessels, those operated, chartered or leased by their shipping companies, as well as those reputed to be the national flag in accordance with their own legislation.
The Parties will make multimodal transport regulations compatible in those aspects that require it.
The Parties will make efforts to advance in the study of measures that contribute to the development of land transport between them.
CHAPTER XI : Telecommunications
Article 11-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it is understood by:
intra- business communications: telecommunications through which a company communicates within itself or with its subsidiaries, branches and, according to the internal laws and regulations of each Party, with its affiliates, or these communicate with each other. For such purposes, the terms subsidiaries, branches and, where appropriate, affiliates shall be interpreted in accordance with the definition of the Party in question. Intra-company communications do not include commercial or non-commercial services provided to companies that are not subsidiaries, branches or related affiliates, or that are offered to clients or potential clients and, in general, to different moral or legal persons.
public telecommunications transport network: the physical infrastructure that allows the provision of public telecommunications services.
value-added services: telecommunications services that use computerized processing systems that act on the format, content, code, protocol or similar aspects of the information transmitted by the user, creating a new service different from the basic service and, to this extent, providing the client with additional, different or restructured information; or involving user interaction with stored information.
public telecommunications transport service: any telecommunications transport service that a Party expressly or de facto establishes, which is offered to the general public. Such services may include telegraph, telephone, telex, carrier service, and data transmission services, which typically involve the real-time transmission of customer-supplied information between two or more points without any end-to-end change in form. or content of that information.
telecommunications: any transmission, emission or reception of signs, signals, writings, images, sounds or information of any nature by wire, radioelectricity, optical means or other electromagnetic systems.
Article 11-02 : General principles.
The Parties acknowledge:
a) the right of each of them to regulate the provision of services in its territory, and to establish new regulations in this regard, in order to achieve the objectives of its national policy;
b) the specific characteristics of the telecommunications services sector and, in particular, its double function as an independent sector of economic activity and a fundamental means of supporting other economic activities.
Article 11-03 : Scope of application.
This Chapter applies to measures by each Party:
a) for the provision of value-added telecommunications services, under the terms established in article 11-05;
b) that affect access to public telecommunications transport networks and services and their use by value-added service providers;
c) that adopts or maintains related to the standardization of connection of terminal equipment or other equipment or system to public telecommunications networks.
This Chapter does not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in connection with the broadcasting or cable distribution of radio and television programming, or the provision of basic telecommunications services.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a) compel a Party to authorize a person of another Party to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply telecommunications transport networks or services;
b) compel a Party to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or provide telecommunications transport networks or services that are not offered to the general public, or to require any person to do so;
c) prevent a Party from prohibiting persons who operate private networks from using one of such networks to provide public telecommunications networks or services to third parties;
d) compel a Party to require any person who broadcasts or distributes radio or television programs by cable to provide its broadcasting or cable distribution infrastructure as a public telecommunications network.
In case of inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and any other of this Agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 11-04 : Access to public telecommunications transport networks and services and their use.
Each Party shall guarantee that any service provider of another Party is granted, under reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions, in accordance with the rules established in the Party in question, access to public telecommunications transport networks and services. and the use thereof, for the supply of value-added services. This obligation will be fulfilled, among other ways, through the application of paragraphs 2 to 9.
Each Party shall endeavor to ensure that pricing for access to and use of public telecommunications transport networks and services is cost-based;
Each Party shall ensure that the service providers of the other Parties have access to and use any public telecommunications transport network or service offered within or through its borders, including private leased circuits. For these purposes, each Party shall ensure, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraphs 7 and 8, that these providers are allowed:
a) purchase or lease and connect the terminal equipment or other equipment that interfaces with the network and is necessary to provide the provider's services;
b) use the operating protocols chosen by the service provider to supply any service that is not necessary to ensure the availability of telecommunications transport networks and services for the general public.
Nothing in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be construed to prevent cross-subsidization between public telecommunications transport services.
Each Party shall ensure that persons of another Party may have access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services to transmit information in its territory or across its borders, including for intra-business communications and for access to information contained in databases or stored in any other form that is readable by a machine in the territory of any Party, provided they are for private and exclusive use, without providing services to third parties and making the international connection through entities authorized to provide international basic services.
Notwithstanding paragraph 5, the Parties may take such measures as may be necessary to ensure the security and confidentiality of messages, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on international trade in services.
Bearing in mind that access to public telecommunications transport networks and services and their use does not involve authorization to provide these services and that authorization is required in all cases, each Party shall guarantee that no further conditions are imposed on users. for access to public telecommunications transport networks or services and for their use, than those necessary for:
a) safeguard the public service responsibilities of providers of public telecommunications services or telecommunications networks, in particular their ability to make their networks or services available to the general public;
b) protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or services; Y
c) guarantee that the service providers of the other Parties only supply value-added services when allowed in accordance with the commitments set forth in this chapter.
In the event that they satisfy the criteria established in paragraph 7, the conditions for access to their networks and services may include the following:
a) restrictions placed on the resale or sharing of such services;
b) the requirement to use specified technical interfaces, including interface protocols, for interconnection with such networks and services;
c) requirements when necessary, for the interoperability of such services and to promote the achievement of the objectives set out in article 11-08, paragraph 2;
d) type approval of terminal equipment or other equipment that interfaces with the network and technical requirements for the connection of that equipment to those networks;
e) restrictions imposed on the interconnection of private, leased or owned circuits with those networks or services, or with circuits leased by another service provider; either
f) communication, registration or licensing procedures.
Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 8, a Party may impose conditions on access to and use of public telecommunications transport networks and services that are reasonable, non-discriminatory, and necessary to strengthen its national telecommunications infrastructure and their ability to provide telecommunications services and to increase their participation in international trade in these services.
Article 11-05 : Conditions for the provision of value-added services.
Considering the strategic role of value-added services to increase the competitiveness of all economic activities in the region, the Parties will establish the necessary conditions for their provision, taking into account the procedures and information required for this purpose.
Each Party shall ensure that:
a) any procedure that it adopts or maintains to grant licenses, permits, registrations or communications regarding the provision of these services is transparent and non-discriminatory and that the requests are processed expeditiously; Y
b) the information required under such procedures is limited to that necessary to prove that the applicant has the financial and technical solvency to start rendering the service and that the applicant's services and terminal equipment or other equipment comply with the technical or regulations applicable in the Part.
No Party shall require a provider of these services:
a) Provide them to the general public, when they have been contracted by specific users and under defined technical conditions, or aimed at them;
b) justify their rates according to their costs;
c) interconnect their networks with any client or network in particular; either
d) Satisfy any particular standard or technical regulation, except for connection to a public telecommunications network, in which case the pertinent recommendations of the International Telecommunication Union will be taken into account.
Each Party may require the registration of a fee to:
a) a service provider, in order to correct a practice of this provider that the Party has considered in a particular case as anti-competitive, in accordance with its national legislation; either
b) a monopoly, to which the provisions of article 11-07 apply.
Article 11-06 : Measures related to standardization.
Each Party shall guarantee that within the measures related to standardization that refer to the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment or systems to public telecommunications networks, including those measures that refer to the use of test and measurement equipment for the procedure of conformity assessment, include at least those necessary for:
a) avoid technical damage to public telecommunications networks;
b) avoid technical interference with public telecommunications services or their deterioration;
c) avoid electromagnetic interference and ensure compatibility with other uses of the electromagnetic spectrum;
d) prevent billing equipment from malfunctioning; either
e) guarantee user security and access to public telecommunications networks or services and interworking with them.
The Parties may establish the approval requirement for terminal equipment or other systems and equipment, when these are intended to be connected to the public telecommunications network, provided that the approval criteria are compatible with the provisions of paragraph 1.
The user's terminal equipment may be approved or its approval may be required, according to the applicable conditions for connection to the public telecommunications network of the Party, in accordance with the provisions of this article. Terminal equipment type-approved by an authority recognized by the Party concerned shall be sufficient and no Party shall require additional authorization on type-approval aspects.
Each Party shall ensure that the end points of public telecommunications networks are defined on a reasonable and transparent basis.
Each Party, in relation to approval:
a) ensure that its conformity assessment procedures are transparent and non-discriminatory and that applications submitted for this purpose are processed expeditiously;
b) allow any technically qualified entity registered in the Parties to perform the required test on the terminal equipment or other equipment or system that will be connected to the public telecommunications network, in accordance with the evaluation procedures of the Party, without prejudice the company's right to review the accuracy and completeness of the test results; Y
c) shall ensure that the measures it adopts or maintains to authorize persons acting as agents of telecommunications equipment suppliers before the competent bodies for conformity assessment of the Party are not discriminatory.
Within the twelve months following the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party, through the Group of Three High-Level Telecommunications Group, shall adopt among its conformity assessment procedures, the necessary provisions to accept the results of the tests carried out, based on their established rules and procedures, by laboratories authorized and recognized by competent entities, which are located in the territory of another Party.
The Parties, through the High Level Telecommunications Group of the Group of Three, will design the work program for the implementation of the guidelines contained in this chapter and established in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Article 11-07 : Monopolies.
When a Party maintains or establishes a monopoly to provide public telecommunications networks and services, and that monopoly competes, directly or through subsidiaries, in the manufacture or sale of telecommunications goods, in the provision of value-added services, or other services telecommunications, the Party shall ensure that the monopoly does not use its monopoly position to engage in anti-competitive practices in those markets, either directly or through dealings with its affiliates, in such a way as to disadvantageously affect a person of other part. The prohibitions may refer to cross-subsidies between companies, behaviors that lead to abuse of dominant position and discriminatory access to public telecommunications networks and services.
Each Party shall adopt or maintain effective measures to prevent the anticompetitive conduct referred to in paragraph 1, such as:
a) accounting requirements;
b) structural separation requirements;
c) rules to ensure that the monopoly grants its competitors access to its networks or its telecommunications services, and the use of them, on terms and conditions no less favorable than those granted to itself or its subsidiaries; either
d) rules to ensure timely disclosure of technical changes in public telecommunications networks and their interfaces.
Each Party shall inform the other Parties of the measures referred to in paragraph 2.
Article 11-08 : Relationship with international organizations and agreements.
The Parties will do their best to stimulate the performance of regional and subregional organizations and promote them as forums to promote the development of telecommunications in the region.
The Parties, recognizing the importance of international standards to achieve global compatibility and interoperability of telecommunications networks or services, undertake to promote the application of standards issued by competent international organizations, such as the International Telecommunication Union and the International Organization for Standardization.
In case there are particular or joint technological developments of the Parties, the mechanisms tending to the application of regional standards related to these developments will be established.
Article 11-09 : Technical cooperation.
In order to stimulate the development of interoperable telecommunications infrastructure and services, the Parties will cooperate in the exchange of technological information, in the development of human resources in the sector, as well as in the creation and development of business exchange programs. , academic and intergovernmental.
The Parties shall encourage and support cooperation in the field of telecommunications at the international, regional and sub-regional levels.
Article 11-10 : Transparency.
Each Party shall make available to the public and to the other Parties information on measures relating to access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services, including measures relating to:
a) rates and other terms and conditions of service;
b) specifications of the technical interfaces with those services and networks;
c) information on the authorities responsible for the preparation and adoption of measures related to standardization that affect such access and use;
d) conditions applicable to the connection of terminal equipment or of another kind, to the public telecommunications network;
e) any communication, permit, registration or license requirements.
Article 11-11 : Denial of benefits.
A Party may deny the benefits of this chapter:
a) to a person of another Party that supplies value-added services, if it determines that the service and the facilities inherent to its provision are located in the territory of a country that is not a party to this Agreement; either
b) to a service provider that is a moral or legal person, if it establishes that the ownership or control of that person corresponds ultimately to persons from a country that is not a party.
Article 11-12 : Release schedule for value-added services.
For value-added services, the provisions of Chapter X shall apply.
The release of value-added services will be based on the following schedule:
a) each Party, upon the entry into force of this Agreement, shall permit:
i) cross-border provision of value-added services, with the exception of videotext services and enhanced packet-switched services;
ii) investment, up to 100%, by physical or natural persons or legal entities, including state companies of another Party, in companies established or to be established in its territory for the provision of value-added services, with exception of videotext services and enhanced packet-switched services;
b) the limitations established in literal a), regarding the videotext services and enhanced packet switching services, will be eliminated from the 1st. July 1995.
Article 11-13 : Other provisions.
Subject to the analysis of the integration achieved in value-added services, the Parties within the two years following the entry into force of this Agreement will make the pertinent consultations to determine the deepening and expansion of the coverage of the free trade area of ​​services. of telecommunications.
CHAPTER XII : Financial services
Article 12-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
company: any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and privately or government owned, including companies, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures or other associations.
public entity: a central bank, or monetary authority of a Party, or any financial institution of a public nature owned or controlled by a Party.
financial institution: any financial intermediary or other enterprise that is authorized to do financial business and is regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the laws of the Party in whose territory it is located.
financial institution of another Party: a financial institution, located in the territory of a Party that is controlled by persons of another Party.
investment:
a) a company;
b) shares of a company;
c) a share in a company that entitles the owner to participate in the income or profits of the company;
d) a participation in a company that gives the owner the right to participate in the social assets of that company in a liquidation;
e) real estate or immovable property or other assets, tangible or intangible, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit or for other business purposes; Y
f) benefits from allocating capital or other resources to the development of an economic activity in the territory of another Party, in accordance with, among others:
i) contracts involving the presence in the territory of another Party of assets of an investor, such as concessions, construction contracts and turnkey contracts; either
ii) contracts in which the consideration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company.
It will not be understood by investment:
a) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:
i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of a Party to a company in the territory of another Party; either
ii) the granting of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing; either
b) any other pecuniary claim that does not entail the types of rights provided in the literals of the definition of investment;
c) a loan granted by a financial institution or a debt security owned by a financial institution, except in the case of a loan to a financial institution or a debt security of a financial institution that is treated as capital for regulatory purposes by the Party in whose territory the financial institution is located.
disputing investor: an investor of a Party that makes a claim under the terms of the rules relating to the settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party.
investment of an investor of a Party: an investment owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an investor of that Party in the territory of another Party.
non-Party investment: the investment of an investor that is not an investor of a Party.
investor of a Party: a Party or a State enterprise thereof, or a person of that Party, that intends to make, makes or has made an investment in the territory of another Party.
measure: any action, act or decision, adopted or that may be adopted by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision or administrative provision, requirement or practice, or in any other form.
new financial service: a financial service not provided in the territory of the Party that is provided in the territory of another Party, and includes any new form of distribution of a financial service, or sale of a financial product that is not sold in the territory of the Party. Part.
self-regulatory bodies: any non-governmental entity, including any stock or futures exchange or market, clearing house or any other association or organization that exercises its own or delegated authority for regulation or supervision over financial service providers or institutions financial.
person of a Party: a national or company of a Party, does not include a branch of a company of a non-Party country.
cross-border provision of financial services or cross-border trade in financial services:
a) the provision of a financial service from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;
b) in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a person of another Party; either
c) by a person of a Party in the territory of another Party.
financial service provider of a Party: a person of a Party who is engaged in the business of providing a financial service in the territory of the Party.
cross-border financial service provider of a Party: a financial service provider of a Party that seeks to provide or provides financial services through the cross-border provision of those services.
financial service: a service of a financial nature, including insurance, reinsurance, and any related or auxiliary service to a service of a financial nature.
Article 12-02 : Scope of application.
This Chapter refers to measures by a Party relating to:
a) financial institutions of another Party;
b) investors of another Party and investments of those investors in financial institutions in the territory of the Party; Y
c) cross-border trade in financial services.
This chapter does not apply to:
a) Activities or services that are part of public retirement plans or public social security systems;
b) the use of financial resources owned by the Party;
c) other activities or services on behalf of the Party or its public entities, or with its guarantee.
Each Party undertakes to progressively and gradually release, through successive negotiations, all financial restrictions or reserves with the purpose of making economic complementarity between them effective. 4. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Chapter and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Articles 17-08, 17-09 and 17-13 of Chapter XVII are an integral part of this chapter.
Article 12-03 : Self- regulated bodies.
Where a Party requires a financial institution or cross-border financial service provider of another Party to be a member of, participate in, or have access to a self-regulatory body to offer a financial service in or to its territory, the Party shall do everything in its power to its scope for that body to comply with the obligations of this chapter.
Article 12-04 : Right of establishment.
The Parties recognize the principle that investors of each Party engaged in the business of providing financial services in the territory of that Party should be permitted to establish a financial institution in the territory of another Party, through any of the modalities of establishment and operation that this allows.
A Party may impose at the time of establishment, terms and conditions that are consistent with Article 12-06.
Article 12-05 : Cross-border trade.
No Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of its measures relating to cross-border trade in financial services by cross-border financial service providers of another Party after the entry into force of this Agreement.
Each Party shall permit persons located in its territory and its nationals, wherever they may be, to purchase financial services from cross-border financial service providers of another Party located in the territory of that other Party or of another Party. This does not obligate a Party to allow those service providers to do business or advertise in its territory. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party may define what is "to do business" and "advertise" for the purposes of this obligation.
Without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in financial services, a Party may require the registration of cross-border financial service providers of another Party and of financial instruments.
Article 12-06 : National treatment.
In similar circumstances, each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords to its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other forms of alienation of financial institutions and investments in financial institutions in its territory.
In similar circumstances, each Party shall accord to financial institutions of another Party and to investments of investors of another Party in financial institutions treatment no less favorable than that it accords to its own financial institutions and to investments of its own investors in financial institutions with respect to to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation and sale or other forms of alienation of financial institutions and investments.
In similar circumstances, pursuant to Article 12-05, when a Party permits the cross-border provision of a financial service, it shall accord to cross-border financial service providers of another Party treatment no less favorable than it accords to its own financial service providers with respect to the provision of of such service.
A Party's treatment of financial institutions and cross-border financial service providers of another Party, whether identical or different from that accorded to its own institutions or service providers in similar circumstances, is consistent with paragraphs 1 through 3 if it provides equality of opportunities to compete.
A Party's treatment does not provide equal opportunity to compete if, in like circumstances, it disadvantages cross-border financial institutions and financial service providers of another Party in their ability to provide financial services, compared with their ability to the Party's own financial institutions and service providers to provide those services.
Article 12-07 : Most favored nation treatment.
Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party, financial institutions of another Party, investments by investors in financial institutions, and cross-border financial service providers of another Party, in like circumstances, treatment no less favorable than that accorded to investors, financial institutions , investments of investors in financial institutions and providers of cross-border financial services of another Party or of another country that is not a Party.
Article 12-08 : Recognition and harmonization.
When applying the measures included in this chapter, a Party may recognize the prudential measures of another Party or of a country that is not a Party. That recognition may be granted unilaterally, achieved through harmonization or other means, or based on an agreement or arrangement with the other Party or with the non-Party country.
The Party granting recognition of prudential measures in accordance with paragraph 1 shall provide appropriate opportunities for any other Party to demonstrate that there are circumstances for which there are or will be equivalent regulations, supervision and enforcement of the regulation, and if appropriate, procedures for sharing information between the Parties.
Where a Party grants recognition of prudential measures in accordance with paragraph 1 and the circumstances set forth in paragraph 2 exist, the Party shall provide appropriate opportunities for another Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a similar agreement or arrangement. .
Article 12-09 : Exceptions.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting or maintaining reasonable prudential measures of a financial nature for reasons such as:
a) protect fund takers, as well as investors, depositors or other creditors, holders or beneficiaries of policies or creditors of fiduciary obligations in charge of a financial institution or a provider of cross-border financial services;
b) maintain the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers; Y
c) ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system of that Party.
Nothing of the provisions of chapters X, XI, XIII, XVI, XVII of this Treaty applies to non-discriminatory measures of general application, adopted by public entities that are in charge of adopting or directing monetary policies or related credit policies. , or exchange policies. This paragraph shall not affect the obligations of a Party under Articles 17-04, 17-07 and 12-18.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement that allows a Party to restrict transfers, and notwithstanding the provisions of Article 12-18, paragraphs 1 through 3, a Party may prevent or limit transfers from a financial institution or provider of cross-border financial services to, an affiliate or a person related to, or for the benefit of, that institution or that service provider, through the fair and non-discriminatory application of measures related to maintaining the safety, soundness, integrity or financial liability of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers.
Article 12-06 shall not apply to the granting of exclusive rights by a Party to a financial institution to provide one of the financial services referred to in Article 12-02, paragraph 2, letter a).
Article 12-10 : Transparency.
Each Party shall ensure that any measure it adopts on matters related to this Chapter is officially published or timely disclosed to the recipients thereof by some other written means.
The regulatory authorities of each Party will make available to interested parties the requirements to fill out an application for the provision of financial services.
At the request of the applicant, the regulatory authority will inform him about the status of his application. When that authority requires additional information from the applicant, it will communicate it without undue delay.
The regulatory authorities of each Party shall issue, within a period of 120 days, an administrative resolution regarding a complete application related to the provision of a financial service, presented by an investor in a financial institution, by a financial institution or by a provider of cross-border financial services of another Party. The authority will notify the interested party, without delay, of the resolution. The application will not be considered complete until all relevant hearings are held and all necessary information is received. When it is not feasible to issue a resolution within the 120-day period, the regulatory authority will notify the interested party without undue delay and will subsequently seek to issue the resolution within a reasonable period of time.
Nothing in this chapter requires a Party to either disclose or allow access to:
a) information relating to the financial affairs and accounts of individual clients of financial institutions or of cross-border financial service providers; either
b) any confidential information the disclosure of which would hinder law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or harm the legitimate business interests of particular companies.
Each Party will maintain or establish one or more consultation centers, within 360 days after the entry into force of this Agreement, to respond as soon as possible to all reasonable questions from interested persons regarding the measures of general application adopted by that Party. part in connection with this chapter.
Article 12-11 : Financial Services Committee.
The Parties create the Financial Services Committee. The principal representative of each Party shall be an official of the competent authority of that Party.
The committee:
a) supervise the application of this chapter and its further development;
b) consider the aspects related to financial services that are presented to it by a Party;
c) will participate in dispute resolution procedures in accordance with articles 12-19 and 12-20;
d) Facilitate the exchange of information between supervisory authorities and cooperate, in terms of advice on prudential regulation, seeking the harmonization of regulatory frameworks as well as other policies when deemed appropriate.
The Committee will meet at least once a year to evaluate the operation of this Agreement with respect to financial services.
CHAPTER XII: Financial services
Article 12-12 : Consultations.
Each Party may request consultations with another regarding any matter related to this Agreement that affects financial services. The other Party shall favorably consider such request. The consulting Parties shall inform the Committee of the results of their consultations during the meetings it holds.
Officials from the competent authorities of the Parties will participate in the consultations provided for in this article.
Each Party may request that the regulatory authorities of another Party intervene in consultations conducted pursuant to this Article, to discuss measures of general application of that other Party that may affect the operations of cross-border financial institutions or financial service providers. in the territory of the Party that requested the consultation.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to oblige the regulatory authorities involved in inquiries pursuant to paragraph 3, to disclose information or to act in a manner that could interfere in particular regulatory, supervisory, administrative or application of measures.
In cases where, for supervisory purposes, a Party needs information on a financial institution in the territory of another Party or on cross-border financial service providers in the territory of another Party, the Party may turn to the responsible regulatory authority in the territory of the Party. another Party to request the information.
Article 12-13 : New financial services and data processing.
Each Party shall permit a financial institution of another Party to provide any new financial services of a type similar to those that that Party allows its financial institutions to provide, in accordance with its laws in similar circumstances. The Party may decide the institutional and legal modality through which said service is offered and may require authorization for its provision. When such authorization is required, the respective resolution will be issued within a reasonable period of time and authorization may only be denied for prudential reasons.
Each Party shall allow financial institutions of another Party to transfer information for processing within or outside the territory of the Party, using any of the means authorized by the Party, when necessary to carry out the ordinary business activities of those Parties. institutions.
Article 12-14 : Senior business management and management bodies.
No Party may compel financial institutions of another Party to hire personnel of any particular nationality to fill senior business management positions or other essential positions.
No Party may require that the board of directors or the board of directors of a financial institution of another Party be composed of a greater than simple majority of nationals of that Party, of residents in its territory, or of a combination of both.
Article 12-15 : Preparation of reservations.
The Parties will prepare, within eight months following the entry into force of this Agreement, a Protocol in which each Party will include reservations to Articles 12-04 to 12-07 and 12-14.
Those reservations will include the measures with respect to which neither Party will increase the degree of non-conformity with those articles as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Any amendment to any of those measures will not decrease the degree of compliance of the measure as it was in effect immediately prior to the amendment;
The reservations referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain the following elements:
a) sector refers to sectors for which each Party has adopted a reservation;
b) subsector refers to the specific sector in which the reservation has been taken;
c) industrial classification refers to the activity covered by the reservation, in accordance with the national industrial classification codes, when applicable;
d) type of reservation specifies the obligation among those mentioned in paragraph 1, about which a reservation is taken;
e) level of government indicates the level of government that maintains the measure on which the reservation is maintained;
f) measures identifies the measures that apply to the sector, subsector or activities covered by the reservation;
g) description describes the coverage of the sector, subsector or activities covered by the reservation.
h) phasing out refers to commitments, if any, for liberalization after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
In the interpretation of a reservation, all the elements of the reservation will be considered.
When a Party has established, in chapters X, XI, XIII, XVI and XVII of this Agreement, a reservation to issues related to the right of establishment, cross-border trade, national treatment, most favored nation treatment, and business senior management and bodies of administration, the reservation will be understood to be made to articles from 04-12 to 07-12 and 12-14, as the case may be, to the extent that the measure, sector, subsector or activity specified in the reservation are covered by this chapter. .
Article 12-16 : Denial of benefits.
A Party may partially or totally deny the benefits derived from this Chapter to a financial service provider of another Party or to a cross-border financial service provider of another Party, prior communication and consultation, in accordance with Articles 12-10 and 12. -12, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out important business activities in the territory of any of the Parties or that is owned or controlled by persons from a country that is not a Party, without prejudice of what is established in the annex to this article.
Article 12-17 : Transfers.
Each Party shall allow all transfers related to the investment in its territory of an investor of another Party to be made freely and without delay. Those transfers include:
a) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration expenses, technical assistance and other charges, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;
b) products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;
c) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or his investment is a party;
d) payments made in accordance with the article relating to expropriation and compensation; Y
e) payments that come from the settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party.
Each Party will allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currency, at the exchange rate prevailing in the market on the transfer date for cash transactions of the currency to be transferred, without prejudice to the provisions of article 12- 18.
No Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits, or profits or other amounts derived from investments carried out in the territory of another Party, or attributable to them.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, each Party may prevent transfers, through the equitable, non-discriminatory application of its laws in the following cases:
a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;
b) issue, trade, and operations of securities;
c) criminal or administrative offences;
d) reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments;
e) guarantee of compliance with rulings in contentious proceedings.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party may restrict transfers of in-kind earnings, in circumstances where it could otherwise restrict those transfers as provided in this chapter.
Each Party may retain laws and regulations establishing income and supplementary taxes by means such as withholding taxes applicable to dividends and other transfers, provided they are not discriminatory.
Article 12-18 : Balance of payments and safeguard.
Each Party may adopt or maintain a measure to suspend, for a reasonable time, all or only some of the benefits contained in this chapter and in article 17-07, paragraph 1, when:
a) the application of any provision of this chapter or of chapter XVII results in a serious economic and financial disturbance in the territory of the Party, which cannot be adequately resolved through any other alternative measure; either
b) the balance of payments of a Party, including the state of its monetary reserves, is seriously threatened or faces serious difficulties.
The Party that suspends or intends to suspend benefits pursuant to paragraph 1 shall notify the other Parties as soon as possible:
a) what is the serious economic and financial disturbance caused by the application of this chapter or article 17-07, paragraph 1 or, as appropriate, the nature and extent of the serious threats to its balance of payments or serious difficulties that it faces;
b) the situation of the economy and foreign trade of the Party;
c) alternative measures available to you to correct the problem; Y
d) the economic policies that it adopts to face the problems mentioned in paragraph 1, as well as the direct relationship that exists between them and their solution.
The measure adopted or maintained by the Party, at all times:
a) avoid unnecessary damage to the economic, commercial and financial interests of the other Parties;
b) it will not impose greater burdens than those necessary to face the difficulties that cause the measure to be adopted or maintained;
c) it will be temporary and will be progressively released to the extent that the balance of payments, or the economic and financial situation of the Party, as the case may be, improves;
d) it will be applied trying at all times that this measure avoids discrimination between the Parties; Y
e) will endeavor to be consistent with internationally accepted criteria.
The Party that adopts a measure to suspend benefits contained in this Agreement shall inform the other Parties about the evolution of the events that gave rise to the adoption of the measure.
For the purposes of this article, reasonable time means the time during which the events described in paragraph 1 persist.
Article 12-19 : Settlement of disputes between the Parties.
In the terms in which this article modifies it, Chapter XIX applies to the solution of controversies that arise between the Parties regarding this chapter.
The Financial Services Committee shall create by consensus a list of up to fifteen individuals that includes up to five individuals from each Party, who have the necessary skills and dispositions to act as arbitrators in disputes related to this chapter. The members of this list must, in addition to meeting the requirements established in article 19-08, paragraph 2, literals b), c) and d), have specialized knowledge in matters of a financial nature or extensive experience derived from the exercise of responsibilities in the financial sector, or in its regulation.
For the purposes of constituting the arbitral tribunal referred to in article 19-09, the list referred to in paragraph 2 shall be used, except that the disputing Parties agree that individuals not included in that list may form part of the arbitral tribunal. , as long as they meet the requirements established in paragraph 2. The President will always be chosen from that list.
In any controversy in which the arbitral tribunal has found that a measure is incompatible with the obligations of this Agreement, when the suspension of benefits referred to in article 19-16 is applicable, and the measure affects:
a) only to the financial services sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits only in that sector;
b) to the financial services sector and to any other sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits in the financial services sector that have an effect equivalent to the effect of that measure in the financial services sector; either
c) any sector other than services, the complaining Party may not suspend benefits in the financial services sector.
Articles 12-20 : Disputes between an investor and a Party.
Except as provided in this article, the claims made by a disputing investor against a Party in relation to the obligations set forth in this chapter shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of chapter XVII section B and with the procedural rules contained in the annex to article 17-16.
When the Party against which the claim is made invokes any of the exceptions referred to in Article 12-09, the following procedure shall be observed:
a) the arbitral tribunal shall refer the matter to the Financial Services Committee for its decision. The court may not proceed until it has received a decision from the Committee under the terms of this article or 60 days have elapsed from the date of receipt by the Committee;
b) once the matter has been received in accordance with subparagraph a), the Committee will decide whether and to what degree the exception of article 12-09 invoked is a valid defense against the investor's claim and will transmit a copy of its decision to the arbitral tribunal and the Commission. That decision will be binding on the court.
Annex to article 12-16
As of January 1, 2000, article 12-16 will read as follows:
Article 12-16: Denial of benefits.
A Party may partially or totally deny the benefits derived from this Chapter to a financial service provider of another Party or to a cross-border financial service provider of another Party, prior communication and consultation, in accordance with Articles 12-10 and 12. -12, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out important business activities in the territory of any of the Parties and that is owned or controlled by persons from a country that is not a Party.
CHAPTER XIII : Temporary entry of business people
Article 13-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
Immigration authorization: the immigration document from Mexico and the visa from Colombia and Venezuela.
labor certification: any procedure prior to migratory authorization that implies a government permit or authorization related to the labor market.
temporary entry: the entry of a business person of a Party into the territory of another Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence.
national: a physical or natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with its law.
business person: the national of a Party who participates in the trade of goods or provision of services, or in investment activities, in accordance with the categories referred to in the annex to article 13-04.
Article 13-02 : General principles.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to facilitate the temporary entry of business persons based on the principle of reciprocity and considering the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose. All this as an instrument to ensure a preferential commercial relationship between the Parties. This chapter reflects the need to guarantee border security and to protect the work of their nationals and permanent employment in their respective territories.
Article 13-03 : General obligations.
Each Party shall apply, in accordance with Article 13-02, the measures related to this Chapter in an expeditious manner to avoid undue delay or prejudice in trade in goods and services, or in investment activities included in this Agreement.
The Parties shall develop and adopt common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the application of this Chapter.
Article 13-04 : Temporary entry authorization.
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including those contained in the annex to Article 13-04, each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of business persons who comply with current immigration regulations, with the other applicable measures related to health and safety. public, as well as with those referring to national security.
A Party may deny employment immigration authorization to a business person when their temporary entry adversely affects:
a) the solution of any labor conflict that exists in the place where they are employed or will be employed; either
b) the employment of any person involved in that conflict.
When a Party denies immigration authorization for employment, in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party:
a) notify the affected business person of the reasons for the refusal;
b) promptly communicate the reasons for the refusal to the Party whose national is refused entry.
No Party may adopt or maintain numerical restrictions on the migratory authorizations contemplated in this chapter.
Within the three months following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will exchange the following company registers, which will be permanently updated through official communications from the competent government bodies:
a) trilateral register of companies that includes the companies of each one of the Parties;
b) trilateral registry that includes companies of one Party that have affiliates, subsidiaries or branches in the territory of another Party and transnational companies with affiliated or subsidiary branches in the territory of more than one Party.
Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees caused by the processing of temporary entry applications to the approximate cost of the processing services provided.
On the date of entry into force of the Treaty, each Party will prepare a list of the migratory measures in force in its territory.
Article 13-05 : Availability of information.
Each Party, in addition to the provisions of Article 21-02 of Chapter XXI:
a) provide the other Parties with the materials that allow them to learn about the measures related to this Chapter; Y
b) within six months of the entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its territory and in that of the other Parties, a consolidated document with material explaining the requirements and procedures for temporary entry.
Each Party will compile, maintain and make available to the other Parties, in accordance with their domestic legislation, the information related to the granting of immigration authorizations issued in accordance with this chapter. This collection will include specific information for each occupation, profession or activity.
Article 13-06 : Working group.
The Parties create a Temporary Entry Working Group, made up of representatives of each of them, including immigration officials.
The Working Group will meet at least once a year to review:
a) the application and administration of this chapter;
b) the elaboration of measures that extend the facilities for the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity;
c) exemption from labor certification tests or procedures of similar effect, for the spouse of the person to whom temporary entry has been authorized in accordance with sections B, C or D of the annex to article 13-04, when requesting work authorization; Y
d) proposals for modifications or additions to this chapter.
Article 13-07 : Settlement of disputes.
The Parties may not initiate the procedures provided for in Article 19-06 of Chapter XIX, with respect to a refusal to authorize temporary entry, nor with respect to any particular case included in Article 13-03, unless:
a) the matter refers to a recurring practice; Y
b) the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him/her with respect to that particular matter.
The remedies mentioned in paragraph 1, literal b), will be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution within six months from the start of the administrative procedure, and the issuance of the resolution has not been delayed for causes attributable to the affected business person.
Article 13-08 : Relationship with other chapters.
Except as provided in this chapter and in chapters I, II, XIX, XXI and XXIII, no provision of this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures.
Annex to article 13-04 : Business persons
Section A - Business Visitors
Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of the business person who, at the prior request of a company registered in the trilateral registry referred to in article 13-04, paragraph 5, literal a), intends to carry out any activity mentioned in the appendix to this section, without requiring labor certification or procedures with similar effects, provided that it complies with current immigration measures, applicable to temporary entry and exhibits:
a) proof of their nationality of a Party;
b) the prior request of a company established in the territory of one of the Parties; or documentation that proves that you will undertake such activities and indicates the purpose of your entry; Y
c) in the case of the provision of a service, proof of the international nature of the business activity that is proposed to be carried out and that the business person does not intend to enter the local labor market, demonstrating that:
i) the main source of remuneration for that activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; Y
ii) the main place of business and where most of the profits are obtained are outside this territory.
The Party will normally accept a declaration as to the principal place of business and the place of profit. When the Party requires additional verification, a letter from the employer registered in the trilateral register of companies stating these circumstances will normally be considered sufficient proof.
Each Party may authorize the temporary entry of a business person who intends to carry out an activity other than those indicated in the appendix to this annex, without requiring labor certification or procedures with similar effects, in terms no less favorable than those provided for in the current provisions of the measures indicated in the list referred to in article 13-04, paragraph 7, provided that the business person also complies with the immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 through 3, a Party may require that a business person requesting temporary entry under this section obtain, prior to entry, immigration authorization.
Section B - Investors
Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and provide the corresponding documentation to the business person who intends to establish, develop, manage or provide key technical advice or services, in supervisory, executive functions or involving essential skills, to carry out or manage a business. investment in which the business person or his company has committed, or is in the process of committing, a significant amount of capital, in accordance with the domestic legislation of each Party, provided that the business person also complies with immigration measures, applicable to temporary entry.
Neither Party may:
a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1; neither
b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, a Party may examine, at a peremptory time, the investment proposal of a business person to assess whether the investment complies with the applicable legal provisions.
Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that a business person applying for temporary entry under this section obtain immigration authorization prior to entry.
Section C - Transfer of personnel within a company
Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to the business person employed by a company registered in the trilateral register of companies referred to in article 13-04, paragraph 5, literal b), who intends to perform managerial, executive or that entail specialized knowledge, in that company or in one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, provided that it complies with the current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. The Party may require that the business person has been an employee of the business, continuously, for 6 months within the year immediately preceding the filing date of the application.
No Party may require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1.
Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that a business person applying for temporary entry under this section obtain immigration authorization prior to entry.
Section D - Professionals
Each Party will authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to the business person who intends to carry out activities at a professional level, at the prior request of a company registered in any of the trilateral business registers referred to in article 13-04, paragraph 5, in the field of a profession indicated in the list referred to in paragraph 4 and based on the trilateral register of educational institutions referred to in paragraph 5, when the business person, in addition to meeting the requirements current immigration documents, applicable to temporary entry, show:
a) proof of their nationality of a Party; Y
b) Documentation that proves, based on the trilateral business registers, that the business person will undertake such activities and that indicates the purpose of their entry.
A Party may require that a business person applying for temporary entry under this section obtain immigration authorization prior to entry.
The temporary entry of a professional does not imply the recognition of titles or certificates, nor the granting of licenses for professional practice.
The Temporary Entry Working Group shall establish a list of professional activities to which this Annex shall apply, which shall be integrated in accordance with paragraph 5, within six months of the entry into force of this Agreement.
Within the three months following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will exchange their respective registers of educational institutions, and will keep them updated through communications from the competent government bodies.
Addendum to Section A of the Addendum to Article 13-04: Categories of Business Visitors
Research and Design
- Technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out research independently or for a company located in the territory of another Party.
Cultivation, Manufacturing and Production
- Owners of harvesting machines who supervise a group of operators admitted in accordance with the applicable provisions.
- Purchasing and production personnel, at the managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company located in the territory of another Party.
Commercialization
- Market researchers and analysts who carry out research or analysis independently or for a company located in the territory of another Party.
- Trade fair and promotional staff who attend trade conventions.
Sales
- Sales representatives and agents who obtain orders or negotiate contracts for goods and services for an enterprise located in the territory of another Party, but who do not deliver the goods or provide the services.
Distribution
- Transport operators that carry out goods or passenger transport operations to the territory of a Party from the territory of another Party, or carry out cargo and goods or passenger transport operations from the territory of one Party to the territory of another, without carrying out in the territory of the Party to which entry is requested, loading or unloading operations, of goods that are in that territory or of passengers that board in it.
- Customs agents that provide advisory services in regard to facilitating the import or export of goods.
After sales services
- Installation, repair, maintenance and supervisory personnel who have the specialized technical knowledge essential to fulfill the seller's contractual obligation and who provide services, or train workers to provide those services, pursuant to a warranty or other contract of services related to the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company located outside the territory of the Party from which temporary entry is requested, during the term of the guarantee or service contract.
General services
- Managerial and supervisory personnel involved in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of another Party.
- Tour bus operators entering the territory of a Party:
a) with a group of passengers on a tour bus trip that started in the territory of another Party and is going to return to it;
b) who is going to pick up a group of passengers on a tour bus trip that will take place and end for the most part in the territory of another Party; either
c) with a group of passengers in a tourist bus whose destination is in the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, and that returns without passengers or with the group to transport it to the territory of another Party.
Definitions
For the purposes of this appendix, it shall be understood as:
tourist bus operator: the natural person required for the operation of the vehicle during the tourist trip, including relief personnel who accompany or join him later.
transport operator: the natural person, other than a tour bus operator, required for the operation of the vehicle during the trip, including relief personnel who accompany or join them later.
CHAPTER XIV : Technical Standards
Article 14-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms presented in the sixth edition of ISO/IEC Guide 2: 1991, "General Terms and their Definitions in Relation to Standardization and Related Activities", shall have the same meaning when used in this chapter, unless they are defined differently here.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
make compatible: bring to the same level, different standardization measures but with the same scope, approved by different standardization bodies, so that they are identical, equivalent, or have the effect of allowing goods and services to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose. same purpose, in order to make it possible for those goods and services to be traded between the Parties.
standardization measures: standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment processes.
standard: the document approved by a recognized institution with standardization activities, which provides for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or related processes and production methods or for services or their related methods of operation, and whose observance is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, service, process or related production method.
international standard: a standardization measure, or other guide or recommendation, adopted by an international standardization body and made available to the public.
legitimate objectives: among others, guaranteeing the safety and protection of human, animal and plant life and health, its environment and the prevention of practices that may mislead consumers, including matters related to the identification of goods or services, considering, among other aspects, when appropriate, fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure type or scientific justification.
international standardization body: a standardization body, open to participation by relevant bodies of at least all parties to the GATT Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), or any other body designated by the Parties.
standardization body: a body whose standardization activities are recognized.
conformity assessment procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine that the relevant requirements established by technical regulations or standards have been met, including sampling, testing, inspection, evaluation, verification, assurance of conformity, accreditation , certification, registration or approval, used for such purposes, but does not mean an approval process.
approval process: registration, communication or any other mandatory administrative process to obtain a permit for a good or service to be marketed or used for defined purposes or under established conditions.
technical regulation: a document that establishes the characteristics of the goods or their related processes and production methods, or of the services or their related methods of operation, including the applicable administrative provisions, and compliance with which is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging or labeling requirements applicable to a good, service, process or related production method.
service: any of the services included in the framework of this Agreement, except financial services.
Article 14-02 : Scope of application.
The provisions of this chapter apply to standardization measures, metrology and related measures of each Party that may affect, directly or indirectly, trade in goods and services between them. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures referred to in chapter V, section B.
Article 14-03 : Scope of obligations.
Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional provisions, compliance with the obligations of this chapter, in its territory at the central or federal, state or departmental and municipal level and shall adopt the measures in this regard that are within its reach with respect to the agencies non-governmental standardization organizations in their territory.
Article 14-04 : Reaffirmation of international rights and obligations.
The Parties mutually reaffirm their current rights and obligations related to standardization measures emanating from the GATT and all other international treaties, including environmental and conservation treaties, to which the Parties are party.
Article 14-05 : Obligations and basic rights.
The Parties shall not develop, adopt, maintain or apply any standardization measure that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between them. To this end, each Party shall ensure that its standardization measures do not restrict trade more than is required to achieve a legitimate objective, taking into account the risks that failure to do so would create.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in accordance with article 14-14, paragraph 3, each Party may establish the level of protection that it deems appropriate in the pursuit of its legitimate objectives in terms of safety and protection of life and human, animal and plant health; and protection of their environment and prevention of practices that may mislead consumers, without constituting an obstacle to trade. To this end, each Party may develop, apply and maintain the standardization measures that guarantee that level of protection, as well as the measures that guarantee the application and compliance with those standardization measures, including the relevant approval procedures,
With regard to its normalization measures, each Party shall grant to the goods and service providers of another Party national treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar goods and service providers of any other country.
Article 14-06 : Use of international standards.
Each Party shall use as a basis for its own standardization measures, current or imminently adopted international standards, except when those standards do not constitute an effective or adequate means to achieve its legitimate objectives; for example, due to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Standardization measures of a Party that conform to an international standard shall be presumed to be consistent with the provisions of Article 14-05, paragraphs 1 and 3.
In the pursuit of its legitimate objectives, each Party may adopt, maintain or apply any standardization measure that achieves a higher level of protection than would have been obtained if the measure were based on an international standard due to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical , technological or infrastructure, among others.
Article 14-07 : Compatibility and equivalence.
Recognizing the central role that standardization measures play in promoting and protecting legitimate objectives, the Parties shall work together, in accordance with this Chapter, to strengthen the level of security and protection of human life and health, animal and vegetable; of their environment and for the prevention of practices that may mislead consumers.
The Parties will make their respective technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures compatible, to the greatest extent possible, without reducing the level of safety or protection of human, animal and plant life and health; their environment or consumers, without prejudice to the rights conferred by this chapter on any Party and taking into account international standardization activities.
At the request of a Party, the other Parties shall adopt reasonable measures within their power to promote the compatibility of the specific standardization measures that exist in their territory, with the standardization measures that exist in the territory of the other Parties, taking into account the international standardization activities.
Each Party shall accept a technical regulation adopted by another Party as equivalent to its own, when, in cooperation with the importing Party, the exporting Party proves to the satisfaction of the exporting Party that its technical regulation adequately meets the legitimate objectives of the importing Party, and if appropriate will review it.
At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall communicate to it the reasons for non-acceptance of a technical regulation in accordance with paragraph 4.
Each Party, whenever possible, shall accept the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of another Party, even when those procedures differ from its own, provided that those procedures offer a satisfactory guarantee, equivalent to the one offered by the procedures that the Party carries out or that are carried out in its territory, the result of which it accepts, that the relevant good or service complies with the applicable technical regulations or with the standards that are developed or maintained in the territory of that Party, and if applicable, review the relevant standardization measure.
Prior to acceptance of the results of a conformity assessment procedure, in accordance with paragraph 6, and in order to build confidence in the continuing integrity of each Party's conformity assessment results , the Parties may consult on matters such as the technical capacity of conformity assessment bodies, taking into account verified compliance with relevant international standards and recommendations.
Article 14-08 : Conformity assessment.
The Parties recognize the convenience of achieving reciprocal recognition of their conformity assessment systems, including accreditation bodies, in order to facilitate the trade of goods and services between them and undertake to work towards the achievement of this objective.
In addition to what is established in paragraph 1, and recognizing the existence of differences in their conformity assessment procedures in their respective territories, the Parties shall make their respective conformity assessment systems and procedures compatible to the greatest extent possible. effect that they are mutually recognizable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
For mutual and reciprocal benefit, each Party shall accredit, approve, license or recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of another Party on terms no less favorable than those granted to those bodies in its territory.
Each Party shall give favorable consideration to requests submitted by another Party to negotiate agreements on the mutual recognition of the results of that Party's conformity assessment procedures.
When it is required to carry out a procedure for the evaluation of conformity with technical regulations or standards, each Party shall have the obligation to:
a) not adopt, maintain or apply conformity assessment procedures that are stricter than necessary to be certain that the good or service complies with the applicable technical regulation or standard, taking into account the risks that non-conformity could create ;
b) initiate and complete that procedure in the most expeditious manner possible;
c) establish a non-discriminatory order for processing applications;
d) publish the normal duration of each of these procedures or inform, at the request of whoever requests it, the approximate duration of the procedure;
e) ensure that the competent body:
i) upon receipt of the application, promptly examine the documentation for completeness and inform the applicant of any deficiencies accurately and completely;
(ii) as soon as possible, convey to the applicant the results of the conformity assessment procedure in an accurate and complete manner, so that the applicant can take any corrective action;
iii) when the request is deficient, advance the procedure as much as possible, if the requester requests it; and
iv) report at the applicant's request the status of their application and the reasons for any delay;
f) limit to what is necessary, the information that the applicant must present to assess conformity and to determine the pertinent rights;
g) grant confidential information derived from the procedure or presented in connection with it:
i) the same treatment as confidential information regarding a good or service of the Party conducting the evaluation; Y
ii) in any case, treatment that protects the legitimate commercial interests of the applicant;
h) ensure that any fee charged for conformity assessment of a good or service that is imported from another Party is equitable in relation to any fee charged for conformity assessment of an identical or similar good or service from the other Party. Party that performs the evaluation taking into consideration the costs of communication, transportation and other related costs;
i) ensure that the location of the facilities where the conformity assessment procedures are carried out does not cause unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative;
j) where possible, endeavor to ensure that the procedure is carried out at that facility and, where appropriate, a mark of conformity is awarded;
k) in the case of a good or service that has been modified as a result of a determination of the assessment of conformity with the applicable technical regulations or standards, limit the procedure to what is necessary to determine that said good or service continues to comply with those regulations or standards; Y
l) limit to reasonableness any requirement relating to samples of a good and ensure that the selection of samples does not cause unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative.
The Parties shall apply the provisions of paragraph 5 to their approval procedures with appropriate adjustments.
CHAPTER XIV: Technical Standards
Article 14-09 : Publication and provision of information.
Each Party shall inform the other Parties of the normalization measures that it intends to adopt in accordance with the provisions of this chapter before the entry into force of those measures and not after their nationals.
When proposing the adoption or modification of any standardization measure, each Party:
a) publish a notice and inform the other Parties of its intention to adopt or modify that measure, to allow interested parties to become familiar with the proposal, at least 60 days in advance of its adoption or modification;
b) will identify in the notice and the information the good or service to which the measure will be applied, and will include a brief description of its objective and motivation;
c) provide a copy of the proposed measure to any Party or interested party that requests it and, where possible, identify provisions that deviate substantially from relevant international standards;
d) without discrimination, allow the other Parties and interested parties to make comments and, upon request, discuss and take into account those comments, as well as the results of the discussions; Y
e) ensure that, when adopting the measure, it is published expeditiously, or in some other way is made available to interested parties in the Party so that they become familiar with it.
With regard to any technical regulation of a state or departmental government, or municipal, each Party:
a) ensure that the intention of that government to adopt or modify that regulation at an appropriate early stage is published in a notice and informed to the other Parties;
b) will ensure that the notice and information identifies the good or service to which the technical regulation will apply, and will include a brief description of its objective and motivation;
c) ensure that a copy of the proposed regulation is delivered to the Parties or to any interested person who requests it;
d) take reasonable steps within its power to ensure that upon adoption of the technical regulation, it is promptly published or otherwise made available to interested parties in the Party for familiarization.
Each Party shall inform the other Parties about its standardization plans and programs.
When a Party considers it necessary to address an urgent problem related to the safety or protection of human, animal and plant life and health; of its environment or practices that mislead consumers, may omit any of the steps established in paragraph 2, literals a) and b), provided that when adopting the standardization measure:
a) immediately inform the other Parties, in accordance with the requirements established in paragraph 2, letter b), including a brief description of the urgent problem;
b) deliver a copy of the measure to any Party or interested party that requests it;
c) without discrimination, allow the other Parties and interested parties to make comments in writing and, upon request, discuss and take into account those comments, as well as the results of the discussions; Y
d) ensure that the measure is published expeditiously, or else allow interested parties to become familiar with it.
The Parties shall allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of their standardization measures and the date on which they enter into force, in order to give stakeholders the opportunity to adapt to the measures, except when necessary to address one of the urgent problems. indicated in paragraph 5.
Each Party shall designate a government authority as responsible for the application of the information provisions of this chapter at the federal or central level, and shall inform the other Parties thereof. When a Party designates two or more government authorities for this purpose, it shall inform the other Parties, without ambiguity or exceptions, of the scope of responsibilities of those authorities.
Article 14-10 : Information centers.
Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one information center within its territory capable of answering all questions and reasonable requests from another Party and interested parties, as well as providing the relevant documentation regarding:
a) any standardization measure adopted or proposed in its territory at the level of its federal or central, state or departmental, or municipal government;
b) the participation and membership of the Party, and of its relevant authorities at the federal or central, state or departmental or municipal level in standardization bodies and conformity assessment systems, international or regional, in bilateral or multilateral agreements, within the scope of this chapter, as well as the provisions of those systems and agreements;
c) the location of notices published pursuant to this chapter, or the place where such information may be obtained;
d) the location of information centers; Y
e) the Party's risk assessment processes, the factors it takes into account when carrying out the assessment and for establishing the levels of protection it deems appropriate, in accordance with Article 14-05, paragraph 2.
When a Party designates more than one information center:
a) inform the other Parties of the scope of responsibilities of each of these centers; Y
b) ensure that any request sent to the wrong information center is forwarded, expeditiously, to the correct information center.
Each Party shall take the measures that are reasonable and within its reach to ensure that there is at least one information center, within its territory, capable of answering all the questions and requests of the other Party and of the interested parties, as well as of provide relevant documentation, or information from where such documentation can be obtained related to:
a) any standard or conformity assessment process adopted or proposed by non-governmental standardization bodies in its territory; Y
b) the participation and membership, in international and regional standardization organizations and conformity assessment systems, of the relevant non-governmental organizations in their territory.
Each Party shall ensure that when another Party or interested parties, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, request copies of the documents referred to in paragraph 1, they are provided at the same price that applies to their nationals, except the actual cost. shipping. Copies of technical regulations and mandatory conformity assessment processes requested by the Parties will be provided free of charge.
Article 14-11 : Limitations on the provision of information.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to oblige a Party to provide any information the disclosure of which they consider contrary to their essential security interests, or detrimental to the legitimate business interests of certain companies.
Article 14-12 : Metrological standards.
The Parties will make their national metrological standards compatible, to the greatest extent possible, based on current international standards, when they constitute unnecessary obstacles to trade or create them.
Article 14-13 : Protection of health.
Medicines, medical equipment, medical instruments, pharmaceutical chemicals and other inputs for human, animal and plant health that are subject to sanitary registration within the territory of any of the Parties, will be, where appropriate, registered, recognized or evaluated by the competent authority of that Party based on a single national system of a federal or central nature of mandatory compliance.
The certificates that support compliance with the standards and technical regulations of the companies that produce or package the products referred to in paragraph 1, will be accepted only if they have been issued by the competent regulatory authorities of the federal or central government of the Parties.
The Parties will establish a mutual technical cooperation system that will work based on the following program:
a) identification of specific needs:
i) application of good manufacturing practices in the preparation and approval of medicines, particularly those for human use;
ii) application of good laboratory practices in the analysis and evaluation systems established in the ISO 9000 and 25 guides in force;
iii) development of common identification and nomenclature systems for auxiliary health products and medical instruments;
b) homologation of requirements related to labeling and strengthening of standardization and surveillance systems in relation to warning labeling;
c) training and training programs, and the organization of a common training, continuing education, training and evaluation system for sanitary officials and inspectors;
d) development of a mutual accreditation system for verification units and testing laboratories;
e) updating of regulatory legal frameworks; Y
f) strengthening of formal communication systems to monitor and regulate the exchange of products related to human, animal and plant health.
In order to carry out the activities proposed in paragraph 3, the Parties shall establish pursuant to Article 14-17, paragraph 5, a technical subcommittee in charge of monitoring and organizing such activities, to guide and recommend to the Parties when they so do. request it.
Article 14-14 : Risk assessment.
Pursuant to Article 14-05, paragraph 2, the Parties may carry out risk assessments. In doing so they will ensure that they take into account risk assessment methods developed by international organizations and that their standardization measures are based on an assessment of risk to human, animal and plant health and safety and their environment.
When conducting a risk assessment, the Party conducting it shall take into consideration all relevant scientific evidence, available technical information, intended end use, production, operation, inspection, quality, sampling or testing processes or methods, or environmental conditions.
When a Party, in accordance with Article 14-05, paragraph 2, once it has established its level of security protection that it deems appropriate, carries out a risk assessment, it shall avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions between similar goods and services at the level of protection it deems appropriate, if those distinctions:
a) have the effect of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against goods or service providers of the other Parties;
b) constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties; either
c) discriminate between similar goods or services for the same use, in accordance with the same conditions that pose the same level of risk and that grant similar benefits.
When the Party that carries out a risk assessment concludes that the scientific evidence or other information available is insufficient to complete that assessment, it may provisionally adopt a technical regulation based on the pertinent information available. Once sufficient information has been submitted to the Party to complete the risk assessment, the Party shall complete its assessment as soon as possible and review, and where appropriate, reconsider the provisional technical regulation in light of that assessment.
Article 14-15 : Handling of dangerous substances.
For the control, handling and acceptance of toxic or dangerous substances or residues, each Party shall apply the provisions, guides or recommendations of the pertinent international agreements to which they are party.
Article 14-16 : Labeling.
The labeling requirements of the goods and services that are part of the scope of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions established therein.
Each Party will apply its pertinent labeling requirements within its territory and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The Parties will seek to develop common labeling requirements. The proposals made by each Party will be evaluated by the Committee referred to in article 14-17.
The Committee referred to in article 14-17, may work and formulate recommendations, among others, on the following areas of labeling, packaging and packaging:
a) a common system of symbols and pictograms;
b) definitions and terminology; either
c) presentation of information.
Article 14-17 : Committee for standardization measures.
The Parties create a Committee for Standardization Measures.
The Committee is responsible for, among other functions:
a) the monitoring of the application, compliance and administration of this chapter, including the progress of the sub-committees and working groups established in accordance with paragraph 4 and the operation of the information centers established in accordance with article 14-10 paragraph one;
b) facilitate the process through which the Parties will make their standardization and metrology measures compatible;
c) provide a forum for Parties to consult on issues related to standardization and metrology measures;
d) report annually to the Commission on the application of this chapter; Y
e) develop the necessary procedural mechanisms to achieve recognition from conformity assessment bodies.
The committee:
a) It will be made up of an equal number of representatives of each Party. Each Party shall establish its procedures for the selection of its representatives;
b) meet at least once a year, as well as when requested by either Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise;
c) establish its regulations; Y
d) will make its decisions by consensus.
When the Committee considers it appropriate, it may establish the subcommittees and working groups that it deems pertinent and determine their scope of action and mandate. Each subcommittee and working group will be made up of representatives of each Party and may:
a) when deemed necessary, call to participate in its meetings or consult:
i) representatives of non-governmental organizations, such as standardization bodies, or private sector chambers and associations;
ii) scientists; either
iii) technical experts; Y
b) determine its work program, taking into account relevant international activities.
In addition to paragraph 4, the Committee shall establish:
a) the Subcommittee on Health Standardization Measures; Y
b) any other subcommittees and working groups it deems appropriate to discuss, among others, the following issues:
i) the identification and nomenclature of the goods and services subject to standardization measures;
ii) technical regulations and quality and identity standards;
iii) packaging, labeling and presentation of information for consumers, including measurement systems, ingredients, sizes, terminology, symbols and other related matters;
iv) programs for product approval and post-sale surveillance;
v) principles for the accreditation and recognition of test facilities, inspection bodies and conformity assessment bodies;
vi) development and implementation of a uniform system for the classification and reporting of hazardous chemicals and chemical hazard communication;
vii) programs to ensure compliance with current provisions, including training and inspection by personnel responsible for regulation, analysis, and compliance verification;
viii) promotion and application of good laboratory practices;
ix) the promotion and application of good manufacturing practices;
x) criteria for the evaluation of potential damage to the environment due to the use of goods or services;
xi) analysis of the procedures to simplify the requirements for the importation of goods and for the provision of specific services;
xii) guidelines for testing chemical substances, including those of an industrial type and those for agricultural, pharmaceutical and biological use; Y
xiii) means that facilitate the protection of consumers, including what refers to their compensation.
Article 14-18 : Technical consultations.
When a Party has doubts about the interpretation or application of this Chapter with respect to the standardization measures, metrology or measures related to these of another Party, the Party may alternatively turn to the Committee or to the dispute settlement mechanism of the Agreement. The Parties involved may not use both channels simultaneously.
When a Party decides to go to the Committee, it will notify it so that it can consider the matter or refer it to a subcommittee or working group, or to another competent forum, in order to obtain non-binding technical advice or recommendations from them.
The Committee will consider any matter that is referred to it, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, as expeditiously as possible and, in the same way, will inform the Parties of any advice or technical recommendation that it prepares or receives in relation to that matter. Once the Parties involved receive from the Committee a technical advice or recommendation that they have requested, they will send to the Committee a written response in relation to that technical advice or recommendation, within the period determined by the Committee.
Pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3, in the event that the technical recommendation issued by the Committee does not resolve the existing difference between the Parties involved, they may invoke the dispute settlement mechanism of the Treaty. If the Parties involved so agree, the consultations carried out before the Committee shall constitute consultations for the purposes of Article 19-05.
A Party that asserts that a standardization measure of another Party is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter shall have to demonstrate that inconsistency.
CHAPTER XV : Public Sector Purchases
Section A - Scope of application and national treatment
Article 15-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
construction services contract: a contract for the performance by any means of civil works or construction indicated in the appendix to annex 5 of article 15-02.
entity: an entity included in annexes 1 and 2 to article 15-02 and in the Protocol that the Parties prepare in accordance with article 15-26 for state or departmental government entities.
technical specification: a specification that establishes the characteristics of the goods or processes and related production methods, or the characteristics of services or their related methods of operation, including the applicable administrative provisions. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process, or method of production or operation.
tendering procedures: open tendering procedures, selective tendering procedures or restricted tendering procedures.
open tender procedures: procedures in which all interested suppliers can submit offers.
restricted bidding procedures: procedures by which an entity communicates individually with suppliers, only in the circumstances and in accordance with the conditions described in article 15-16.
selective bidding procedures: procedures in which, under the terms of article 15-12, the suppliers whom the entity invites to do so may submit bids.
Supplier: A person who has provided or may provide goods or services in response to an entity's invitation to bid.
locally established supplier: among others, a natural person residing in the territory of the Party, a company organized or established under the laws of the Party, and a branch or representative office located in the territory of the Party.
services: among others, construction service contracts, unless otherwise specified.
Article 15-02 : Scope of application and coverage of obligations.
This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to purchases:
a) of a central or federal government entity indicated in annex 1 to this article; a government company indicated in annex 2 to this article; or a state or departmental government entity in accordance with what the Parties establish in the Protocol referred to in article 15-26;
b) goods, in accordance with annex 3 to this article, services, in accordance with annex 4 to this article or construction services, in accordance with annex 5 to this article; Y
c) when it is estimated that the value of the contract to be awarded equals or exceeds the value of the following thresholds, calculated and adjusted in accordance with the inflation rate of the United States of America as provided in annex 6 to this article: in the case of:
i) central or federal government entities, USD 50,000 for contracts for goods, services or any combination thereof, and USD 6.5 million for construction service contracts;
ii) government companies, US$250,000 for contracts for goods, services or any combination thereof, and US$8 million for construction service contracts; Y
iii) state and departmental government entities, the value of the applicable thresholds, in accordance with what the Parties establish in the Protocol referred to in article 15-26.
Paragraph 1 will be subject to the reservations and general notes indicated in annexes 7 and 8 to this article, respectively.
Subject to paragraph 4, where a contract to be awarded by an entity is not subject to this chapter, its provisions may not be construed to cover the components of any good or service of that contract.
None of the entities of the Parties shall conceive, prepare or structure a purchase contract in such a way as to avoid the obligations of this chapter.
Purchases include acquisitions by methods such as purchase, lease, or rental, with or without a purchase option. Purchases do not include:
a) non-contractual agreements or any form of government assistance, including cooperation agreements, transfers, loans, capital transfers, guarantees, fiscal incentives and government supply of goods and services granted to individuals or to state, departmental and regional governments; Y
b) the acquisition of services from fiscal agencies or deposits, liquidation and administration services for regulated financial institutions, or public debt sale and distribution services.
Article 15-03 : Valuation of contracts.
Each Party shall ensure that, in determining whether a contract is covered by this Chapter, its entities apply the provisions of paragraphs 2 through 7 to calculate the value of that contract.
The value of the contract will be estimated at the time of publication of the call in accordance with article 15-11.
When calculating the value of a contract, entities will take into account all forms of remuneration, including bonuses, rights, commissions and interest.
In addition to the provisions of article 15-02, paragraph 4, an entity may not choose a valuation method or divide the purchase requirements into independent contracts, in order to evade the obligations contained in this chapter.
When an individual requirement results in the award of more than one contract or the contracts are awarded in separate parts, the basis for valuation will be:
a) the actual value of similar successive or recurring contracts entered into during the preceding fiscal year or in the preceding twelve months, adjusted where possible for expected changes in quantity and value in the following twelve months; either
b) the estimated value of successive or recurring contracts to be entered into during that fiscal year or in the twelve months following the initial contract.
In the case of lease or rental contracts, with or without a purchase option, or contracts in which a total price is not specified, the basis for valuation will be:
a) In the case of contracts signed for a specific period, if this is twelve months or less, the calculation will be made on the basis of the total value of the contract during its period of validity or, if it is greater than twelve months, on the full value basis including estimated residual value; either
b) in the case of contracts for an indefinite term, the base will be the estimated monthly payment multiplied by 48.
If the entity is not certain whether a contract is for fixed or indefinite terms, it will calculate the value of the contract using the method indicated in subparagraph b).
When the bidding conditions require optional clauses, the basis for valuation will be the total value of the maximum purchase allowed, including all possible optional purchases.
Article 15-04 : National treatment and non-discrimination, and most favored nation treatment.
With respect to the measures included in this Chapter, each Party shall grant to the goods of another Party, to the suppliers of those goods and to the service providers of another Party, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable granted:
a) to its own goods, and suppliers; Y
b) to the goods and suppliers of another Party.
With respect to the measures included in this chapter, neither Party may:
a) give a supplier established in its territory less favorable treatment than that accorded to another supplier established in that territory, by reason of the degree of foreign affiliation or ownership; either
b) discriminate against a supplier established in its territory on the grounds that the goods or services offered by that supplier for a particular purchase are goods or services of another Party.
Paragraph 1 does not apply to measures relating to import taxes or other charges of any kind on or in connection with importation, the method of collection of such taxes and charges, or other import regulations, including restrictions and formalities.
Article 15-05 : Rules of origin.
For the purposes of public sector purchases covered by this chapter, no Party shall apply rules of origin to goods imported from any other Party other than the rules of origin established in Chapter VI, or incompatible with them.
Article 15-06 : Denial of benefits.
A Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of another Party, after prior communication and consultation, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out important business activities in the territory of any Party and is owned or controlled by persons of a country that is not a Party.
Article 15-07 : Prohibition of special compensatory conditions.
Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not take into account, request or impose special compensatory conditions in the qualification and selection of suppliers, goods or services, in the evaluation of offers or in the award of contracts. For the purposes of this article, special compensatory conditions are the conditions that an entity imposes or takes into account before or during the purchase procedure to promote local development or improve balance of payments accounts, through local content requirements. , licensing of technology, investment, countertrade or similar requirements.
The Parties will exchange information on the results of the application of programs aimed at supporting the local industry, or of the performance of any type of committee for the same purposes, such as advisory commissions.
Each Party may resort to the Dispute Resolution mechanism of Chapter XIX if, as a result of the application of the programs or the actions of the committees referred to in paragraph 2, their suppliers are discriminated against.
Article 15-08 : Technical specifications.
Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specification that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.
Each Party shall ensure that, where applicable, any technical specifications established by its entities:
a) is defined in terms of performance criteria rather than design or descriptive features; Y
b) is based on international standards, national technical regulations, recognized national standards, or building codes.
Each Party shall ensure that the technical specifications established by its entities do not require or refer to a specific brand or trade name, patent, design or type, specific origin or producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or understandable way of describing the purchase requirements and provided that, in such cases, words such as "or equivalent" are included in the bidding conditions.
Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not solicit or accept, in a manner that has the effect of preventing competition, advice that could be used in preparing or adopting any technical specification in respect of a particular purchase, from a person who may have an interest. merchant on that purchase.
Section B - Tender Procedures
Article 15-09 : Tender procedures.
The bidding procedures will be applied in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article, for the parties indicated therein.
Each Party shall ensure that the bidding procedures of its entities:
a) are applied in a non-discriminatory manner; Y
b) are consistent with this article and with articles 15-10 to 15-16.
Each Party shall ensure that its entities:
a) do not provide any supplier with information about a specific purchase in such a way that it has the effect of preventing competition; Y
b) provide all suppliers with equal access to information regarding a purchase during the period prior to the issuance of any call or bidding conditions.
Article 15-10 : Qualification of suppliers.
Pursuant to Article 15-04, in the qualification of suppliers during the bidding procedure, no entity of a Party may discriminate between suppliers of the other Parties or between national suppliers and suppliers of the other Parties.
An entity's rating procedures will be consistent with the following:
a) the conditions for the participation of suppliers in the bidding procedures will be published sufficiently in advance, so that suppliers have adequate time to start and, to the extent that it is compatible with the efficient operation of the contracting process, complete qualification procedures;
b) the conditions for participating in the bidding procedures, including financial guarantees, technical qualifications and the information necessary to prove the financial, commercial and technical capacity of the suppliers, as well as the verification that the supplier satisfies those conditions, shall be they will be limited to those essential to ensure compliance with the contract in question;
c) the financial, commercial and technical capacity of a supplier shall be determined on the basis of its global activity, including both its activity carried out in the territory of the Party of the supplier, and its activity in the territory of the Party of the purchasing entity, if the have;
d) an entity may not use the supplier qualification process, including the time it requires, in order to exclude suppliers of another Party from a list of suppliers or not consider them for a specific purchase;
e) an entity shall recognize as qualified suppliers those suppliers of another Party that meet the conditions required to participate in a specific purchase; f) an entity shall consider for a given purchase those suppliers of another Party that request to participate in the purchase and that have not yet been qualified, provided that sufficient time is available to complete the qualification procedure;
g) an entity that maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers shall ensure that suppliers can request their qualification at any time, that all qualified suppliers who request it are included in the list within a reasonably short period of time and that all suppliers included in the list are notified of the cancellation of the list or their removal from it;
h) when, after the publication of the call in accordance with article 15-11, a supplier that has not yet been qualified requests to participate in a given purchase, the entity shall promptly initiate the qualification procedure;
i) an entity will notify any supplier that has requested its qualification, the decision on whether it has been qualified; Y
j) when an entity rejects a qualification request, or ceases to recognize the qualification of a supplier, at the request of the supplier, the entity shall promptly provide pertinent information on the reasons for its action.
Each part:
a) ensure that each of its entities uses a single rating procedure; when the entity establishes a need to resort to a different procedure and, at the request of another Party, is prepared to demonstrate that need, it may use additional qualification procedures; Y
b) will try to minimize the differences between the rating procedures of its entities.
Nothing in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall prevent an entity from excluding a provider for reasons such as bankruptcy, or misrepresentation.
Article 15-11 : Invitation to participate.
Except as provided in section 15-16, an entity shall publish an invitation to participate for all purchases, in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 5, in the corresponding publication indicated in the annex to this section.
The invitation to participate will take the form of a call, which will contain the following information:
a) a description of the nature and quantity of the goods or services to be purchased, including any future purchase options and, if possible:
i) an estimate of when such options may be exercised; Y
ii) in the case of recurring contracts, an estimate of when subsequent calls may be issued;
b) an indication of whether the tender is open or selective;
c) any date to begin or conclude the delivery of the goods or services to be purchased;
d) the address to which the request must be sent to be invited to tender or to qualify on the list of suppliers and the deadline for receipt of the request;
e) the address to which the offers will be sent and the deadline for their receipt;
f) the address of the entity that will award the contract and that will provide any information necessary to obtain specifications and other documents;
g) a statement of any conditions of an economic or technical nature, and of any financial guarantees, information and documents required from suppliers;
h) the amount and method of payment of any amount to be paid for the bidding conditions; and
i) The indication of whether the entity calls for the presentation of offers for the purchase, lease or rental, with or without a purchase option.
Notwithstanding paragraph 2, an entity indicated in Annex 2 to Article 15-02 or in the Protocol that the Parties prepare in accordance with Article 15-26 for state or departmental government entities, may use as an invitation to participate a scheduled purchase call, which will contain the information in paragraph 2 to the extent that it is available to the entity, but which will include, at a minimum, the following information:
a) a description of the object of the purchase;
b) the deadlines set for the receipt of offers or requests to be invited to bid;
c) the address from which documentation related to the purchase may be requested;
d) an indication that the interested suppliers will express to the entity their interest in the purchase; Y
e) the identification of an information center in the entity where additional information can be obtained.
An entity that uses a scheduled purchase solicitation as an invitation to participate will subsequently invite suppliers that have expressed interest in purchasing to confirm their interest, based on information provided by the entity that will include, at least, the information provided in paragraph 2.
Notwithstanding paragraph 2, an entity indicated in Annex 2 to Article 15-02 or in the Protocol that the Parties prepare in accordance with Article 15-26 for state or departmental government entities, may use as an invitation to participate a call regarding the qualification system. An entity that uses this call will offer in a timely manner, in accordance with the considerations referred to in article 15-15, paragraph 8, information that allows all suppliers that have expressed interest in participating in the purchase, to have a real possibility to assess your interest. The information will normally include the data required for the call referred to in paragraph 2.
In the case of selective bidding procedures, an entity that maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers will insert annually, in the appropriate publication referred to in the annex to this article, a notice containing the following information:
a) an enumeration of all current lists, including their headings, in relation to the goods or services, or categories of goods or services whose purchase is made through the lists;
b) the conditions that suppliers must meet to be included in the lists and the methods according to which the entity in question will verify each of those conditions; Y
c) the period of validity of the lists and the formalities for their renewal.
When, after the publication of an invitation to participate, but before the expiration of the period set for the opening or receipt of offers, as stated in the calls or in the bidding conditions, the entity considers it necessary to make modifications or reissue the the call or the bidding conditions, the entity will ensure that the new or modified call or the tender conditions are given the same dissemination that was given to the original documentation. Any material information provided to one supplier regarding a particular purchase will be simultaneously provided to the other interested suppliers, sufficiently in advance to allow all interested parties appropriate time to review the information and to respond.
An entity will indicate in the calls referred to in this article that the purchase is covered by this chapter.
Article 15-12 : Selective bidding procedures.
In order to guarantee optimal effective competition between the suppliers of the Parties in the selective bidding procedures, an entity shall invite, for each purchase, the largest number of national suppliers and suppliers of the other Parties that is compatible with the efficient operation of the shopping system.
Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 3, an entity that maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers may select among the suppliers included in the list, who will be invited to bid on a specific purchase. In the selection process, the entity will give equal opportunities to the suppliers included in the list.
In accordance with article 15-10, paragraph 2, letter f), an entity will allow a supplier that requests to participate in a certain purchase to submit an offer and will take it into account. The number of additional suppliers authorized to participate will only be limited for reasons of efficient operation of the purchasing system.
When it does not summon or admit a supplier to the tender, at the latter's request, an entity will provide it without delay with pertinent information on the reasons for its proceeding.
Section B - Tender Procedures
Article 15-13 : Deadlines for bidding and delivery.
An entity:
a) by setting a deadline, it will provide suppliers of another Party with sufficient time to prepare and submit bids before the closing of the bid;
b) in setting a deadline, in accordance with its own reasonable needs, it will take into account factors such as the complexity of the purchase, the anticipated degree of subcontracting and the time normally required to transmit offers by post both from places in the abroad as within the national territory; Y
c) when establishing the deadline for the receipt of offers or requests for admission to the tender, it will duly consider publication delays.
Subject to paragraph 3, an entity shall provide that:
a) in open bidding procedures, the term for the receipt of an offer is not less than forty days from the date of publication of a call, in accordance with article 15-11;
b) in selective bidding procedures that do not imply the use of a permanent list of qualified suppliers, the deadline for submitting a request for admission to bidding is not less than twenty-five days from the date of publication of a call , in accordance with article 15-11, and the term for the receipt of offers is not less than forty days from the date of publication of a call; Y
c) in selective bidding procedures that imply the use of a permanent list of qualified suppliers, the term for the receipt of offers is not less than forty days from the date of the first invitation to bid, but when the latter date does not coincide with the publication of a call referred to in article 15-11, no less than forty days will elapse between the two dates.
An entity may shorten the periods provided in paragraph 2 in accordance with the following:
a) According to the provisions of article 15-11, paragraph 3 or 5, when a call has been published within a period of not less than forty days and not more than twelve months, the period of forty days for the receipt of offers may be reduced to not less than twenty-four days;
b) in the case of a second publication or a subsequent publication related to recurring contracts, in accordance with article 15-11, paragraph 2, literal a) the period of forty days for the receipt of offers may be reduced to no less than twenty-four days;
c) when, for reasons of urgency duly justified by the entity, the established deadlines cannot be observed, in no case will these deadlines be less than ten days, counted from the date of publication of a call in accordance with article 15- eleven; either
d) When one of the entities indicated in Annex 2 to Article 15-02 or in the Protocol that the Parties prepare in accordance with Article 15-26 for state or departmental government entities, uses as an invitation to participate a call to the one referred to in article 15-11, paragraph 5, the entity and the selected providers may set, by mutual agreement, the deadlines; however, in the absence of an agreement, the entity may set terms sufficiently long to allow the due submission of offers, which in no case shall be less than ten days.
In establishing the delivery date of the goods or services and in accordance with its reasonable needs, an entity shall take into account factors such as the complexity of the purchase, the anticipated degree of subcontracting, and the time realistically estimated to be necessary for the delivery of goods or services. production, dispatch and transportation of the goods from the different places of supply.
Article 15-14 : Bidding conditions.
When the entities provide bidding conditions to the suppliers, the documentation will contain all the necessary information that allows them to duly present their offers, including the information that must be published in the call referred to in article 15-11, paragraph 2, except for the information required in accordance with article 15-11, paragraph 2 literal h) of that article. The documentation will also include:
a) the address of the entity to which the offers should be sent;
b) the address where requests for additional information should be sent;
c) the closing date and time for the receipt of offers and the period during which the offers will remain valid;
d) the persons authorized to attend the opening of the offers and the date, time and place of that opening;
e) a statement of any conditions of an economic or technical nature, and of any financial guarantees, information and documents required from suppliers;
f) a full description of the goods or services to be purchased and any other requirements, including technical specifications, certificates of conformity, and necessary plans, drawings and instructions;
g) the criteria on which the award of the contract will be based, including any factor, other than price, that will be considered in the evaluation of the offers and the cost elements that will be taken into account when evaluating the prices of the same, such such as transportation, insurance and inspection costs and, in the case of goods or services of the other Parties, import taxes and other import charges, taxes and currency of payment;
h) the terms of payment; and
i) any other requirement or condition.
An entity:
a) provide the bidding conditions at the request of a supplier participating in open bidding procedures or requesting to participate in selective bidding procedures, and will promptly respond to any reasonable request for clarification thereof; Y
b) respond without delay to any reasonable request for relevant information from a supplier participating in the tender, provided that such information does not give that supplier an advantage over its competitors in the contract award procedure.
Article 15-15 : Presentation, reception and opening of offers and awarding of contracts.
The entity will use procedures for the presentation, reception and opening of offers and the awarding of contracts that are consistent with the following:
a) Bids will normally be submitted in writing, either directly or by post;
b) when bids transmitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile or other means of electronic transmission are accepted, the bid submitted shall include all the information necessary for its evaluation, in particular the final price proposed by the supplier and a statement that the supplier accepts all the clauses and conditions of the call;
c) offers submitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile or other means of electronic transmission shall be confirmed without delay by letter or by signed copy of the telex, telegram, telefacsimile or electronic message;
d) the content of the telex, telegram, telefacsimile or electronic message will prevail in case there is a difference or contradiction between it and any other documentation received after the term for the receipt of offers has expired;
e) it will not be allowed to submit bids by telephone;
f) Applications to participate in a selective bidding may be submitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile and, when permitted, by other means of electronic transmission; Y
g) The opportunities to correct formal errors, which are granted to suppliers during the period between the opening of the offers and the award of the contract, may not be used in such a way as to discriminate between suppliers.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, "electronic means of transmission" includes the means by which the recipient can produce a hard copy of the offer at the place of destination of the transmission.
No entity will penalize the provider whose offer is received at the office designated in the bidding conditions after the expiration of the established term, when the delay is due solely to an oversight of the entity.
All the offers requested by an entity in the public or selective bidding procedures will be received and opened in accordance with the procedures and under the conditions that guarantee the regularity of the opening of the offers. The entity will keep the information corresponding to the opening of the offers. The information will remain available to the competent authorities of the Party to be used, if required, in accordance with Articles 15-17, 15-18 or Chapter XIX.
An entity will award contracts in accordance with the following:
a) For an offer to be considered for the award, it must comply, at the time of opening, with the requirements established in the call or in the bidding conditions and come from suppliers that meet the conditions of participation. ;
b) if the entity receives an offer that is abnormally lower in price than the other offers, it may check with the supplier to ensure that the supplier satisfies the conditions for participation and is or will be able to comply with the terms of the contract;
c) unless for reasons of public interest it decides not to award the contract, the entity shall award it to the supplier that it has considered capable of performing the contract and whose offer is the lowest price or the most advantageous in accordance with the specific criteria evaluation established in the call or in the bidding conditions;
d) the awards will be made in accordance with the criteria and requirements established in the bidding conditions; Y
e) clauses relating to options shall not be used in order to circumvent this chapter.
No entity of a Party may condition the award of a contract on the fact that a supplier has previously been assigned one or more contracts by an entity of that Party, or on the supplier's previous work experience in the territory of that Party.
An entity:
a) upon express request, it will promptly inform the participating providers of the decisions on the contracts awarded and, if they so request, do so in writing; Y
b) at the express request of a supplier whose offer has not been chosen, it will provide the relevant information to that supplier about the reasons why its offer was not chosen, the characteristics and advantages of the selected offer and the name of the winning supplier.
Within a maximum period of seventy-two days from the award of the contract, an entity will communicate directly to the participating providers or insert a notice in the appropriate publication referred to in the annex to article 15-11 containing the following information:
a) a description of the nature and quantity of the goods or services that are the subject of the contract;
b) the name and address of the entity that awards the contract;
c) the award date;
d) the name and address of each selected supplier;
e) the value of the contract, or of the highest and lowest price bids considered for the award of the contract; Y
f) the bidding procedure used.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 through 8, an entity may refrain from disclosing certain information about the award of the contract, when its disclosure:
a) could impede compliance with the law or be contrary to the public interest;
b) would harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person; either
c) out to the detriment of fair competition between suppliers.
Article 15-16 : Restricted bidding.
An entity of a Party may, in the circumstances and in accordance with the conditions described in paragraph 2, use the restricted bidding procedures and accordingly deviate from the provisions of Articles 15-09 through 15-15, provided that restricted bidding procedures are not used to avoid the maximum possible competition or in a way that constitutes a means of discrimination between suppliers of the other Parties or of protection of national suppliers.
An entity may use restricted tendering procedures in the following circumstances and under the following conditions, as applicable:
a) in the absence of offers in response to a call for public or selective bidding or when the offers submitted have resulted from collusion or do not comply with the essential requirements of the bidding conditions, or when the offers have been made by suppliers that do not meet the conditions for participation provided in accordance with this chapter, provided that the initial purchase requirements are not substantially changed in the award of the contract;
b) when, because they are works of art, or for reasons related to the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights, or reserved information or when for technical reasons there is no competition, the goods or services can only be supplied by a determined provider without there being other reasonable alternatives or substitutes;
c) to the extent strictly necessary, when, for reasons of extreme urgency due to events that the entity cannot foresee, it would not be possible to obtain the goods or services on time through public or selective bidding;
d) in the case of additional deliveries from the initial supplier either as replacement parts or continuing services for existing materials, services or facilities, or as an extension of existing materials, services or facilities, where a change of supplier would require the entity to acquire equipment or services that do not meet the requirement to be interchangeable with existing equipment or services, including software, to the extent that the initial purchase of the software was covered by this chapter;
e) when an entity acquires prototypes or a first good or service that are manufactured at its request in the course and for the execution of a specific research, experimentation, study or original manufacturing contract. Once the contracts of this class have been fulfilled, the purchase of goods or services that are made as a result of them will be adjusted to articles 15-09 to 15-15. The original development of a first good may include its production in limited quantity in order to take into account the results of field tests and to demonstrate that the product lends itself to mass production meeting acceptable quality standards, but does not include series production to determine commercial viability or to recover research and development costs;
f) for goods purchased on a commodity market;
g) for purchases made under exceptionally favorable conditions that are only offered in the very short term, such as extraordinary sales made by companies that are not normally suppliers; or to the alienation of assets of companies in liquidation or under judicial administration, but does not include ordinary purchases made from habitual suppliers;
h) for contracts to be awarded to the winner of an architectural design competition, provided that the competition is:
i) organized in accordance with the principles of this chapter, including in relation to the publication of the invitation to qualified suppliers to bid;
ii) organized in such a way that the design contract is awarded to the winner; Y
iii) submitted to an independent jury; and
i) when an entity requires consulting services related to aspects of a confidential nature, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to compromise confidential information of the public sector, cause serious economic damage or, similarly, be contrary to the public interest.
Entities shall prepare a written report on each contract they have awarded under paragraph 2. Each report shall contain the name of the procuring entity, the value and type of goods or services procured, the country of origin, and a statement of the circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 2 that justified the use of restricted bidding. The entity will retain each report. These will remain at the disposal of the competent authorities of the Party to be used, if required, in accordance with articles 15-17, 15-18 or chapter XIX.
Section C - Challenge Procedures and Dispute Resolution.
Article 15-17 : Challenge procedures.
The challenge procedures will be applied in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article for the Parties indicated therein.
In order to promote fair, open, and impartial procurement procedures, each Party shall adopt and maintain challenge procedures for purchases covered by this chapter, in accordance with the following:
a) each Party shall allow suppliers to resort to the challenge procedure in relation to any aspect of the purchasing process that, for the purposes of this article, begins from the moment an entity has defined its purchase requirement and continues until the award of the contract;
b) before initiating a challenge procedure, a Party may encourage the supplier to seek a solution to its complaint with the procuring entity;
c) each Party shall ensure that its entities give timely and impartial consideration to any complaint or challenge regarding purchases covered by this chapter;
d) whether or not a supplier has attempted to resolve its complaint with the entity, or after a satisfactory resolution has not been reached, no Party may preclude the supplier from initiating a challenge procedure or bringing other recourse;
e) a Party may request a supplier to notify the entity of the initiation of a challenge procedure;
f) a Party may limit the term within which a supplier may initiate the challenge procedure, but in no case shall this term be less than ten business days, from the moment the supplier knows or is considered to have known the basis of the complaint;
g) each Party shall establish or designate a reviewing authority with no substantial interest in the outcome of the purchases to receive challenges and issue the pertinent resolutions and recommendations;
h) upon receiving the challenge, the reviewing authority will proceed to investigate it expeditiously;
i) a Party may require its reviewing authority to limit its considerations to the challenge itself;
j) when investigating the challenge, the reviewing authority may delay the award of the proposed contract until the resolution of the challenge, except in cases of urgency or when the delay could be contrary to the public interest;
k) The reviewing authority will issue a recommendation to resolve the challenge, which may include guidelines for the entity to re-evaluate the offers, terminate the contract, or submit it again to the competition;
l) generally, entities will follow the recommendations of the reviewing authority;
m) at the conclusion of the challenge proceeding, each Party shall empower its review authority to submit further written recommendations to an entity, regarding any phase of its procurement process that was found to be problematic during the challenge investigation, including recommendations for make changes to the entity's purchasing procedures so that they are consistent with this chapter;
n) The reviewing authority will provide in a timely manner and in writing the results of its inquiries and its recommendations regarding the challenges, and will make them available to the Parties and interested persons;
o) each Party shall specify in writing and make generally available all of its challenge procedures; Y
p) in order to verify that the procurement process was carried out in accordance with this chapter, each Party shall ensure that each of its entities maintains complete documentation relating to each of its purchases, including a written record of all communications that substantially affect each purchase, for a period of at least three years from the date the contract was awarded.
A Party may request the start of the challenge procedure only after the call has been published or, in case of not being published, after the bidding conditions are available. When a Party establishes this requirement, the term of ten business days referred to in paragraph 2, letter f), will not begin to run before the date on which the call has been published or the bidding conditions are available.
Article 15-18 : Settlement of disputes.
When a Party considers that a measure of another Party is inconsistent with the obligations of this Chapter or could cause nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to Article 19-02, at the option of the complaining Party, the following shall apply:
a) the provisions of Chapter XIX; either
b) the provisions of chapter XIX with the modifications provided for in paragraphs 2 to 9.
Any consulting Party may request in writing the constitution of an arbitral tribunal whenever a matter is not resolved in accordance with article 19-05 within a period of thirty days following the request for consultations.
For the participation of the third Party as a complaining Party, instead of the period established in Article 19-07, paragraph 3, a period of five days will be observed.
For the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, instead of the terms established in article 19-09, the following will be observed:
a) the terms established in paragraph 1, literal b), will be ten days and three days respectively;
b) the term established in paragraph 1, literal c), will be five days;
c) the terms established in paragraph 2, literal b), will be 10 days and three days respectively; Y
d) The period established in paragraph 2, literal c), will be five days.
For the challenge, instead of the period established in article 19-10, a period of ten days will be observed.
For the preliminary decision, instead of the deadlines established in article 19-14, the following will be observed:
a) the period established in paragraph 1 shall be sixty days; Y
b) the period established in paragraph 2 shall be ten days.
For the final decision, instead of the deadlines established in article 19-15, the following will be observed:
a) the period established in paragraph 1 shall be twenty days; Y
b) the period established in paragraph 3 shall be ten days.
In accordance with article 19-16, paragraph 1, when ordering the term for the Parties to comply with the final decision, the arbitral tribunal shall take into account the need to establish a reduced term in the case of disputes arising from this chapter.
For the final decision, instead of the period established in article 19-17, a period of forty days will be observed.
The provisions of this article do not prevent a supplier of a Party from initiating the judicial or administrative instances that may arise under the domestic law of each Party.
Section D - General Provisions
Article 15-19 : Exceptions.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any action or refraining from disclosing information that it considers necessary to protect its essential security interests in connection with the purchase of arms, ammunition or war materiel, or any other essential contracting for national security or for national defense purposes.
As long as these measures are not applied in such a way that they constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where the same conditions exist or that they imply a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted as meaning to prevent a Party from establishing or maintaining measures:
a) necessary to protect morality, public order or safety;
b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life and health;
c) necessary to protect intellectual property; either
d) related to the goods or services of disabled people, charitable institutions or penitentiary work.
Article 15-20 : Provision of information
This Article shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of Annex 1 thereto, for the Parties indicated in that Annex.
Pursuant to Chapter XXI, each Party shall promptly publish any law, regulation, jurisprudence, administrative ruling of general application, and any procedure, including model contractual clauses relating to public sector procurement covered by this Chapter, by inserting it into publications pertinent to which annex 2 refers to this article.
Each part:
a) explain to another Party, upon request, its public sector procurement procedures;
b) ensure that its entities, upon request from a supplier, promptly explain their public sector procurement practices and procedures; Y
c) designate upon the entry into force of this Agreement one or more information centers for:
i) facilitate communication between the Parties; Y
ii) answer, upon request, all reasonable questions from the other Parties in order to provide relevant information on aspects covered by this chapter.
A Party may request additional information on the award of the contract that may be necessary to determine whether a purchase was made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter with respect to offers that have not been selected. For this purpose, the Party to which the purchasing entity belongs will provide information on the characteristics and relative advantages of the winning bid and the price of the contract. When disclosure of this information may prejudice competition in future tenders, the requesting Party may not disclose the information except after consulting with and obtaining the consent of the Party that provided the information.
Each Party shall provide to another Party, upon request, information available to that Party or its entities about its entities' covered purchases and about individual contracts awarded by its entities.
No Party may disclose confidential information, the disclosure of which may harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person or be detrimental to fair competition between suppliers, without the formal authorization of the person who provided such information to the Party.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a Party to provide confidential information the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest.
In order to enable effective monitoring of purchases covered by this chapter, each Party shall collect statistics and provide the other Parties with an annual report in accordance with the following requirements, unless the Parties otherwise agree:
a) statistics on the estimated value of contracts awarded, both below and above the value of the applicable thresholds, broken down by entity;
b) statistics on the number and total value of contracts above the value of the applicable thresholds, broken down by entity, by categories of goods and services established in accordance with the classification systems developed pursuant to this chapter and by country of origin of the goods and services purchased;
c) statistics on the number and total value of contracts awarded pursuant to article 15-16, broken down by entity, by category of goods or services, and by country of origin of the goods and services purchased; Y
d) statistics on the number and total value of contracts awarded in accordance with the exceptions to this chapter established in annex 7 to article 15-02, broken down by entity.
Each Party may organize by state or department any portion of the report referred to in paragraph 7 that corresponds to the entities established in the Protocol that the Parties prepare in accordance with Article 15-26 for state or departmental government entities. .
Each Party will make available to the other Parties and to the suppliers that request it, during the first quarter of the year, its annual purchasing program. This provision shall not constitute a purchase commitment for the entities.
Article 15-21 : Technical Cooperation.
The Parties shall cooperate, on mutually agreed terms, to achieve a better understanding of their public sector procurement systems, with a view to achieving the greatest access to public sector procurement opportunities for suppliers of either Party.
Each Party shall provide to the others and to the suppliers of these Parties, on a cost-recovery basis, information concerning training and orientation programs related to its public sector procurement systems, and access, without discrimination, to any program that effect.
The training and orientation programs referred to in paragraph 2 include:
a) training of public sector personnel directly involved in public sector procurement procedures;
b) training of suppliers interested in taking advantage of public sector purchasing opportunities;
c) the explanation and description of specific aspects of the public sector procurement system of each Party, such as its challenge mechanism; Y
d) information regarding public sector procurement market opportunities.
Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall establish at least one contact point to provide information on the training and orientation programs referred to in this article.
Article 15-22 : Joint participation programs for micro, small and medium industry.
The Parties create the Micro, Small and Medium Industry Committee, made up of representatives of each Party. The committee will meet by agreement of the Parties, but not less than once a year, and will report annually to the Commission on the efforts of the Parties to promote public sector procurement opportunities for their micro, small, and medium-sized industries.
The committee will work to facilitate the following activities of the Parties:
a) the identification of opportunities available for the training of the personnel of micro, small and medium-sized industries in matters of public sector purchasing procedures;
b) the identification of micro, small and medium-sized industries interested in becoming trading partners of micro, small and medium-sized industries in the territory of another Party;
c) the development of databases on micro, small and medium-sized industries in the territory of each Party to be used by entities of another Party that wish to make purchases from smaller-scale companies;
d) conducting consultations regarding the factors that each Party uses to establish its eligibility criteria for any program for micro, small, and medium-sized industries; Y
e) carrying out activities to deal with any related matter.
Article 15-23 : Rectifications or modifications.
A Party may modify its coverage under this chapter only in exceptional circumstances.
When a Party modifies its coverage under this chapter:
a) communicate the modification to the other Parties;
b) incorporate the change to the corresponding annex; Y
c) propose to the other Parties appropriate compensatory adjustments to their coverage, in order to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that existing before the modification.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may make exclusively formal rectifications and minor amendments to its lists of Annexes 1 to Article 15-02, as well as to the Protocol that the Parties prepare in accordance with Article 15- 26 for state or departmental government entities, provided that such rectifications are communicated to the other Parties, and no Party expresses its objection to the proposed rectifications within a period of thirty days. In those cases, it will not be necessary to propose compensation.
It shall not be necessary to propose compensation when a Party reorganizes its entities including through programs for the decentralization of the purchases of those entities or when the corresponding public functions cease to be performed by any public sector entity, whether or not it is covered by this chapter. No Party may carry out such reorganizations or programs in order to evade compliance with the obligations of this chapter.
A Party may resort to the dispute settlement procedure under Chapter XIX when a Party considers that:
a) the adjustment proposed in accordance with paragraph 2, letter c) is not adequate to maintain a level comparable to that of the mutually agreed coverage; either
b) a minor rectification or amendment in accordance with paragraph 3 or a reorganization in accordance with paragraph 4 does not meet the requirements stipulated in those paragraphs and as a consequence requires compensation.
Article 15-24 : Alienation of entities.
Nothing in this chapter prevents a Party from disposing of an entity covered by this chapter.
If, through the public offering of shares of an entity contained in Annex 2 to Article 15-02 or through other methods, the entity is no longer subject to federal or central government control, the Party may remove that entity from its list at that time. annex and remove the entity from the coverage of this chapter, prior communication to the other Parties.
When a Party objects to the withdrawal of the entity on the grounds that it remains subject to federal or central government control, that Party may resort to the dispute settlement procedure under Chapter XIX.
Article 15-25 : Future negotiations.
The Procurement Committee will recommend to the Parties that they initiate negotiations with a view to achieving the subsequent liberalization of their respective public sector procurement markets.
In those negotiations, the Parties will review all aspects of their public sector procurement practices for the purposes of:
a) evaluate the operation of their public sector procurement systems;
b) seek to expand the coverage of the chapter; Y
c) review the value of the thresholds.
Prior to that review, the Parties shall consult with their state or departmental governments with a view to reaching commitments, on a voluntary and reciprocal basis, for the incorporation into this chapter of the purchases of state or departmental entities and companies owned by them, or under their control.
Article 15-26 : Annexed protocols.
In order to reflect the outcome of the negotiations referred to in Article 15-25, the Parties shall draw up Protocols.
Annex 1 to article 15-02 : Federal or central government entities
Colombian roster:
Comptroller General of the Republic
government ministry
Unit for Attention to Indigenous Affairs
National Directorate of Copyright
General Archive of the Nation
Community Development Fund
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Revolving Fund of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Justice and Law
National Fund of Notaries FONANOT
Notary Social Welfare Fund and FONPRENOR Registry
Security Fund of the Judicial Branch and the Public Ministry
National Penitentiary and Prison Institute, INPEC
Superintendence of Notaries and Registry
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
Directorate of National Taxes and Customs
Banking Superintendence
Superintendency of Securities
Social Welfare Fund of the Banking Superintendence
Agustín Codazzi Geographic Institute
Ministry of National Defense
Military Forces Retirement Fund
Military Housing Box
Military Club
Central Military Hospital
Institute of Fiscal Houses of the Army
Militar University of New Granada
Air Force Revolving Fund
Revolving Fund of the National Police
Army Revolving Fund
Department of agriculture
Instituto Colombiano Agropecuario ICA (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
Colombian Institute for Agrarian Reform INCORA (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
Colombian Institute of Hydrography, Meteorology and Land Adequacy HIMAT
National Institute of Natural, Renewable and Environmental Resources INDERENA
National Institute of Fisheries and Aquaculture INPA
Ministry of Labor and Social Security
Family Subsidy Superintendence (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.)
National Social Welfare Fund, CAJANAL
Colombian Artist Security Fund
Social Welfare Fund of the Congress of the Republic
National Learning Service SENA
Ministry of Health
National Superintendence of Health
Colombian Institute for Family Welfare ICBF (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.)
National Cancer Institute
National Institute of Health
Recruitment Sanatorium Hospital
God's Water Sanatorium
Ministry of Mines and Energy
Institute of Nuclear Sciences and Alternative Energies INEA
Institute for Research in Geosciences, Mining and Chemistry INGEOMINAS
Energy Regulation Commission
Mining-Energy Planning Unit
Mining-Energy Information Unit
Ministry of Foreign Trade
Colombian Institute of Foreign Trade INCOMEX
Ministry of Economic Development
Superintendence of Industry and Commerce
Superintendence of Companies
National Institute of Social Interest Housing and Urban Reform INURBE
Social Corporation of the Superintendencies of CORPORANONIMAS Companies
Ministry of National Education
Pilot Public Library of Medellín for Latin America
Jorge Eliercer Gaitan Center
Boyacá College
East of Caldas National Integrated College
College of Antioquia
Bolivar College
Cauca Hall of Residence
College of Cundinamarca
Caro and Cuervo Institute
Colombian Institute of Educational Credit and Technical Studies Abroad "Mariano Ospina Pérez" ICETEX"
Colombian Institute for the Promotion of Higher Education ICFES
Colombian Institute of Hispanic Culture
Luis Carlos Galan Institute
National Institute for the Blind INCI
National Institute for the Deaf INSOR
Polytechnic Institute of Cundinamarca
Polytechnic Institute of Sucre
Pascual Bravo Technological Institute of Medellín
National Technical Institute of Commerce "Simón Rodríguez" of Cali
ITA de Buga Agricultural Technical Institute
Higher Institute of Rural Education of Pamplona ISER
Institute of Professional Technical Education of Roldanillo
National Institute of Professional Technical Training of San Andrés and Providencia
National Institute of Professional Technical Training of Ciénaga
National Institute of Professional Technical Training of San Juan del Cesar
Technological Institute of Putumayo
Tolimense Institute of Professional Technical Training
Bogota Central Technical Institute
Female Residences
University Unit of the South of Bogotá UNISUR
Caldas University
University of Cauca
University of Cordoba
National University of Colombia UN
UPN National Pedagogical University
Pedagogical and Technological University of Colombia UPTC
People's University of Cesar
South Colombian University
Technological University of Chocó "Diego Luis Cordoba"
Technological University of the Eastern Plains
Technological University of Pereira UTP
University of the Amazon
Pacific university
PROCULTURE
Colombian Institute of Culture COLCULTURE
Colombian Institute of Anthropology ICAN
National Library
National Museum of Colombia
Colombian Institute of Youth and Sports COLDEPORTES
Special Administrative Unit
National School of Sport
National Sport Administrative Boards
Ministry of communications
CAPRECOM Communications Social Welfare Fund
Revolving Fund of the Ministry of Communications
Ministry of Transport
General Superintendency of Ports
National Highway Institute
Civil Aviation
Administrative Department of Security DAS
Revolving Fund of the Administrative Department of Security
National Administrative Department of Statistics DANE
Revolving Fund of the National Administrative Department of Statistics (FONDANE)
Administrative Department of National Planning DNP
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Rionegro, Nare, CORNARE
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Risaralda CARDER
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Tumaco and Colonization of the Mira River
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Valle del Cauca CVC
Regional Autonomous Corporation of César CORPOCESAR
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Quindio CRQ
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Tolima CORTOLIMA
Regional Autonomous Corporation of the Northeastern Border CORPONOR
Regional Autonomous Corporation of La Guajira CORPOGUAJIRA
Regional Autonomous Corporation of the Bogotá, Ubaté and Suárez River Basins CAR
Regional Autonomous Corporation of the Sinú and San Jorge Valleys CVS
Regional Autonomous Corporation for the Development of Caldas CORPOCALDAS
Corporation for the Defense of the Bucaramanga Plateau
Regional Autonomous Corporation for the Development of Chocó CODECHOCO
Corporation for the Reconstruction and Development of the Department of Cauca CRC
Regional Development Corporation of Urabá CORPOURABA
Regional Corporation of the Zulia River Valleys
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Magdalena and the Sierra Nevada de Santa Martha, CORPAMAG.
Regional Autonomous Corporation of Putumayo CAP
Regional Autonomous Corporation for the Development of Nariño CORPONARI¥O
Colombian Institute for the Development of Science and Technology Francisco José de Caldas COLCIENCIAS
Administrative Department of the Civil Service
School of Public Administration ESAP
National Administrative Department of Cooperatives, DANCOOP
Administrative Department of the Presidency
Mexico roster:
Ministry of the Interior
National Center for Municipal Studies
Qualifying Commission for Publications and Illustrated Magazines
National Population Council
General Archive of the Nation
National Institute of Historical Studies of the Mexican Revolution
Assistance Board for Social Reincorporation
National Center for Disaster Prevention
National Council of Radio and Television
Mexican Commission for Aid to Refugees
Secretary of Foreign Relations
Mexican Section of the International Boundary and Water Commission Mexico-USA
Mexican Section of the Mexico-Guatemala International Boundary and Water Commission
Secretariat of Finance and Public Credit
National Banking Commission
National Value Comission
National Insurance and Bond Commission
National Institute of Statistics, Geography and Informatics
Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulic Resources
Mexican Institute of Water Technology
National Institute of Forestry and Agricultural Research
Support for Agricultural Marketing Services (Aserca)
Ministry of Communications and Transportation (including the Mexican Institute of Communications and the Mexican Institute of Transportation)
Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development
Secretary of Public Education
National Institute of Anthropology and History
National Institute of Fine Arts and Literature
Radio Education
Engineering and Industrial Development Center
National Council for Culture and the Arts
National Sports Commission
Health Secretary
Administration of the Patrimony of Public Charity
National Center for Blood Transfusion
General Management of Biologicals and Reagents
Center for the Development of Health Infrastructure
Institute of Human Communication Dr. Andrés Bustamante Gurría
National Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine
National Institute of Orthopedics
National Council for the Prevention and Control of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (Conasida)
Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare
Federal Attorney for the Defense of Labor
Agrarian Reform Secretariat
Agricultural Training Institute
Fisheries Secretariat
National Fisheries Institute
Attorney General of the Republic
Ministry of Energy, Mines and Parastatal Industry
National Commission for Nuclear Safety and Safeguards
National Commission for Energy Saving
Ministry of Social Development
Ministry of Tourism
Secretariat of the Comptroller General of the Federation
National Commission for Arid Zones
National Commission of Free Textbooks
National Human Rights Commission
National Council for Educational Promotion
Secretary of National Defense
Marine Secretary
Venezuelan roster:
Ministry of the Secretariat of the Presidency
Ministry of Internal Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Treasury
Ministry of Defense
Ministry of development
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Health and Social Assistance
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
Ministry of Labor
Ministry of Transport and Communications
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Energy and Mines
Ministry of the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources
Ministry of Urban Development
Family Ministry
Foreign Trade Institute
Venezuelan Institute of Planning
Autonomous National Printing Service
Autonomous Service National Radio of Venezuela
Petrochemical of Venezuela S.A.
CORPOVEN
LAGOVEN
MARAVEN
BARIVEN
Institute of Social Welfare of the Armed Forces
Industry and Commerce
CORPOINDUSTRY
Industrial Credit Fund
Investment Fund of Venezuela
sugar mills
Transport and comunication
Venezuelan Navigation CA
National Pipeline Institute
AC Caracas Metro
Culture and Communication
Monte Avila Publishers CA
Film Promotion Fund
Housing and Urban Development
National Housing Institute
Simon Bolivar Center
National Urban Development Fund
Tourism and Recreation
Tourism Corporation of Venezuela
Annex 2 to article 15-02 : Government companies
Colombian roster:
Defense and SecurityAir Service to National Territories SATENA
Navy Shipping Service Republic of Colombia SENARC
Hotel San Diego S.A.
CIAC Colombian Aeronautical Industry Corporation
Agriculture
IDEMA Agricultural Marketing Institute (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
General Deposit Warehouses of the Agrarian Fund, IDEMA, Banco Ganadero ALMAGRARIOS
Perishable Products Marketing Company EMCOPER SA
Colombian Company of Veterinary Products VECOL
Work and Social Security
ISS Social Security Institute
Promoter of Vacations and Social Recreation PROSOCIAL
Mines and Energy
Electric Corporation of the Atlantic Coast CORELCA
Colombian Petroleum Company ECOPETROL
Electric Interconnection SA ISA
Colombian Institute of Electric Power ICEL
Minerals of Colombia SA MINERALCO
Carbones de Colombia SA CARBOCOL
Coal Company of the East SA CARBORIENTE SA
Economic development
National Tourism Corporation of Colombia CNT
Handicrafts of Colombia SA
Education
Publishing Company of the National University
communications
National Telecommunications Company TELECOM
National Institute of Radio and Television INRAVISION
Technological Institute of Telecommunications ITEC
National Postal Administration, ADPOSTAL
Transport
Colombian Company of RAILWAYS
Colombian Channeling and Dredging Company
Colombian Maritime and Fluvial Company SA
Colombian Society of Railway Transport STF SA
National Administrative Department of Planning DNP
Financial Fund for Development Projects FONADE
Mexico roster:
Printing and PublishingGraphic Workshops of the Nation
Producer and Importer of Paper SA de CV (PIPSA)
Communications and Transportation
Airports and Auxiliary Services (ASA)
Federal Roads and Bridges of Income and Related Services (Capufe)
Mexican Postal Service
National Railways of Mexico (Ferronales)
Telecommunications of Mexico (Telecom)
Industry
Petróleos Mexicanos (Pemex) (Does not include fuel and gas purchases)
Federal Electricity Commission (CFE)
Mineral Resources Council
Mineral Resources Board
Commerce
National Company for Popular Subsistence (Conasupo) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.)
Rural Wineries Conasupo, SA de CV
Distributor and Promoter of Commerce SA de CV (Diconsa)
Leche Industrializada Conasupo, SA de CV (Liconsa) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
Federal Consumer Attorney
National Consumer Institute
National Industrial Development Laboratories
National Market Information Service
Social Security
Institute of Security and Social Services for State Workers (ISSSTE)
Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS)
National System for the Integral Development of the Family (DIF) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.)
Assistance Services of the Secretary of the Navy
Social Security Institute for the Mexican Armed Forces
National Indigenous Institute (INI)
National Institute for Adult Education
Youth Integration Centers
National Institute of Senescence
Others
Administrative Committee of the Federal School Construction Program (CAPFCE)
National Water Commission (CNA)
Commission for the Regularization of Land Tenure
National Council of Science and Technology (Conacyt)
Notimex, SA de CV
Mexican Institute of Cinematography
National Lottery for Public Assistance
Sports forecasts
Venezuelan roster:
Agriculture
National Coffee Fund
National Cocoa Fund
National Reforestation Company
National Lime Company
National Agrarian Institute
National Fund for Agricultural Research
Agricultural Capacity Institute
National Institute of Parks
Livestock Agricultural Credit Institute
Agricultural Credit Fund
Energy and Mines
Venezuelan Corporation of Guyana
CVG Ferrominera del Orinoco, CA
Venezuelan Bauxite CA
Bitumens Orinoco, CA
CVG Siderúrgica del Orinoco, CA
CVG Venezolana de Ferrosilicios, SA
Caroni SA Aluminum
Venezuelan Aluminum Industry CA
Interamericana de Alumina CA
CVG Electrification of Caroni CA
CA Electric Power of Venezuela
PDVSA, Petroleos de Venezuela SA
Culture and Communication
Foundations of Buildings and Educational Endowments
Autonomous Institute of National Library and Library Services
National Council of Culture
Venezuelan Institute of Scientific Research
International Institute for Advanced Studies Foundation
Institute of Engineering, Research and Technological Development Foundation
CONICIT
Venezuelan Airline
Venezuelan TV CA
Social Security
Foundation Maintenance of the Medical-Assistance Infrastructure Public Health
National Institute of Nutrition
Autonomous Service Integrated Sub-System of Medical Care
Foundation for the Maternal-Child Food Program
National Institute of Hygiene "Rafael Rangel"
Autonomous Institute University Hospital of Caracas
Venezuelan Institute of Social Security
Social Welfare Institute of the Ministry of Education (IPASME)
Housing and Urban Development
National Autonomous Rural Housing Service
COMMONFOUND
Annex 3 to article 15-02 : List of goods
Section A - General Provisions
This chapter applies to all property, except as provided in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4.
In relation to Colombia, the strategic assets indicated in section B acquired by the Ministry of Defense or its affiliated entities are excluded from the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of article 15-19.
In relation to Mexico, the strategic assets indicated in section B acquired by the Ministry of National Defense and the Ministry of the Navy are excluded from the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of article 15-19.
In relation to Venezuela, the strategic assets indicated in section B acquired by the Ministry of Defense are excluded from the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of article 15-19.
Section B - List of certain assets
Note: The Parties agreed that the design of the Common Classification System for Goods will be finalized before the entry into force of this Agreement. This system may follow the Federal Supply Classification (FSC).
(Numbering refers to FSC)
   10 Armament
    
    11 Nuclear war material
    
    12 Fire control equipment
    
    13 Ammunition and explosives
    
    14 guided missiles
    
    15 Aircraft and Aircraft Structural Components
    
    16 Aircraft components and accessories
    
    17 Aircraft take-off, landing and ground handling equipment
    
    18 space vehicles
    
    19 Boats, small structures, pangas and floating docks
    
    20 Vessels and maritime equipment
Annex 4 article 15-02 : List of services
Section A - General Provisions
This chapter applies to all services that are purchased by the entities indicated in annexes 1 and 2 to article 15-02.
The list of services indicated in the appendix to this annex is indicative of the services purchased by the entities of the Parties. The Parties will use the list of services for reporting purposes and will update the appendix to this annex when they agree.
Annex 5 to article 15-02 applies to contracts for construction services.
General notes:
For Colombia:All services related to those goods acquired by the Ministry of Defense or its attached entities that are not identified as subject to the coverage of this chapter, (Annex 3 to article 15-02), will be excluded from the disciplines of this chapter.
All services acquired in support of military forces located outside the territory will be excluded from the coverage of this chapter.
For Mexico:
All services related to those goods acquired by the Secretary of National Defense and the Secretary of the Navy that are not identified as subject to the coverage of this chapter, (Annex 3 to article 15-02), will be excluded from the disciplines of this chapter.
All services acquired in support of military forces located outside the territory will be excluded from the coverage of this chapter.
For Venezuela:
All services related to those goods acquired by the Ministry of Defense that are not identified as subject to the coverage of this chapter, (Annex 3 to article 15-02), will be excluded from the disciplines of this chapter.
All services acquired in support of military forces located outside the territory will be excluded from the coverage of this chapter.
Appendix to annex 4 of article 15-02 : Common classification system for services
Notes:
The Parties agreed that the design of the Common Classification System for Services will be finalized before the entry into force of this Agreement.
The Parties will continue to work on developing definitions relating to the categories and other improvements to the classification system.
The Parties will continue to review pertinent technical issues that may arise from time to time.
This common classification system may follow the following format:
group = one digit
Subgroup = two digits
Class = four digits
A. Research and Development
                     
Definition of Research and Development Contracts
Purchases of research and development services include the acquisition of specialized advice in order to increase scientific knowledge; apply advanced scientific knowledge or exploit the potential of scientific discoveries and technological improvements to advance existing technological knowledge; and systematically use increases in scientific knowledge and advances in existing technology to design, develop, test, or evaluate new products or services.
Research and Development Codes
Research and development codes are made up of two alphabetic digits. The first digit is always the letter A to identify Research and Development, the second code is alphabetical, from A to Z, to identify the main subgroup.

B. Special Studies and Analysis - not Research and Development
                    
Definition of Special Studies and Analysis
Acquisitions of special studies and analysis include the acquisition of organized analytical judgments, which help understand complex issues or improve policy development or decision making. In such acquisitions, the product obtained is a structured formal document that includes data and other information that constitute the basis for conclusions or recommendations.

W. Equipment Leasing and Rental
 
        W0 Leasing or Rental of Equipment
Annex 5 to Article 15-02 : Construction services
This chapter applies to all construction services specified in the appendix to this annex, which are acquired by the entities indicated in annexes 1 and 2 of article 15-02.
The Parties may update the appendix to this annex when they so agree.
Appendix to annex 5 of article 15-02 : Common classification system
Building Services Codes
The Parties agreed that the design of the Common Classification System for Construction Services will conclude before the entry into force of this Agreement.
The Common Classification System for Construction Services may follow the following format:
Note: Based on Central Product Classification (CPC) division 51
Definition of construction services:
Pre-building work; new construction and repair, alteration, restoration, and maintenance work to residential construction, non-residential construction, or civil engineering work. This work can be carried out by general contractors who carry out the construction work in its entirety for the project owner, on their own account, or by subcontracting some part of the construction work to specialized contractors, eg. in construction installation, where the value of the work performed by the subcontractor becomes part of the main contractor's work. The products classified here are services that are essential in the production process of different types of construction, the final inputs of construction activities.
Annex 6 to article 15-02 : Indexation and conversion of the value of the thresholds
The calculations referred to in article 15-02, paragraph 1 literal c), will be made according to the following:
a) the inflation rate of the United States of America will be measured by the Wholesale Price Index for finished products published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics;
b) the first adjustment for inflation, which will take effect on January 1, 1997, will be calculated based on the period from January 1, 1995 to December 31, 1996;
c) all subsequent adjustments will be calculated over biennial periods, beginning on the 1st. November, and will take effect on the 1st. January of the immediately following year;
d) the inflationary adjustment will be estimated according to the following formula:
        
           T0 x (1+ TTi)= T1;
            
                where
            
         T0 : threshold value in the base period;
         TTi : cumulative rate of inflation in the United States  
                        in the i-th biennial period; Y
         T1 : new threshold value.
The exchange rate for determining the value of the thresholds, for the purposes of this chapter, will be the current value of the Colombian peso, the Mexican peso and the Venezuelan bolivar in relation to the US dollar as of the date of publication of the notice of the projected contract. The Parties will calculate and convert the value of the thresholds into their own currencies. It is understood that these calculations will be based on the official exchange rate of the Bank of Mexico, the Central Bank of Venezuela and the representative market rate disclosed by the Banking Superintendence of Colombia.
Annex 7 to article 15-02 : Reserves
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, annexes 1 to 5 of article 15-02 are subject to the following:
Colombian roster:
transitory reservations
Colombia may reserve from the obligations of this chapter, for the years and in the percentages described in paragraph 2:
a) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods and services and any combination thereof, and the construction services acquired by the following entities during the year, that exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02 , paragraph 1, literal c):
i) Colombian Petroleum Company (ECOPETROL)
ii) Carbones de Colombia (CARBOCOL)
iii) National Telecommunications Company (TELECOM)
iv) Electrical Interconnection
v) Electric Corporation of the Atlantic Coast (CORELCA)
vi) Colombian Institute of Electric Power (ICEL)
vii) Valle del Cauca Regional Autonomous Corporation (CVC)
viii) Colombian Road Company (FERROVIAS)
b) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02, paragraph 1, literal c), excluding contracts for the purchase of services of construction acquired by the entities indicated in paragraph 1 literal a), numerals i) to viii).
The years and percentages referred to in paragraph 1 are as follows:
         1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
         50% 45% 45% 40% 40%  

         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 onwards
         35% 35% 30% 30% 0%
The value of purchase contracts financed by loans from multilateral and regional financial institutions shall not be included in the calculation of the total value of purchase contracts in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2. Purchase contracts financed by such loans shall also not be subject to to any of the provisions indicated in this chapter.
Colombia will ensure that the total value of the purchase contracts in the same Federal Supply Classification (FSC) class, or another classification system agreed between the Parties, that are reserved by the entities indicated in paragraph 1, literal a), numerals i) to viii), in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 for any year, does not exceed 10% of the total value of the purchase contracts that may be reserved by the entities indicated in paragraph 1, literal a), numerals i) to viii), for that year.
Colombia will ensure that, after December 31, 1998, the entities indicated in paragraph 1, literal a), numerals i) to viii), make all reasonable efforts to ensure that the total value of the purchase contracts within of the same FSC class or another classification system agreed between the Parties, which are reserved by any of the entities indicated in paragraph 1, literal a), numerals i) to viii), in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 for any year, does not exceed 50% of the total value of all purchase contracts of the entities indicated in paragraph 1, literal a), numerals i) to viii), within that FSC class or another classification system agreed between Parties for that year.
This chapter will not apply, until the 1st. January 2002, to purchases of medicines made by the Ministry of Health, the Social Security Institute (ISS), the Colombian Family Welfare Institute (ICBF), the Social Welfare Fund (CAJANAL) and the Ministry of Defense , which are not currently patented in Colombia or whose Colombian patents have expired. Nothing in this paragraph shall prejudge any right included in Chapter XVIII.
Permanent Reserves
This chapter does not apply to purchases made:
a) with a view to commercial resale by government stores;
b) in accordance with loans from regional or multilateral financial institutions to the extent that those institutions impose different procedures, except for local content requirements; either
c) between one entity and another in Colombia.
This chapter does not apply to the purchase of transportation services that are part of or related to a purchase contract.
National security exceptions include purchases made in support of safeguarding nuclear materials or technology.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, Colombia may reserve purchase contracts for the obligations of this chapter, for an amount equivalent to 5% of its total annual purchases.
Mexico roster:
transitory reservations
Mexico may reserve from the obligations of this chapter, for the years and in the percentages described in paragraph 12:
a) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods and services and any combination thereof, and the construction services acquired by Pemex during the year, that exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02, paragraph 11, literal c);
b) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods and services and any combination thereof and the construction services acquired by CFE during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02, paragraph 11 , literal c); Y
c) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02, paragraph 11, literal c), excluding contracts for the purchase of services of construction acquired by Pemex and CFE.
The years and percentages referred to in paragraph 11 are as follows:
         1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
         50% 45% 45% 40% 40%  

         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 onwards
         35% 35% 30% 30% 0%
The value of purchase contracts financed by loans from multilateral and regional financial institutions shall not be included in the calculation of the total value of purchase contracts in accordance with paragraphs 11 and 12. Purchase contracts financed by such loans shall also not be subject to to any of the provisions indicated in this chapter.
Mexico will ensure that the total value of purchase contracts in the same Federal Supply Classification (FSC) class that are reserved by Pemex or CFE in accordance with paragraphs 11 and 12 for any year, does not exceed 10% of the total value. of the purchase contracts that Pemex and CFE may reserve for that year.
Mexico will ensure that, after December 31, 1998, both Pemex and CFE make all reasonable efforts to ensure that the full value of purchase contracts within a single FSC class that are reserved by Pemex or CFE in accordance with with paragraphs 11 and 12 for any year, does not exceed 50% of the total value of all Pemex and CFE purchase contracts within that FSC class for that year.
This chapter will not apply, until the 1st. January 2002, to purchases of medicines made by the Ministry of Health, the IMSS, the ISSSTE, the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of the Navy, which are not currently patented in Mexico or whose Mexican patents have expired. Nothing in this paragraph shall prejudge any right included in Chapter XVIII.
Permanent Reserves
This chapter does not apply to purchases made:
a) with a view to commercial resale by government stores;
b) pursuant to lending from regional or multilateral financial institutions to the extent that those institutions impose different procedures except for local content requirements; either
c) between one entity and another in Mexico.
This chapter does not apply to the purchase of transportation services that are part of a purchase contract, or are related to it.
National security exceptions include purchases made in support of safeguarding nuclear materials or technology.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, Mexico may reserve purchase contracts for the obligations of this chapter, for an amount equivalent to 5% of its total annual purchases.
Venezuelan roster:
transitory reservations
Venezuela may reserve from the obligations of this chapter, for the years and in the percentages described in paragraph 22:
a) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods and services and any combination thereof, and the construction services acquired by Petróleos de Venezuela and its subsidiaries during the year, that exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02, paragraph 21, literal c);
b) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods and services and any combination thereof and the construction services acquired by CVG and its affiliated companies, CA Metro de Caracas and CA Energía Eléctrica de Venezuela during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02, paragraph 21, literal c); Y
c) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in article 15-02, paragraph 21, literal c), excluding contracts for the purchase of services of construction acquired by Petróleos de Venezuela and its subsidiaries, CVG and its subsidiaries, CA Metro de Caracas and CA Energía Eléctrica de Venezuela.
The years and percentages referred to in paragraph 21 are as follows:
         1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
         50% 45% 45% 40% 40%  

         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 onwards
         35% 35% 30% 30% 0%
The value of purchase contracts financed by loans from multilateral and regional financial institutions shall not be included in the calculation of the total value of purchase contracts in accordance with paragraphs 21 and 22. Purchase contracts financed by such loans shall also not be subject to to any of the provisions indicated in this chapter.
Venezuela will ensure that the total value of the purchase contracts in the same Federal Supply Classification (FSC) class, or another qualification system agreed between the Parties, that are reserved by Petróleos de Venezuela and its affiliated companies, CVG and its companies subsidiaries, CA Metro de Caracas and CA Energía Eléctrica de Venezuela in accordance with paragraphs 21 and 22 for any year, does not exceed 10% of the total value of the purchase contracts that Petróleos de Venezuela and its affiliated companies, CVG and its subsidiary companies, CA Metro de Caracas and CA Energía Eléctrica de Venezuela, for that year.
Venezuela will ensure that, after December 31, 1998, Petróleos de Venezuela and its affiliated companies, CVG and its affiliated companies, CA Metro de Caracas and CA Energía Eléctrica de Venezuela make all reasonable efforts to ensure that the full value of purchase contracts within the same FSC class or another qualification system agreed between the Parties, which are reserved by Petróleos de Venezuela and its affiliated companies, CVG and its affiliated companies, CA Metro de Caracas and CA Energía Eléctrica de Venezuela, in accordance with paragraphs 21 and 22 for any year, does not exceed 50 of the total value of all purchase contracts of Petróleos de Venezuela, CVG and its affiliated companies,CA Metro de Caracas and CA Energía Eléctrica de Venezuela within that class of the FSC or another qualification system agreed between the Parties, for that year.
Permanent Reserves
This chapter does not apply to purchases made:
a) with a view to commercial resale by government stores;
b) pursuant to lending from regional or multilateral financial institutions to the extent that those institutions impose different procedures except for local content requirements; either
c) between one and another entity of Venezuela.
This chapter does not apply to the purchase of transportation services that are part of a purchase contract, or are related to it.
National security exceptions include purchases made in support of safeguarding nuclear materials or technology.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, Venezuela may reserve purchase contracts for the obligations of this chapter, for an amount equivalent to 5% of its total annual purchases.
This chapter does not apply to purchases made in relation to social programs (such as "Dairy Scholarship", "Food Scholarship", "Cereal Bonus", "School Supplies and Uniforms", "Daily Care Homes", "Program Maternal-Child Alimentary"), carried out by the Ministries of Education, Family and Health, are directed to the attention of education, health and food.
Annex 8 to article 15-02 : General notes
Any significant modification to the legislation, regulations, procedures and practices regarding public sector procurement of one Party shall be communicated to the other Parties sufficiently in advance of its entry into force, so that, where appropriate, those Parties adopt the measures necessary to maintain the original balance in the scope of the chapter
A modification resulting from legislative changes to the amounts from which public bidding must be made in accordance with the legislation of a Party, does not imply a modification of the coverage, unless such modification results in discriminatory treatment against providers. of the other Parties.
Without prejudice to article 15-25, and in order to promote greater opportunities for access to public sector procurement, the Parties may establish or modify the bidding procedures contained in this chapter, taking into account the disciplines of the Government Procurement Code. of the GATT.
The percentages agreed by the Parties for the calculation of their temporary reserve in accordance with the provisions of Annex 7 to Article 15-02, may be modified before the end of the year prior to its application, when necessary to guarantee compliance with the principle of relative equivalence in the application of that reservation. This principle means that the Parties will reserve each year an equivalent percentage of the value of their total purchases. The Procurement Committee will be in charge of reviewing these percentages based on the information exchanged between the Parties corresponding to public sector purchases in the immediately preceding year and will decide, when necessary, adjustments to the percentage for the following year, in accordance with the values ​​originally agreed between the Parties.
The Parties create a Purchasing Committee that will supervise the application of the provisions of this chapter. The activities of the Committee will include, among others, compliance with the principle of relative equivalence for the application of the transitory reservation agreed between the Parties. The Committee will also define a Common Asset Classification System agreed between the Parties and will evaluate the possibility of replacing the list of entities covered by this chapter with a list of entities not covered.
Annex to article 15-09 : Provisions applicable to Colombia and Venezuela regarding bidding procedures
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Colombia and Venezuela will apply their national legislation regarding purchasing procedures.
Colombia and Venezuela will grant to Mexico, regarding bidding procedures, a treatment no less favorable than the most favorable granted to any other country that is not a Party.
Colombia and Venezuela will apply the procedures of Articles 15-09 to 15-16, except for the provisions of sections A to F.
Section A - Qualification of suppliers.
Article 15-10, paragraph 2, letters e), f), h), i), j), do not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
Section B - Invitation to participate.
Article 15-11 does not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
When a tender procedure is used, the entity will publish an invitation to participate that will contain the following information:
a) a description of the object and characteristics of the goods and services to be acquired;
b) the address to which the request to participate in the tender should be sent; Y
c) the deadline for the receipt of offers.
When, after the publication of an invitation to participate but before the deadline for the receipt of offers, the entity considers it necessary to make changes or reissue the invitation to participate, the entity will ensure that this invitation is made under the same conditions than the original.
Section C - Selective Bidding Procedures.
Article 15-12 does not apply to Colombia and Venezuela. If, as a result of modifications to their respective internal legislation, Colombia or Venezuela decide to establish selective bidding procedures, they will be obliged to apply the disciplines of article 15-12.
Section D - Deadlines for bidding and delivery.
Article 15-13, paragraphs 2 and 3 do not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
Section E - Bidding Terms.
Article 15-14 does not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
When the entities provide bidding bases or specifications to the suppliers, the documentation will contain all the necessary information that allows them to duly present their offers. This information of the bidding bases will contain objective, fair and clear rules that avoid the declaration of desertion of the bidding or contest, among others:
a) the objective requirements necessary to participate;
b) the address of the entity to which the offers must be sent;
c) the closing date and time for the receipt of offers;
d) the date, time and place of the opening of the offers;
e) a description of the goods or services to be purchased and any other necessary requirements;
f) the criteria on which the award of the contract will be based; Y
g) any other requirement or condition.
Section F - Presentation, reception and opening of offers and award of contracts.
Article 15-15 does not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
An entity shall endeavor to use procedures for the submission, receipt, and opening of bids and the award of contracts that are consistent with the following:
a) Offers will be submitted directly in writing to the entity or to the Colombian or Venezuelan consulate where the supplier is located; Y
b) It will not be allowed to submit offers by telephone, telex, telegram, telefacsimile or other means of electronic transmission.
All the offers requested by an entity in the bidding procedures will be received and opened in accordance with the procedures and conditions that guarantee the regularity of the opening of the offers. The entity will try to keep the documents related to the opening of the tenders.
An entity, when awarding contracts shall take into consideration the following:
a) In order for a bid to be considered for awarding, it must comply at the time of opening with the requirements stipulated in the invitation to participate or in the bidding bases or specifications and come from suppliers that comply with the conditions of participation; Y
b) the awards will be made in accordance with the criteria and requirements established in the bidding conditions or specifications.
Within a period of seventy-two days from the award of the contract, the entity will publish the results of the award.
Section G - Restricted Bidding.
Article 15-16 does not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
Colombia and Venezuela will not use the restricted bidding procedures or any other supplier selection procedure, in such a way that they diminish or eliminate the benefits granted in this chapter.
Annex to article 15-11 : Publications for purchase calls in accordance with article 15-11 "Invitation to participate"
Colombian roster:
Main newspapers of national circulation
Mexico roster:
Main national newspapers or the Official Gazette of the Federation.
Mexico will endeavor to establish a specialized publication for the purposes of the purchase calls. When that publication is established, it will supersede those referred to in paragraph 1.
Venezuelan roster:
Main newspapers of national circulation
Venezuela will endeavor to establish a specialized publication for the purposes of the purchase calls. When that publication is established, it will supersede those referred to in paragraph 1.
Annex to article 15-17 : Provisions applicable to Colombia and Venezuela regarding challenge procedures.
Article 15-17 does not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
Annex 1 to article 15-20 : Provision of information.
Paragraph 4 does not apply to Colombia and Venezuela.
Colombia and Venezuela may defer the preparation of the annual report referred to in paragraphs 9 and 10, for a period of three years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
Mexico agrees to collaborate with Colombia and Venezuela in a technical cooperation program to facilitate compliance with the obligations of article 15-20.
Annex 2 to article 15-20 : Publications for measures according to article 15-20 "Provision of information"
Colombian roster:
Official diary
Congressional Gazette
Mexico roster:
Official Journal of the Federation.
Judicial Weekly of the Federation (only for jurisprudence).
Mexico will endeavor to establish a special publication for administrative resolutions of general application and for any procedure, including model contractual clauses related to purchases. When this publication is established, it will replace those indicated in paragraphs 1 and 2 for this purpose.
Venezuelan roster:
Official Gazette of the Republic of Venezuela.
Venezuela will endeavor to establish a special publication for model contractual clauses relating to purchases.
CHAPTER XVI : Policy on State companies
Article 16-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
Designation: The establishment, authorization, or expansion of the scope of a government monopoly to include an additional good or service, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
company: any entity constituted or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit, including any partnership, trust, association, sole proprietorship, joint venture or other association, except for State companies.
state enterprise: an enterprise owned by, or controlled by, a Party through equity participation.
market: the geographic and commercial market for a good or service.
monopoly: an entity, including a consortium or government body, which, in any relevant market in the territory of a Party, has been designated as the sole supplier or purchaser of a good or service. It does not include an entity that has been granted an exclusive intellectual property right arising solely from that grant.
government monopoly: a monopoly owned or controlled by a Party or another government monopoly through equity participation.
according to commercial considerations: in accordance with the normal business practices carried out by the private companies that make up that industry.
non-discriminatory treatment: the best treatment between national treatment and most favored nation treatment, in the manner established in the relevant provisions of this Agreement.
Article 16-02 : Monopolies and state companies.
Each Party undertakes that its State companies grant legal or natural persons of the other Parties non-discriminatory treatment in their territory, with regard to the sale of goods and provision of services for similar commercial operations.
Each Party undertakes that its government monopolies and state companies:
a) act solely on commercial considerations in the purchase or sale of the monopolized good or service on the relevant market in the territory of that Party, including as to its price, quality, availability, saleability, transportation, and other terms and conditions for its purchase and sale; Y
b) do not use their monopoly position in their territory to carry out anti-competitive practices in a non-monopolistic market, which may adversely affect the persons of another Party.
Paragraph 2 does not apply to the acquisition of goods or services by government monopolies or state companies, for official purposes, and:
a) not for the purpose of commercial resale;
b) without the purpose of using them in the production of goods for commercial sale; either
c) without the purpose of using them in the provision of services for their commercial sale.
Regarding the sale price of a good or service, paragraph 2, literal a), applies only to the sale by government monopolies and state companies of:
a) goods or services to persons engaged in the production of industrial goods;
b) services to persons engaged in commercial resale; either
c) services to companies producing industrial goods.
The provisions of paragraph 2, literal a) shall not apply to those activities of a government monopoly that are carried out in accordance with the terms of its designation, and respect the principles enshrined in paragraphs 1 and 2, literal b).
Article 16-03 : Committees.
Within three months of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Commission shall establish the following committees:
a) a competition committee, made up of representatives of each Party, which will submit reports and recommendations to the Commission regarding the subsequent work that may proceed on relevant issues regarding the relationship between competition laws and policies; and trade in the free trade zone;
b) a committee that, in order to detect those practices of state companies that could be discriminatory or contrary to the provisions of this chapter, will prepare reports and recommendations regarding those practices.
CHAPTER XVII : Investment
Section A - Investment
Article 17-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
business : any entity incorporated, organized, or protected under applicable law, whether for profit or not, and whether privately or government owned, including partnerships, foundations, companies, branches, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, or other associations;
investment : resources transferred to the national territory of a Party or reinvested in it by investors of another Party, including:
a) any type of good or right whose purpose is to produce economic benefits;
b) the participation of investors of a Party, in any proportion, in the capital stock of companies constituted or organized in accordance with the legislation of another Party;
c) companies that are owned or effectively controlled by an investor of that Party, that have been incorporated or organized in the territory of the other Party; Y
d) any other resources considered as investment under the legislation of that Party.
Investment does not include credit or debt operations, including:
a) a payment obligation of the State or a State company, nor the granting of a credit to the State or a State company;
b) pecuniary rights derived exclusively from:
i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of a Party to a company in the territory of another Party; either
ii) the granting of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing.
investor of a Party : any of the following persons who is the holder of an investment in the territory of another Party:
a) the Party itself or any of its public entities or state enterprises;
b) a natural person who has the nationality of that Party in accordance with its laws;
c) a company incorporated, organized or protected under the laws of that Party;
d) A branch located in the territory of that Party that carries out business activities therein;
Article 17-02 : Scope of Application.
This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
a) investments of investors of another Party made in its territory;
b) investors of another Party in everything related to their investment; Y
c) with regard to Article 17-04, to all investments in the territory of the Party.
This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or maintained by the Parties in the area of ​​financial services, in accordance with Chapter XII, except as expressly provided in that Chapter.
This chapter applies throughout the territory of the Parties and at any level or order of government.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures designed to preserve its national security or public order, or to apply the provisions of its criminal laws.
Article 17-03 : National Treatment and Most Favored Nation Treatment.
Each Party shall grant to the investors of another Party, and to the investments of those investors, treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors and investments.
Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party, and to the investments of those investors, treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in similar circumstances, to investors and their investments of another Party or of a country that is not a Party. The most favored nation treatment shall not apply to the provisions of article 17-01.
The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall extend to any measure adopted or maintained by a Party in relation to losses due to armed conflicts, civil strife, disturbances of public order, acts of God or force majeure.
No Party shall be obliged to extend to investors or investments of another Party the advantages that it has granted or will grant to investors or investments of another Party or of a country that is not a Party, by virtue of a treaty to avoid double taxation.
Article 17-04 : Performance requirements.
No Party shall establish performance requirements through the adoption of investment measures that are mandatory or enforceable for the establishment or operation of an investment, or compliance with which is necessary to obtain or maintain an advantage or incentive, and that prescribe:
a) the purchase or use by an enterprise of products of national origin of that Party, or from national sources of that Party, whether specified in terms of particular products, in terms of volume or value of the products, or as proportion of the volume or value of its local production;
b) that the purchase or use of imported products by a company is limited to an amount related to the volume or value of the local products that the company exports;
c) restrictions on the importation by a company of products used in its local production or related to it, limiting the company's access to foreign currency to an amount related to the inflow of foreign currency attributable to that company;
d) restrictions on the export or sale for export of products by a company, whether specified in terms of particular products, in terms of volume or value of products, or as a proportion of volume or value of its local production .
The provisions contained in:
a) paragraph 1, letters a) and d), do not apply in relation to the requirements for qualification of goods with respect to export promotion programs;
b) paragraph 1, letter a), does not apply in relation to the purchase or use by a Party or by a State enterprise;
c) paragraph 1, letter a), above does not apply in relation to the requirements imposed by an importing Party related to the necessary content of the goods to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to impose, in relation to any investment in its territory, requirements for the geographic location of productive units, job creation or labor training, or activities carried out in research and development matter.
In the event that, in the opinion of a Party, the imposition by another Party of any other requirement not provided for in paragraph 1 negatively affects the flow of trade, or constitutes a significant barrier to investment, the matter will be considered by the Commission.
If the Commission finds that the requirement in question does affect negatively the flow of trade or constitutes a significant barrier to investment, it will recommend the Party in question to suspend the respective practice.
Article 17-05 : Employment and Business Management.
The limitations regarding the number or proportion of foreigners who can work in a company or perform managerial or administrative functions as provided by the legislation of each Party, may not in any case prevent or hinder the exercise by an investor of control of his investment. .
Article 17-06 : Preparation of Reserves.
Within eight months of signing the Agreement, the Parties will prepare a Protocol that will consist of 4 lists that will contain the sectors and subsectors on which each Party can maintain measures that are not in accordance with Articles 17-03, 17-04 and 17- 05, according to the following criteria:
a) With respect to the measures contained in list 1, no Party will increase the degree of non-conformity with those articles on the date of signing this Agreement. Any amendment to any of those measures will not decrease the degree of compliance of the measure as it was in effect immediately prior to the amendment;
b) with respect to the measures contained in list 2, each Party may adopt or maintain new measures that do not conform to those articles or make those measures more restrictive;
c) List 3 will contain the economic activities reserved to the State;
d) List 4 will contain exceptions to Article 17-03, paragraph 2, in relation to international bilateral or multilateral treaties signed or to be signed by the Parties.
The Parties, in the negotiations referred to in list 2 of paragraph 1, will seek to reach agreements on the basis of reciprocity, aimed at achieving a global balance in the concessions granted.
Article 17-07 : Transfers.
Each Party shall permit all transfers related to the investment of an investor of another Party in the Party's territory to be made freely and without delay.
Those transfers include:
a) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration expenses, technical assistance, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;
b) products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;
c) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or his investment is a party;
d) payments derived from compensation for expropriation concept; Y
e) Payments that come from the application of the provisions related to the dispute resolution system.
Each Party shall allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currencies and at the exchange rate prevailing in the market on the date of the transfer, for cash transactions in the currency to be transferred, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 6.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, each Party may, to the extent and for the time necessary, prevent transfers, through the equitable, non-discriminatory application of its laws in the following cases:
a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;
b) issue, trade and operations of securities;
c) criminal or administrative offences; either
d) guarantee of compliance with rulings in contentious proceedings.
Likewise, each Party may, through the equitable and non-discriminatory application of its laws, request information and establish requirements regarding reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments.
Each Party may retain laws and regulations establishing income and supplementary taxes by means such as withholding taxes applicable to dividends and other transfers, provided they are not discriminatory.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, each Party shall have the right, in circumstances of exceptional or serious balance of payments difficulties, to limit transfers temporarily and in an equitable and non-discriminatory manner, in accordance with internationally accepted criteria.
Article 17-08 : Expropriation and Compensation.
No Party, except as provided in the annex to this article, shall expropriate or nationalize, directly or indirectly, an investment of an investor of another Party in its territory, nor take any measure equivalent to the expropriation or nationalization of that investment (expropriation). , unless it is:
a) for reasons of public utility;
b) on non-discriminatory grounds;
c) in accordance with the principle of legality; Y
d) by compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4.
The compensation will be equivalent to the fair market value of the investment at the time of expropriation, and will not reflect any change in value due to the fact that the intention to expropriate was known prior to the date of expropriation. The valuation criteria will include the declared fiscal value of tangible assets, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value.
The payment of the indemnity will be fully payable and freely transferable under the terms of article 17-07.
Payment will be made without delay. The time that elapses between the moment the indemnity is established and the moment of payment may not cause damages to the investor. Consequently, its amount will be sufficient to ensure that the investor can, if he decides to transfer it, obtain, at the time of payment, an equal amount of the international currency normally used as a reference by the Party expropriating. The payment will also include interest at the current market rate for the reference currency.
Article 17-09 : Special Formalities and Information Requirements
Nothing in Article 17-03 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of another Party, such as investments being constituted in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do not substantially impair the protection afforded by a Party under this Chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 17-03 and 17-04, each Party may require an investor of another Party or its investment, in its territory, to provide information regarding that investment, in accordance with the provisions of the legislation of that part. Each Party shall protect information that is confidential from any disclosure that could negatively affect the competitive situation of the investment or the investor.
Article 17-10 : Relationship with other Chapters
In the event of any inconsistency between any provision of this chapter and another provision of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 17-11 : Denial of Benefits.
A Party, after communication and consultation with the other Party, may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of another Party that is an enterprise of that Party and to investments of that investor, if investors from a country that is not a Party hold the majority of the capital of the company or control it, and the company does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is constituted or organized.
Article 17-12 : Extraterritorial Application of the Legislation of a Party.
No Party, in relation to the investments of its investors constituted and organized in accordance with the laws and regulations of another Party, may exercise jurisdiction or adopt any measure that has the effect of the extraterritorial application of its legislation or the obstruction of trade between the Parties, or between a Party and a country that is not a Party.
Article 17-13 : Measures Related to the Environment.
No Party shall eliminate domestic measures applicable to health, safety or the environment, or undertake to exempt from their application the investment of an investor from any country, as a means to induce the establishment, acquisition, expansion or conservation of the investment in its territory. If a Party believes that another Party has encouraged an investment in such a way, it may request consultations with that other Party.
Article 17-14 : Promotion of Investments and Exchange of Information.
With the intention of increasing reciprocal investment participation, the Parties will design and implement mechanisms for the dissemination, promotion and exchange of information related to investment opportunities.
The Parties undertake to establish mechanisms related to the exchange of fiscal and tax information.
Article 17-15 : Double Taxation.
The Parties agree to initiate, among themselves, bilateral negotiations aimed at the conclusion of agreements to avoid double taxation, according to the calendar established between the respective competent authorities.
Section B - Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party
Article 17-16 : Purpose and Scope of Application.
This section and the annex to this article are intended to ensure equal treatment for investors of each Party on the basis of reciprocity and compliance with the norms and principles of international law, with the due exercise of hearing and defense guarantees. in legal proceedings before an impartial court.
The mechanism established in this section shall be applied to claims made by an investor of a Party (disputing investor) against a Party (disputing Party) regarding the violation of an obligation established in this chapter from the entry into force of this Treaty. The foregoing is without prejudice to the disputing investor and the disputing Party (disputing parties) attempting to settle the dispute through consultation or negotiation.
Article 17-17 : Assumptions for the Filing of a Claim.
The investor of a Party may, on its own behalf or on behalf of a company owned or under its effective control, submit to arbitration a claim based on the fact that another Party has violated an obligation established in this chapter, provided that the investor has suffered loss or damage by virtue of or as a consequence of the breach.
An enterprise that is an investment may not submit a claim to arbitration under this section.
The investor may not file a claim under this section, if more than three years have elapsed from the date on which he knew or should have known of the alleged violation, as well as of the losses or damages suffered.
The investor who initiates proceedings before any judicial court with respect to the measure allegedly in violation of the provisions of this chapter, may not file a claim under this section. The investor may also not bring a claim under this section on behalf of an enterprise owned or controlled by the investor that has commenced proceedings in any court of law with respect to the same infringing action. The foregoing does not apply to the exercise of administrative remedies before the executing authorities of the allegedly infringing measure, provided for in the law of the disputing Party.
The investor who files a claim pursuant to this section or the company on whose behalf the claim is filed may not initiate proceedings before any court of law regarding the measure allegedly in violation.
Article 17-18 : Communication and Submission of the Claim to Arbitration.
The disputing investor who intends to submit a claim to arbitration under the terms of this section shall notify the disputing Party.
As long as ninety days have elapsed since the communication referred to in the preceding paragraph and six months since the measures giving rise to the claim took place, a disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration in accordance with:
a) The Rules of the Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded in Washington on March 18, 1965 ("ICSID Convention"), when the disputing Party and the investor Party are States part thereof;
b) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, when the disputing Party or the investor Party, but not both, are State parties to the ICSID Convention; either
c) the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ("UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules"), approved by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976, when the disputing Party and the of the investor are not a State party to the ICSID Convention, or it is not available.
The rules of each of the arbitration procedures mentioned in the previous paragraph will be applicable except to the extent established by this section.
Each Party agrees to submit the claims to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Article 17-19 : Accumulation of Procedures.
If any of the disputing parties requests the accumulation of proceedings, a consolidation tribunal will be installed in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and will proceed in accordance with the provisions of those rules, except as provided in this section.
Procedures will accumulate in the following cases:
a) when an investor presents a claim on behalf of a company that is under his effective control and in parallel another or other investors who have participation in the same company, without having control of it, present claims on their own account as a result of the same violations; either
b) when two or more claims are submitted to arbitration that raise common questions of fact and law with respect to the same violation of a Party.
The consolidation tribunal will examine these claims jointly, unless it determines that the interests of one of the disputing parties would be harmed.
Article 17-20 : Applicable Law
Any tribunal established under this section shall decide disputes submitted to it in accordance with this Agreement and the applicable rules of international law.
The Commission's interpretation of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on any court established pursuant to this section.
Article 17-21 : Final Award
When a tribunal established under this section makes an award unfavorable to a Party, that tribunal may only order:
a) the payment of pecuniary damages and the corresponding interest; either
b) the restitution of the property. In this case, the award will provide that the disputing Party may pay pecuniary damages, plus the applicable interest, instead of restitution, indicating the respective amount.
When the claim is made by an investor representing a company:
a) The award that provides for the restitution of the property will provide that the restitution or, where appropriate, the substitute compensation be granted to the company;
b) The award that provides for the payment of pecuniary damages and corresponding interest will establish that the sum of money be paid to the company.
The award will be rendered without prejudice to the rights that any person with a legal interest may have regarding the reparation of the damages they have suffered, in accordance with the applicable legislation.
Article 17-22 : Payments under insurance or guarantee contracts.
The disputing Party shall not adduce as a defense, counterclaim, right of compensation or others, that the disputing investor received or will receive, in accordance with an insurance or guarantee contract, compensation or other compensation for all or part of the damages for which restitution is requested.
Article 17-23 : Finality and execution of the award.
The award rendered by any court established pursuant to this section shall be binding only on the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.
The disputing Party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay and provide for its due execution.
If the Party whose investor was a party to the arbitration procedure considers that the disputing Party has breached or contempt of the final award, it may resort to the dispute settlement procedure between the Parties, established in Chapter XIX, to obtain, where appropriate, , a resolution in the sense that the disputing Party observes the final award and conforms to it.
The disputing investor may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held in New York on June 10, 1958; (New York Convention) or the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, held in Panama on January 30, 1975; (Inter-American Convention), regardless of whether or not the procedures contemplated in paragraph 3 have been initiated.
Article 17-24 : Exclusions.
The measures that a Party adopts by virtue of Article 17-02, paragraph 4, nor the decision that prohibits or restricts the acquisition of an investment in its territory by an investor of other part.
Annex to Article 17-08
Colombia reserves the full application of article 17-08 of this chapter. Colombia will not establish more restrictive measures in terms of nationalization, expropriation and compensation, than those in force at the entry into force of this Agreement.
Mexico and Venezuela will only apply the aforementioned article with respect to Colombia from the moment that Colombia notifies them of the withdrawal of its reservation.
Annex to Article 17-16 : Rules of procedure
Rule 1: Communication of the intention to submit the claim to arbitration.
The disputing investor, when notifying the disputing Party of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration, shall indicate the following points:
a) the name, company name and address of the disputing investor and the name or company name and address of the company when the claim has been made on its behalf, proving ownership or effective control thereof;
b) the provisions allegedly breached and any other applicable provision;
c) the facts on which the claim is based; Y
d) the reparation requested and the approximate amount of the damages claimed.
Rule 2: Conditions prior to submitting a claim to the arbitration procedure.
A disputing investor for its own account and an investor representing a company may submit a claim to the arbitration procedure in accordance with section B of this chapter and this annex, only if:
a) in the case of the self-employed investor, he agrees to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures established in section B of this chapter and this annex;
b) in the case of an investor representing a company, both the investor and the company agree to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures established in section B of this chapter and this annex; Y
c) the investor or the company, or both, as the case may be, undertake in writing not to initiate proceedings before any judicial court with respect to the alleged violation of this chapter. The foregoing does not apply to the exercise of administrative remedies before the very authorities that have adopted the allegedly infringing measure, provided for in the legislation of the disputing Party.
The consent required by this rule shall be in writing, delivered to the disputing Party, and included in the submission of the claim to arbitration.
The investor's consent to submit the claim to arbitration will be considered sufficient to meet the requirements indicated in:
a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention and the Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the Parties;
b) Article II of the New York Convention which requires a written agreement; Y
c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention, which requires an agreement.
Rule 3: Number of arbitrators and method of appointment.
The court will be made up of three arbitrators. Each of the disputing parties will appoint an arbitrator; the third arbitrator, who will be the president of the arbitral tribunal, will be appointed by the disputing parties by mutual agreement. The foregoing is with the exception of the provisions for the accumulation court in accordance with article 17-19 of this chapter and without prejudice to the disputing parties agreeing otherwise.
Rule 4: Integration of the court in the event that one of the disputing parties does not appoint an arbitrator or an agreement is not reached in the appointment of the president of the arbitral tribunal.
The ICSID Secretary General (Secretary General) shall appoint arbitrators in arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this Annex.
When a tribunal, other than the accumulation tribunal, is not integrated within a period of ninety days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, the Secretary General, at the request of any of the disputing parties, appoint, at its discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed, but not the president of the court, who will be appointed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of this rule.
The Secretary General shall appoint the president of the tribunal from among the arbitrators from the list referred to in paragraph 4, ensuring that the president of the tribunal is not a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary General shall designate, from the ICSID Panel of arbitrators, the president of the arbitral tribunal, provided that he is of a different nationality from that of the disputing Party or the on behalf of the disputing investor.
As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will establish and maintain a list of 15 arbitrators as possible presidents of the arbitral tribunal. These arbitrators will meet the qualities established in the ICSID Convention. The members of the list will be appointed by consensus regardless of their nationality.
Rule 5: Consent for the appointment of arbitrators.
For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator on grounds other than nationality:
a) the disputing Party accepts the appointment of each of the members of a tribunal established in accordance with the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules;
b) a disputing investor, whether on its own account or on behalf of a company, may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules, only on the condition that the disputing investor and, if their case, the company they represent, express their consent in writing on the appointment of each of the members of the court.
Rule 6: Accumulation of proceedings.
When an accumulation tribunal determines that the claims submitted to arbitration in accordance with article 17-17 of this chapter raise common issues of fact and law, the accumulation tribunal, in the interest of their fair and expeditious resolution, and having heard to the disputing parties, may agree:
a) assume jurisdiction, process and resolve any or all claims, jointly; either
b) assume jurisdiction, process and resolve one or more of the claims on the basis that this will contribute to the resolution of the others.
A disputing party that seeks cumulation to be determined under the terms of paragraph 1 shall request the ICSID Secretary-General to set up an accumulation tribunal and shall specify in its request:
a) the name of the disputing Party or of the disputing investors against whom the cumulation agreement is sought;
b) the nature of the cumulation agreement requested; Y
c) the grounds on which the requested petition is based.
Within a period of 60 days from the date of the petition, the ICSID Secretary General shall designate the three members of the accumulation tribunal from the list referred to in rule 5, paragraph 4 of this annex, indicating who will preside over it. In the event that the list referred to does not find the persons necessary to make these appointments, the ICSID Secretary General will make them from the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators. If there are no arbitrators available on that panel, the ICSID Secretary General will make the remaining appointments at his discretion. One member of the tribunal shall be a national of the disputing Party, and the other member shall be a national of the Party to which one of the disputing investors belongs.
When an accumulation tribunal has been established, the disputing investor who has submitted a claim to arbitration, and has not been named in the application for accumulation made in accordance with paragraph 2, may request in writing that accumulation tribunal be include in the joinder request made in accordance with paragraph 1, and specify in that request:
a) the name and domicile of the disputing investor and, where appropriate, the name or corporate name and domicile of the company;
b) the nature of the cumulation agreement requested; Y
c) the grounds on which the petition is based.
The accumulation court will provide, at the expense of the interested investor, a copy of the accumulation petition to the disputing investors against whom the accumulation agreement is sought.
Once the accumulation court has assumed jurisdiction over a claim, the jurisdiction of the court constituted to hear it will cease. At the request of a disputing party, the accumulation tribunal may, pending its decision on its jurisdiction with respect to a claim, order that the arbitral tribunal constituted to resolve it suspend the proceedings.
Within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt, the disputing Party will send the Commission a copy of:
a) the request for arbitration made pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention; b) notice of arbitration under the terms of Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;
c) the communication of arbitration in the terms provided by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;
d) the accumulation request made by a disputing investor;
e) the request for consolidation made by the disputing Party; either
f) the request for inclusion in an accumulation request made by a disputing investor.
The Commission shall keep a record of the documents referred to in this paragraph.
Rule 7: Communication
The disputing Party will send to the other Parties:
a) communication of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration within 30 days from the date of submission of the claim to arbitration; Y
b) if requested, and at their expense, a copy of the communications presented in the arbitration proceedings.
Rule 8: Participation of a party.
Upon communication to the disputing parties, a Party may submit to any tribunal established under section B of this chapter, its opinion on a matter of interpretation of this Agreement.
Rule 9: Documentation.
Each Party shall be entitled to receive, upon request and at its expense, from the disputing Party a copy of:


a) evidence offered to any court established under section B of this chapter; Y
b) the written communications presented by the disputing parties.
The Party that receives information in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 shall treat it as confidential.
Rule 10: Headquarters of the arbitration procedure.
Any tribunal established under section B of this chapter, unless otherwise agreed by the disputing parties, shall conduct the arbitration proceeding in the territory of one of the Parties.
Rule 11: Interpretation of the annexes of reservations and exceptions.
The Commission's interpretation of any provision of this Agreement shall be binding on any court established pursuant to section B of this chapter.
The arbitral tribunal, at the request of the Party, will request the interpretation of the Commission when that Party alleges, as a defense, that a measure allegedly in violation of this Treaty is included in the scope of a reservation or exception consigned in any of its annexes. If the Commission does not present its interpretation in writing within a period of sixty days from the delivery of the request, the arbitral tribunal will decide on the matter.
Rule 12: Provisional or precautionary measures.
The court constituted under section B of this chapter may adopt provisional measures to establish its jurisdiction or preserve the rights of the disputing parties. The court may not order coercive precautionary measures or the suspension of the application of the measure allegedly in violation of this Treaty.
Rule 13: Finality and execution of the award .
The disputing party may request the enforcement of a final award provided that:
a) in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID Convention:
i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without any disputing party requesting its review or annulment; either
ii) the review or annulment procedures have been completed; Y
b) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:
i) three months have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without any disputing party having initiated a review or annulment proceeding; either
ii) a court of the disputing Party has rejected or has declared a request for review or annulment of the award and this decision cannot be appealed.
For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, it will be considered that the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to Section B of this chapter arises from a commercial relationship or operation.
Rule 14: General provisions.
A claim is considered submitted to arbitration under the terms of section B of this chapter when:
a) the request for arbitration under paragraph 1 of Article 36 of ICSID has been received by the Secretary-General;

b) the notice of arbitration, pursuant to Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, has been received by the Secretary-General; either

c) the communication of arbitration contemplated in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, has been received by the disputing Party.
The delivery of communications and other documents to a Party shall be made to the national section of that Party at the address referred to in Article 20-02, paragraph 1.
The final awards will be published only in the event that there is a written agreement on the matter between the disputing parties.
CHAPTER XVIII: Intellectual property
Section A - General Provisions.
Article 18-01 : Basic principles.
Each Party shall grant in its territory to the nationals of another Party adequate and effective protection and defense of intellectual property rights under the same conditions as to the nationals themselves and shall ensure that the measures aimed at defending those rights do not in turn become in obstacles to legitimate trade.
With respect to the existence, acquisition, scope, maintenance, use and observance of the intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity that a Party grants to the holders of intellectual property rights of any another country, shall be granted immediately and without conditions to the holders of intellectual property rights of the other Parties.
Each Party may grant in its legislation protection to intellectual property rights that is broader than that required in this chapter, provided that such protection is not incompatible with it, nor with the commitments acquired by the Parties in international agreements.
Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent each Party from contemplating in its legislation, practices or conditions related to the granting of licenses that, in particular cases, may constitute an abuse of industrial property rights with a negative effect on competition in the corresponding market. Each Party may accept or maintain, in accordance with other provisions of this Agreement, appropriate measures to prevent or control such practices or conditions.
No Party may grant licenses for the reproduction or translation of protected works in accordance with Article 18-03, when they violate the normal exploitation of the work or cause unjustified damage to the economic interests of the owner of the respective right.
The Parties will make every effort to adhere to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1967 Act and its subsequent amendments), if they are not already party to it on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Section B - Copyright and related rights.
Article 18-02 : Basic principles.
In order to provide adequate and effective protection and defense of copyright and related rights, each Party shall apply, at least, this chapter and the substantive provisions of:
a) Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Paris Act, 1971;
c) International Convention for the Protection of Interpreting and Performing Artists, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations, Rome, 1961;
d) International Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against Unauthorized Reproduction of their Phonograms, Geneva, 1971.
No Party may require the holders of copyright and related rights to comply with any formality or requirement, as a condition for the enjoyment and exercise of their respective rights.
Article 18-03 : Category of works.
Each Party shall protect the works set forth in Article 2 of the Berne Convention, including any works already known or to be known, which constitute original expression within the spirit of the Berne Convention, including:
a) computer programs (software), in their character of literary works in the sense conferred on the term by the Berne Convention; Y
b) the compilations of facts or data, expressed by any form or procedure, known or yet to be known, provided that due to the selection or arrangement of their content, they constitute creations of an intellectual nature.
The protection provided by each Party under paragraph 1, letter b), does not extend to the facts or data themselves, nor does it affect any copyright on pre-existing works that are part of the compilation.
Article 18-04 : Copyright content.
In addition to the moral rights recognized in their respective legislation, the Parties agree that adequate and effective protection of copyright must contain, among other economic rights, the following:
a) the right to prevent the importation into the territory of the Party of copies of works made without the authorization of the owner;
b) the right to authorize or prohibit the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the work by sale, rental or any other means of distribution to the public;
c) the right to authorize or prohibit the communication of the work to the public, understood as any act by which a plurality of people who do not exceed the domestic sphere can have access to the work, through its dissemination by any procedure or in any form. , known or to be known, of signs, words, sounds or images; Y
d) the right to authorize or prohibit the reproduction of the work by any procedure or in any form, known or to be known. Each Party shall provide that the placing on the market of the original or a copy of the work, including computer programs (software), with the consent of the right holder, shall not exhaust the rental right.
The exercise of the rights referred to in this article does not constitute an obstacle to legitimate trade.
Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights:
a) the person who holds economic rights by any title may freely and separately transfer them under the terms of the legislation of each Party for the purposes of exploitation and enjoyment by the holder; Y
b) any person who holds economic rights by virtue of a contract, including employment contracts whose object is the creation of any type of work or the production of phonograms, has the capacity to exercise those rights in their own name and to fully enjoy the benefits derived from those rights.
Each Party will circumscribe the limitations or exceptions to the rights established in this article, to determined special cases that do not prevent the normal exploitation of the work, nor cause unjustified prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder.
Any assignment, authorization or license to use economic rights shall be understood to be limited to the forms of exploitation agreed upon in the contract, unless the Parties have expressly agreed otherwise. Each Party shall provide for the adoption of necessary measures to ensure the protection of rights with respect to modes of exploitation not provided for in the contract.
When the ownership of economic rights over a literary or artistic work is held by a legal person, the term of protection shall not be less than fifty years, counted from the first publication of the work or, failing this, from its disclosure. or realization, when applicable.
Article 18-05 : Rights of performers.
The rights of interpreters or performers will be recognized in accordance with the international treaties to which each Party is a party and in accordance with their legislation.
The term of protection of the rights of interpreters or performers may not be less than fifty years, counted from that in which the interpretation or performance took place, or from its fixation, if this were the case.
Article 18-06 : Phonograms.
Without prejudice to the rights established in the Rome Convention, producers of phonograms will have:
a) the right to authorize or prohibit the direct and indirect reproduction of their phonograms;
b) the right to authorize or prohibit the importation into the territory of the Party of copies of the phonogram made without the authorization of the producer;
c) the right to authorize or prohibit the first public distribution of the original and each copy thereof, by sale, rental or any other means of distribution to the public. This distribution right is not exhausted with the introduction to the market of legitimate copies of the phonogram; Y
d) the right to receive remuneration for the use of the phonogram or copies thereof for commercial purposes, when the legislation of each Party establishes it. This remuneration may be shared with the performing artists under the terms of the legislation of the respective Party.
Each Party will circumscribe the limitations or exceptions to the rights established in this article, to determined special cases that do not prevent the normal exploitation of the phonogram, nor cause unjustified prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder.
The term of protection of the rights of phonogram producers may not be less than fifty years, counted from the end of the year in which the first fixation was made.
The protection provided for in this article will leave intact and will not affect in any way the protection of copyright over the works. Therefore, none of the provisions set forth in this article may be interpreted in detriment of that protection.
Article 18-07 : Rights of broadcasting organizations.
. The broadcast referred to in the Rome Convention includes, among others, the production of satellite signals carrying programs destined for a broadcasting or telecommunication satellite; likewise, it includes dissemination to the public by an entity that issues or broadcasts the emissions of another, received through any of the aforementioned satellites.
Retransmission by an issuing entity other than that of origin may be by wireless diffusion of signs, sounds, or images, or by wire, cable, fiber optics, or another analogous procedure.
Each Party may establish exceptions in its legislation to the protection granted by this section in the following cases:
a) in the case of a use for private use;
b) when brief fragments have been used for information on current events;
c) in the case of an ephemeral fixation carried out by a broadcasting organization by its own means and by its own broadcasts; Y
d) when it is used exclusively for educational or scientific research purposes.
The term of protection of the rights of broadcasting organizations may not be less than fifty years, counted from the end of the year in which the broadcast was made.
Within one year of the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall criminalize:
a) manufacturing, importing, selling, leasing or any act that allows having a device or system that is essential to decrypt an encrypted satellite signal carrying programs, without the authorization of the legitimate distributor of that signal; either
b) the retransmission, fixation, reproduction or dissemination of a broadcast by a broadcasting organization, through any sound or audiovisual medium, without the prior and express authorization of the owner of the broadcasts, as well as the reception, broadcast or distribution by any medium, of broadcasting without the prior and express authorization of the owner.
In any case, the conduct indicated in paragraph 4, literals a) and b), will be cause for civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Section C - Industrial property
Article 18-08 : Matter subject to trademark protection
The Parties may establish as a condition for the registration of trademarks, that the signs are visible or perceptible if they are capable of graphic representation. A brand shall be understood as any sign capable of distinguishing in the market the goods or services produced or marketed by a person, from the identical or similar goods or services produced or marketed by another person. Collective trademarks will also be understood by trademarks.
The right to the exclusive use of the trademark will be acquired by registering it before the respective competent national office, notwithstanding that any Party recognizes previous rights, including those sustained on the basis of use, in accordance with its legislation.
The nature of the goods or services to which a trademark will be applied shall in no case constitute an obstacle to the registration of the trademark.
Article 18-09 : Rights conferred by trademarks.
The owner of a registered trademark shall have the right to prevent all persons, who do not have the consent of the owner, from using identical or similar signs in commerce for goods or services that are identical or similar to those for which the trademark has been registered. owner's trademark, when such use creates a probability of confusion. The probability of confusion will be presumed when an identical or similar sign is used for identical or similar goods or services.
When in two or more Parties there are registrations of an identical or similar trademark in the name of different owners, to distinguish identical or similar goods or services, the marketing of the goods or services identified with that trademark in the territory of the other Party where is also registered, unless the owners of those trademarks sign agreements that allow the aforementioned commercialization.
In the event of reaching the agreements mentioned in paragraph 2, the parties must adopt the necessary provisions to avoid public confusion regarding the origin of the goods or services in question, including matters relating to the identification of the origin of the goods. or services in question with prominent characters and proportional to them for proper information to the consuming public. These agreements must comply with the rules on commercial practices and promotion of competition and be registered with the competent national offices.
In any case, the importation of a good or service that is in the situation described in paragraph 2 shall not be prohibited, when the trademark is not being used by its owner in the territory of the importing Party, unless the owner of that trademark presents valid reasons supported by the existence of obstacles to use. Each Party shall recognize as valid reasons for non-use, circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the trademark that constitute an obstacle to the use of the trademark, such as import restrictions or other government requirements applicable to goods or services identified. for the brand.
It will be understood that a trademark is in use when the goods or services that it distinguishes have been placed on the market or are available on the market under that trademark, in the quantity and in the manner that normally corresponds, taking into account the nature of the trademark. the goods or services and the modalities under which their commercialization is carried out in the market.
When it is done in good faith and does not constitute use as a trademark, third parties may, without the consent of the owner of the registered trademark, use their own name, pseudonym or address, a geographical name, or any other certain indication in the market. relative to the kind, quality, quantity, destination, value, place of origin or time of production of your goods or the provision of your services or other characteristics thereof, provided that:
a) are clearly distinguishable from a registered trademark;
b) are limited to informational purposes;
c) are not capable of misleading the public about the origin of the goods or services; Y
d) do not constitute acts of unfair competition.
Provided that the use made by a third party of a registered trademark is in good faith, is limited to the purpose of informing the public, is not likely to mislead or confuse the business origin of the respective goods and does not constitute an act of competition. unfair, the registration of the trademark does not grant its owner the right to prohibit the use of the trademark to that third party to:
a) advertise, offer for sale or indicate the existence or availability of legitimately marked goods or services in the territory of the Party that granted the registration; either
b) indicate the compatibility or adequacy of spare parts or accessories usable with the goods of the registered trademark.
The owner of the registered trademark may exercise the actions of the case against third parties that use in the market without his consent, an identical or similar trademark or sign to distinguish identical or similar goods or services, when that identity or similarity misleads the public. .
Article 18-10 : Well-known trademarks.
Article 6 bis of the Parés Agreement will also apply, with the corresponding modifications, to service marks. It shall be understood that a mark is well-known in a Party when the mark is known to the relevant sector of the public or business circles of that Party as a result of commercial activities carried out in a Party or outside them, by a person who uses that Party. brand in connection with your goods or services. In order to demonstrate the notoriety of the brand, all the means of proof admitted in the Party in question may be used.
The Parties will not register as a trademark those signs that are the same or similar to a well-known trademark, to be applied to any good or service, in any case in which the use of the trademark by the person requesting its registration could create confusion or risk of association with the person referred to in paragraph 1, or constitutes an unfair advantage of the prestige of the brand. This prohibition will not apply when the registrant is the person referred to in paragraph 1.
The person who initiates the corresponding action against a trademark registration granted in violation of paragraph 2 must prove that he is the owner of the well-known trademark that he claims.
Article 18-11 : Signs not registrable as trademarks.
The Parties may deny the registration of trademarks that violate morality and good customs, that reproduce national symbols or that are misleading.
Article 18-12 : Publication of the trademark application or registration.
Under the terms and conditions established by the legislation of each Party, the competent national office shall order the publication, either of the application or of the registration, as the case may be, so that any person with a legitimate interest can submit observations to the request or exercise the corresponding actions against the registry.
Article 18-13 : Cancellation, expiration or nullity of trademark registration.
The competent national office of each Party, in accordance with its legislation, will cancel or declare the registration of a trademark expired at the request of any interested person, when the trademark has not been used in the Party in which the registration was granted without justifiable reason. , by the owner or by its licensee, during the three consecutive years preceding the date on which the corresponding action is initiated.
The following means of proof of the use of the brand shall be understood as, among others:
a) the commercial invoices that demonstrate the regularity and the quantity of commercialization, at least during the year previous to the date of initiation of the corresponding action;
b) Inventories of goods identified with the brand whose existence is certified by an auditor or notary public that demonstrates regularity in production or sales, or both, at least during the year prior to the date of initiation of the action. correspondent;
c) any other means of proof permitted by the legislation of the Party where the corresponding action is requested.
Proof of use of the trademark will correspond to the owner of the registration. The registration may not be canceled or declared expired when the owner of the trademark presents valid reasons supported by the existence of obstacles to use. The Parties will recognize as valid reasons the circumstances referred to in article 18-09, paragraph 4.
In accordance with the legislation of each Party, the respective office or the competent national authority, as the case may be, will cancel or declare the nullity of the registration of a trademark, at the request of the legitimate owner, when it is identical or similar to a trademark that had been well known, under the terms of article 18-10, at the time of requesting registration.
Article 18-14 : Duration of trademark protection.
The registration of a trademark will have a duration of ten years from the date of filing of the application or from the date of its granting and may be renewed indefinitely for successive periods of ten years, under the terms established by the laws of each Part.
Article 18-15 : Licenses and assignment of trademarks.
The Parties may establish conditions for the licensing and assignment of trademarks, it being understood that compulsory trademark licenses will not be allowed and that the owner of a registered trademark shall have the right to assign it, with or without the transfer of the company to which the trademark belongs. brand.
Article 18-16 : Protection of appellations of origin and geographical indications
Each Party shall protect appellations of origin and geographical indications, under the terms of its legislation.
Each Party may declare the protection of appellations of origin or, where appropriate, of geographical indications, as provided by its legislation, at the request of the competent authorities of the Party where the appellation of origin or geographical indication is protected.
Appellations of origin or geographical indications protected in a Party shall not be considered common or generic to distinguish the good, while their protection subsists in the country of origin.
In relation to appellations of origin and geographical indications, the Parties will establish the legal means so that interested persons can prevent:
a) the use of any means that, in the designation or presentation of the good, indicates or suggests that the good in question comes from a territory, region or locality other than the true place of origin, so as to mislead the public as to the geographical origin of the product;
b) any other use that constitutes an act of unfair competition, in the sense established in article 10 bis of the Parés Agreement.
Article 18-17 : Protection of industrial secrets.
Whoever lawfully has control of an industrial secret will be protected against the disclosure, acquisition or use of said secret without their consent, in a manner contrary to fair trade practices, by third parties, to the extent that:
a) the information is secret in the sense that as a whole or in the precise configuration and composition of its elements, it is not generally known or easily accessible to the people who are members of the circles that normally handle the type of information in question ;
b) the information has actual or potential commercial value because it is secret; Y
c) in the given circumstances, the person legally in control of it has taken reasonable steps to keep it secret.
The information contained in an industrial secret must necessarily refer to the nature, characteristics or purposes of the goods, to the production methods or processes, or to the means or forms of distribution or commercialization of goods or provision of services.
Article 18-18 : Information not considered as an industrial secret.
For the purposes of this chapter, information that is in the public domain, information that is evident to a technician in the field, or information that must be disclosed by law or court order shall not be considered as an industrial secret.
2. It shall not be understood that information that is provided to any authority by a person who possesses it enters the public domain or is disclosed by legal provision, when provided for the purpose of obtaining licenses, permits, authorizations, registrations or any other acts of authority.
Article 18-19 : Support of the industrial secret.
The information that is considered as an industrial secret must appear in documents, electronic or magnetic means, optical discs, microfilms, films or other similar elements.
Article 18-20 : Validity of the protection of the industrial secret.
The protection granted in accordance with article 18-17 will last as long as the conditions established therein exist.
Article 18-21 : Obligations of the user of a trade secret.
Whoever keeps an industrial secret may transmit it or authorize its use to a third party. The authorized user will have the obligation not to disclose the industrial secret by any means. He may only transfer it or authorize its use with the express consent of the person who authorized the use of that secret.
2. In the agreements in which technical knowledge, technical assistance or provision of basic or detailed engineering are transmitted, confidentiality clauses may be established to protect the industrial secrets contained therein. These clauses will specify the aspects that are considered confidential.
Any person who, due to their work, employment, position, position, performance of their profession or business relationship, has access to an industrial secret about the confidentiality of which they have been warned, must refrain from using it and disclosing it without just cause and without consent of the person keeping that secret or its authorized user.
Violation of the provisions of this article will subject the offender to the corresponding penal and administrative sanctions, as well as the obligation to indemnify the damages caused by his conduct, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 18-22 : Data protection of pharmaceutical or agrochemical goods.
If, as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmochemical goods or agrochemical goods using new chemical constituents, a Party requires the submission of unpublished experimental or other data necessary to determine their safety and efficacy, that Party The Party will protect the referred data as long as its generation implies a considerable effort, except when the publication of said data is necessary to protect the public or when measures are adopted to guarantee the protection of the data against any unfair commercial use.
Each Party shall provide, with respect to the data referred to in paragraph 1 that is submitted to it after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, that no person other than the person who submitted the data may, without the latter's authorization, have such data. data in support of a request for approval of a good for a reasonable period after its submission. For this purpose, a reasonable period will normally be understood as a period of not less than five years counted from the date on which the Party has granted the person who produced the data, the approval to place his good on the market, taking into account the nature of the data and the effort and expense of the individual to generate it. Subject to this provision,
Article 18-23 : Protection of plant varieties.
In accordance with its legislation, each Party shall grant protection to plant varieties. The Parties shall endeavor, to the extent that their systems are compatible, to comply with the substantive provisions in force of the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV Convention).
Section D - Technology transfer.
Article 18-24 : Promotion of technology transfer.
The Parties shall contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and the transfer and diffusion of technology through favorable government regulations for industry and commerce that are not anti-competitive.
Section E - Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights.
Article 18-25 : Application of existing guarantees.
This chapter does not impose any obligation on the Parties to establish a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights, different from the one already existing for the application of the legislation in general. None of its provisions creates obligations with respect to the distribution of the economic resources assigned between the means destined to achieve the observance of intellectual property rights and those destined to the application of laws in general.
Article 18-26 : Guiding principles.
The Parties declare that an adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights must be inspired by principles of equity, speed, efficiency and procedural effectiveness and respect for a fair process. To this end, the Parties shall ensure such protection in accordance with the following rules, applied in such a way as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide safeguards against inappropriate or excessive application of procedures.
Article 18-27 : Essential procedural guarantees.
Each Party undertakes that its legislation guarantees that:
a) the parties in a process are duly notified of all procedural acts and the guarantees of hearing and legality are respected;
b) the parties are duly represented in a process;
c) means to identify and protect confidential information are included;
d) in the process, evidence that is in the possession of the opposing party may be presented, which is pertinent to the solution of the dispute;
e) every judicial decision is based on the evidence regularly and opportunely submitted to the process, ex officio or at the request of a party;
f) the judgments and other acts that put an end to the process, will contain an analysis of the facts of the dispute, the evidence as a whole, the pertinent legal norms and the arguments of the parties, and based on that analysis, the petitions will be resolved, in such a way that there is no pending issue between the parties for the same facts;
g) the judgments and other acts that put an end to the process, as well as the precautionary or precautionary measures may be subject to appeal, review or other resources that legally correspond;
h) the holder of the right is granted an adequate payment as compensation for the damage suffered as a result of the infringement. When the infringement consists of the use of an intellectual property right, the economic value of the use will be considered, among other factors.
Article 18-28 : Measures to prevent or repair damage.
The legislation of each Party shall empower the competent authority to order, quickly and effectively, the following measures:
a) The order to the alleged infringer or to a third party to immediately cease the illegal activity, including the order to prevent goods that infringe an intellectual property right from entering the commercial circuits of its jurisdiction. In the case of imported goods, the order may be issued immediately after customs clearance. In the case of trademarks, the mere removal of a trademark illegally affixed to the goods will not be sufficient to allow their circulation, except in exceptional cases provided by the legislation of that Party.
b) the embargo or preventive seizure, as appropriate, of assets that infringe any of the rights recognized in this chapter;
c) the seizure, confiscation or kidnapping of the instruments used for the commission of the crime;
d) the preservation of evidence related to the alleged infringement;
e) the adoption of the measures contemplated in this article, without having heard the other party, provided that an adequate bond or guarantee is granted and there is a sufficient degree of certainty that:
i) the applicant is the owner of the right;
ii) the right of the applicant is being infringed, or that infringement is imminent; Y
(iii) any delay in issuing those measures is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right holder, or there is a verifiable risk that evidence is being destroyed;
f) Prompt notification to the affected party, immediately after the execution of the measures in the cases provided for in subparagraph e). These measures will be revoked or left without effect, at the request of the affected party, when the procedure on the merits of the matter has not been initiated within the period determined by the legislation of each Party;
g) Ordering the plaintiff, upon request of the defendant, to pay adequate compensation for the damage caused by these measures, when they are revoked, expire due to any act or omission of the applicant, or it is subsequently determined that there was no infringement or threat of infringement of an intellectual property right;
h) the requirement that an applicant for precautionary or precautionary measures provide the necessary information for the identification of the relevant assets by the authority that will carry out the precautionary or precautionary measures.
When considering the issuance of the indicated measures, the judicial authorities will take into account the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement and the measures ordered, as well as the possible impact on the rights of third parties.
Article 18-29 : Compensation and costs.
Each Party shall empower its judicial authorities to order:
a) the payment to the victim of an adequate indemnity as compensation for the damages suffered as a result of the violation;
b) that the infringer assumes the payment of the costs of the process in which the plaintiff has incurred, in accordance with the applicable legislation;
c) the necessary measures so that the goods that constitute infringement of the right are withdrawn from the trade, liquidated outside the commercial channels, or are destroyed, without any compensation, so as to minimize the risk of future infringements;
d) that the materials and instruments predominantly used in the production of illicit goods are, without any compensation, destroyed or placed outside the commercial circuits, under the terms provided in their legislation.
Each Party may, at least with respect to works protected by copyright and phonograms, authorize the judicial authorities to order the recovery of profits or the payment of previously determined damages, or both, even if the infringer did not know or did not have reasonable grounds to know that you were engaged in infringing activity.
Article 18-30 : Administrative procedures.
The principles contained in this section will be applied, as appropriate, if any of the Parties contemplates in its legislation administrative procedures for the protection of the rights recognized in this chapter.
Article 18-31 : Criminal proceedings.
The Parties shall contemplate in their legislation sufficient dissuasive measures of imprisonment, a fine, or both, to punish violations of the rights recognized in this chapter, equivalent to the level of sanctions applied to crimes of a similar magnitude. In any case, they will establish criminal sanctions when there is willful falsification of trademarks or copies protected by copyright on a commercial scale.
The criminal sanctions will include the seizure and confiscation of the goods that constitute a violation of the law, as well as the materials or instruments used predominantly in the production of the illicit goods, and these, without any compensation, will be destroyed or placed out of commerce in the terms provided by the legislation of each Party.
Article 18-32 : Defense of intellectual property rights at the border.
1. Each Party shall adopt procedures so that the holder of a right who has valid reasons to believe that goods identified with counterfeit trademarks or illegal copies protected by copyright or related rights are being imported may submit to the competent authorities, administrative or judicial, a request in order for the customs authorities to order the suspension of the clearance of those goods for free circulation. Neither Party shall be required to apply these procedures to goods in transit.
Each Party may authorize the submission of a request referred to in paragraph 1 with respect to goods that imply other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of this chapter are met.
Each Party may establish similar procedures related to the suspension by the customs authorities of the release of goods destined for export from its territory.
Article 18-33 : Withholding procedures initiated ex officio.
When a Party requires its competent authorities to act on their own initiative and suspend the release of assets for which those authorities have evidence that, prima facie, suggests that they infringe an intellectual property right:
a) The competent authorities may at any time request from the right holder any information that may assist them in the exercise of these powers;
b) the importer and right holder shall be promptly notified by the Party's competent authorities of the suspension. When the importer has requested a reconsideration of the suspension before the competent authorities, this will be subject, with the appropriate modifications, to article 18-28, paragraph 1, literal h), and paragraph 2;
c) The Party will only exempt the authorities and public officials from the responsibility that the appropriate corrective measures give rise to, in the case of acts carried out or disposed of in good faith.
Article 18-34 : Applicable principles.
All the enforcement provisions contained in this section are applicable to the defense of intellectual property rights at the border, when applicable.
Each Party may exclude from the application of measures to defend intellectual property rights at the border, small quantities of goods that are not of a commercial nature and are part of the personal baggage of travelers or are sent in small non-repeated batches.
CHAPTER XIX : Settlement of disputes.
Article 19-01 : Cooperation.
The Parties shall always endeavor to reach agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement through cooperation and consultation and shall endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that might affect its operation.
Article 19-02 : Scope of application.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this chapter shall apply:
a) to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement; Y
b) when a Party considers that a measure of another Party is incompatible with the obligations of this Agreement, or could cause nullification or impairment in the sense of the annex to this article.
If a Party increases an import tax, the Parties may negotiate an appropriate compensation mechanism before initiating a dispute settlement procedure.
Article 19-03 : Settlement of disputes under the GATT.
Any controversy that arises in relation to the provisions of both this Treaty and the GATT, in the agreements negotiated in accordance with the same, may be resolved in one or the other forum, at the choice of the complaining Party.
Before the complaining Party initiates a GATT dispute settlement procedure against another Party alleging reasons substantially equivalent to those it could invoke under this Agreement, the following rules shall apply:
a) the complaining Party shall communicate its intention to do so to the Party or Parties other than the Party against which it intends to initiate proceedings; Y
b) If one or more of the Parties that have received the respective communication wish to resort to the dispute resolution procedure in this chapter regarding the same matter, they and the claimant shall try to agree on a single forum.
Once a Party has initiated a dispute settlement procedure under Article 19-06 or one under the GATT, it may not resort to the other forum on the same matter.
For the purposes of this article, dispute settlement procedures under the GATT shall be considered initiated when a Party requests:
a) the composition of a panel in accordance with Article XXIII:2 of the GATT; either
b) investigation by a Committee of those established in the agreements negotiated in accordance with the GATT.
Article 19-04 : Settlement of disputes in accordance with the Cartagena Agreement.
The Parties will submit to the competition rules that are stated below:
a) Controversies that arise between Colombia and Venezuela in relation to the provisions of both this Treaty and the legal system of the Cartagena Agreement, will be submitted to the jurisdiction of the bodies of the Cartagena Agreement;
b) Controversies that arise between Colombia and Venezuela in relation to the commitments acquired exclusively in this Agreement will be resolved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
c) Controversies that arise between Mexico and any of the other Parties in relation to the provisions of this Agreement shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; Y
d) Controversies that arise between the three Parties in relation to the provisions of this Agreement shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The submission of a controversy to the competence of the bodies of the Cartagena Agreement will not affect the rights that Mexico may have under this Agreement.
Article 19-05 : Consultations.
Any Party may request in writing to the other Parties consultations regarding any measure or regarding any other matter that it considers might affect the operation of this Agreement.
The Party that initiates consultations pursuant to paragraph 1 shall deliver the request to the responsible national bodies of the other Parties.
The third Party that considers to have a substantial interest in the matter, shall have the right to participate in the consultations by delivering a communication to the responsible national bodies of the other Parties.
The consulting Parties:
a) provide the information that allows examining the way in which the measure or any other matter could affect the operation of this Agreement;
b) will endeavor to avoid any solution that adversely affects the interests of the third Party; Y
c) treat confidential information exchanged during consultations in the same manner as the Party that provided it.
Article 19-06 : Intervention of the Commission, good offices, conciliation and mediation.
Any consulting Party may request in writing that the Commission meet whenever a matter is not resolved pursuant to Article 19-05 within forty-five days after delivery of the request for consultations.
A Party may also request in writing that the Commission meet when consultations have been held under Article 5-30 or Article 14-18.
The Party initiating the procedure shall mention in the request the measure or any other matter that is the subject of the claim, shall indicate the provisions of this Agreement that it considers applicable, and shall deliver the request to the responsible national bodies of the other Parties.
The Commission will meet within the ten days following the delivery of the request and, in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, it may:
a) convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary;
b) resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other dispute resolution procedures; either
c) make recommendations.
The Commission shall have the power to combine two or more procedures related to the same measure that are submitted to it in accordance with this article. The Commission may consolidate two or more proceedings regarding other matters that it is aware of in accordance with this article, when it deems appropriate to examine them jointly.
Article 19-07 : Appeal to the arbitral tribunal.
Any consulting Party may request in writing the constitution of an arbitral tribunal when the Commission has met in accordance with the provisions of Article 19-06, paragraph 4 and the matter has not been resolved within:
a) the forty-five days following the meeting; either
b) the forty-five days following the day on which the Commission met to discuss the most recent matter submitted to it, when several proceedings have been accumulated in accordance with article 19-06, paragraph 5.
The requesting Party shall submit the request to the responsible national bodies of the other Parties. Upon delivery of the application, the Commission will establish an arbitral tribunal.
When the third Party considers that it has a substantial interest in the matter, it shall have the right to participate as a complaining Party after notifying the national bodies responsible for the disputing Parties of its intention to intervene. The communication will be delivered as soon as possible, but in no case later than seven days from the date on which one of the Parties has delivered the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal.
The third Party that decides not to intervene as a complaining Party pursuant to paragraph 3, must with respect to the same matter and in the absence of a significant change in economic or commercial circumstances, refrain from initiating a dispute settlement procedure pursuant to:
a) this Agreement; either
b) the GATT, invoking reasons substantially equivalent to those that that Party may invoke in accordance with this Agreement.
Article 19-08 : List of arbitrators.
The Commission will integrate a list of up to thirty individuals who have the necessary qualities and disposition to be arbitrators.
The members of the list:
a) have knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters related to this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;
b) they will be appointed strictly based on their objectivity, reliability and good judgment;
c) they will be independent, they will not be linked to the Parties, and they will not receive instructions from them; Y
d) they will comply with the Code of Conduct established by the Commission.
Article 19-09 : Constitution of the arbitral tribunal.
When there are two disputing Parties, the following procedure shall apply:
a) the arbitral tribunal shall be made up of five members;
b) The disputing Parties shall endeavor to designate the president of the arbitral tribunal within the fifteen days following the delivery of the request for its integration. In the event that the disputing Parties do not reach an agreement within this period, one of them, chosen by lot, will designate it within five days. The individual designated as president:
i) may not be of the nationality of the Party that designates it; Y
ii) in the case of the controversies referred to in Article 19-04, paragraph 1, letter c), may not be a national of any Party to this Agreement;
c) within fifteen days of the election of the chair, each disputing Party shall select two arbitrators who are nationals of the other disputing Party; Y
d) If a disputing Party does not select an arbitrator within that period, the arbitrator shall be selected by lot from among the members of the list who are nationals of the other disputing Party.
When there are three disputing Parties, the following procedure shall apply:
a) the arbitral tribunal shall be made up of five members;
b) The disputing Parties shall endeavor to agree on the appointment of the president of the arbitral tribunal within fifteen days following the delivery of the request for its integration. In the event that the disputing Parties do not reach an agreement within this period, it will be chosen by drawing whether it will be the defendant Party or the complaining Parties who will designate it, and must select it within a period of ten days. The individual selected as chair may not be of the nationality of the Party or Parties that designate him;
c) within fifteen days of the selection of the chair, the Party complained against shall select two arbitrators, each of whom shall be a national of each of the complaining Parties. The complaining Parties will select two arbitrators who are nationals of the Party complained against; Y
d) If any disputing Party does not select an arbitrator within that period, the arbitrator shall be designated by lot in accordance with the nationality criteria in subparagraph c).
Normally, the arbitrators will be chosen from the list referred to in article 19-08.
Article 19-10 : Disqualification.
Any disputing Party may present a challenge without expression of cause, within the fifteen days following that in which the proposal is made, against any individual who does not appear on the list referred to in article 19-08 and who is proposed as arbitrator. .
Article 19-11 : Remuneration and payment of expenses.
The Commission will set the amounts of remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators.
The remuneration of the arbitrators, their transportation and lodging expenses, and all general expenses of the arbitral tribunal shall be covered in equal proportions by the disputing Parties.
Each arbitrator will keep a record and present a final account of his time and expenses, and the arbitral tribunal will keep a similar record and will render a final account of all general expenses.
Article 19-12 : Rules of procedure.
The Commission will establish Rules of Procedure, which will be applied by the arbitral tribunals constituted in accordance with this chapter. These rules will include, among others, provisions regarding the Referee Code of Conduct. For the elaboration of the rules, the Commission will take into consideration the following principles:
a) the procedures shall guarantee, as a minimum, the right to a hearing before the arbitral tribunal, as well as the opportunity to present arguments and replies or responses in writing; Y
b) The hearings before the arbitral tribunal, the deliberations and the preliminary decision, as well as all the writings and communications with it, will be confidential.
Article 19-13 : Participation of the third Party.
The non-disputing Party, after delivering communications to the national bodies responsible for the disputing Parties, shall have the right to attend all hearings, to present written and oral communications to the arbitral tribunal and to receive a copy of the briefs submitted by the disputing Parties. .
Article 19-14 : Preliminary decision.
Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, within ninety days following the appointment of the last arbitrator, the arbitral tribunal will submit to the disputing Parties a preliminary decision that will contain:
a) findings of fact;
b) the determination of whether the measure in question is incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to article 19-02; Y
c) the draft operative part.
The disputing Parties may make written observations to the arbitral tribunal on the preliminary decision within fourteen days following its presentation.
In the case referred to in paragraph 2, and after examining the written observations, the arbitral tribunal may, ex officio or at the request of any disputing Party:
a) carry out any diligence it deems appropriate;
b) request the observations of any disputing Party or of any Party that has delivered the communication referred to in article 19-13; Y
c) reconsider its preliminary decision.
Article 19-15 : Final decision.
The arbitral tribunal will submit to the Commission a final decision and, if applicable, the saved votes on the issues with respect to which there has not been a unanimous decision, within thirty days from the presentation of the preliminary decision.
Neither the preliminary decision nor the final decision will reveal the identity of the arbitrators who have voted with the majority or with the minority.
The final decision of the arbitral tribunal will be announced fifteen days after its communication to the Commission.
Article 19-16 : Compliance with the final decision.
The final decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be binding on the disputing Parties in the terms and within the terms that it orders.
When the final decision of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is inconsistent with this Agreement, the defendant Party, whenever possible, will refrain from executing the measure or will repeal it.
When the decision of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is cause for nullification and impairment within the meaning of the annex to Article 19-02, it will determine the level of nullification or impairment and may suggest adjustments mutually satisfactory to the disputing Parties.
Article 19-17 : Suspension of benefits.
The complaining Party may suspend the application of benefits of equivalent effect to the defendant Party if the arbitral tribunal resolves:
a) that a measure is incompatible with the obligations of this Agreement and the Party complained against does not comply with the final resolution within the term that the arbitral tribunal has established; either
b) that a measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to Article 19-02 and the disputing Parties do not reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute within the term established by the arbitral tribunal.
The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant Party complies with the final decision of the arbitral tribunal or until the disputing Parties reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute, as the case may be.
In considering the benefits to be suspended under paragraph 1:
a) the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the arbitral tribunal has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or that has been cause for annulment. or impairment within the meaning of the annex to article 19-02; Y
b) the complaining Party that considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, may suspend benefits in other sectors.
At the written request of any disputing Party, communicated to the responsible national bodies of the other Parties, the Commission shall establish an arbitral tribunal to determine whether the level of benefits that a complaining Party has suspended in accordance with paragraph 1 is manifestly excessive. To the extent possible, the arbitral tribunal will be made up of the same members that made up the one that issued the final decision referred to in article 19-15.
The arbitral tribunal constituted for the purposes of paragraph 4, will present its final decision within sixty days following the appointment of the last arbitrator, or in any other period agreed upon by the Parties.
Article 19-18 : Interpretation by the Commission.
The Commission will endeavor to agree, as soon as possible, on an appropriate interpretation or response when:
a) a Party considers that a matter of interpretation or application of this Agreement, arising or to arise in a judicial or administrative proceeding of another Party, merits interpretation by the Commission; either
b) a Party receives a request for an opinion on a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement from a court or administrative body of a Party.
The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall present to them any interpretation agreed upon by the Commission, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.
When the Commission fails to reach an agreement, either Party may submit its own opinion to the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.
Article 19-19 : Alternative means for dispute resolution.
To the extent possible, each Party shall promote and facilitate the use of arbitration and other alternative means for the resolution of international commercial disputes between individuals.
To this end, each Party shall have adequate procedures to ensure compliance with arbitration agreements and the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards pronounced in such disputes. These procedures will take into consideration the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, of 1958, or the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, of 1975.
The Commission may establish a Private Business Dispute Advisory Committee composed of persons who have specialized knowledge or experience in the resolution of private international business disputes. The Committee will present reports and recommendations to the Commission on general questions sent by it regarding the existence, use and effectiveness of arbitration and other procedures for the settlement of such controversies.
Annex to article 19-02 : Nullification and impairment
The Parties may resort to the dispute resolution mechanism of this chapter, when by virtue of the application of a measure that does not contravene the Treaty, they consider that the benefits that they could reasonably have expected to receive from the application of chapters III are annulled or impaired. to IX except for what is established regarding investment in the automotive sector, chapter X, chapter XIV, chapter XV or chapter XVI.
2. Paragraph 1 shall apply even when the Party against which the appeal is filed invokes a general exception provided for in Article 22-01, except in the case of a general exception applicable to cross-border trade in services.
CHAPTER XX : Administration of the Treaty
Article 20-01 : The Administrative Commission.
The Parties create the Administrative Commission, made up of the heads of the responsible national bodies indicated in Annex 1 to this article, or by the persons they designate.
It will correspond to the Commission:
a) ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Agreement;
b) evaluate the results achieved in the application of this Agreement, monitor its development and recommend to the Parties the modifications it deems appropriate;
c) intervene in disputes under the terms established in Chapter XIX;
d) supervise the work of all the committees and working groups established in this Agreement and included in Annex 2 to this article, which will report to the Commission;
e) monitor pricing practices and policies in specific sectors in order to detect those cases that could cause distortions in trade between the Parties;
f) recommend to the Parties the adoption of the necessary measures to implement their decisions; Y
g) hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement or that is attributed to it by any provision thereof.
The Commission may:
a) establish and delegate responsibilities in ad hoc committees or permanent committees, working groups and experts and supervise their work;
b) request the advice of individuals or groups without governmental ties; Y
c) if agreed by the Parties, adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions.
The Commission will establish its rules and procedures and all its decisions will be unanimous.
The Commission shall meet at least once a year in ordinary session, which shall be successively chaired by each Party.
Article 20-02 : National Sections.
The responsible national body of each Party shall designate its office or permanent official dependency that shall act as the national section of that Party and shall communicate to the other Parties:
a) the name and position of the official responsible for his national section; Y
b) the address of their national section, to which communications should be addressed.
The Commission shall supervise the coordinated functioning of the national sections of the Parties.
It will correspond to the national sections:
a) provide assistance to the Commission;
b) provide administrative support to arbitral tribunals;
c) on instructions from the Commission, support the work of the other committees and groups established under this Agreement; Y
d) fulfill the other functions entrusted to it by the Commission.
Annex 1 to article 20-01 : Responsible national bodies
The national body responsible for each Party shall be:
a) in the case of Colombia, the Ministry of Foreign Trade or the body that replaces it;
b) in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development or the body that replaces it; Y
c) in the case of Venezuela, the Foreign Trade Institute or the body that replaces it.
Annex 2 to article 20-01 : Committees, Subcommittees and Working Groups
Committees:
Automotive Sector Committee (article 4-03) -Agricultural
Trade Committee (article 5-10)
-Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Measures Committee (article 5-29)
-Sugar Analysis Committee (annex 3 to article 5-04)
-Committee of Financial Services (article 12-11)
-Committee for Standardization Measures (article 14-17)
-Micro, Small and Medium Industry Committee (article 15-22)
-Purchasing Committee (annex 8 to article 15-02)
-Committee on Competition Matters (article 16-03) -State
Company Practices Committee (article 16-03)
subcommittees
Subcommittee on Health Standardization Measures (article 14-17)
Work groups:
Working Group on Agricultural Technical and Marketing Standards (article 5-09)
-Working Group on Rules of Origin (article 6-17)
-Working Group on Customs Procedures (7-11)
-Working Group on Professional Services ( annex 1 to article 10-02)
-Temporary Entry Working Group (article 13-06)
CHAPTER XXI : Transparency
Article 21-01 : Information Center.
Each Party shall designate a unit or office as an information center to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.
When requested by a Party, the information center of another Party will indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.
Article 21-02 : Publication.
Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or made available for the information of the Parties and any interested party.
Each Party shall endeavor to:
a) publish in advance any measures; Y
b) provide the Parties and any interested party with a reasonable opportunity to comment on the measure.
Article 21-03 : Provision of information.
Each Party shall communicate, to the extent possible, to any other Party that has an interest in the matter, any measure that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the interests of that other Party under the terms of this Agreement.
Each Party, at the request of another Party, shall provide it with information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any measure, regardless of whether or not that other Party has been previously notified of that measure.
The communication or supply of information referred to in this article will be carried out without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Treaty.
Article 21-04 : Hearing guarantees, legality and due process.
The Parties reaffirm the guarantees of hearing, legality and due process enshrined in their respective legislation.
Each Party shall maintain tribunals and judicial or administrative procedures for the review and, when appropriate, the correction of the final acts related to this Agreement.
Each Party shall ensure that in the judicial and administrative procedures related to the application of any measure that affects the operation of this Agreement, the essential formalities of the procedure are observed, and the legal cause of the same is founded and motivated.
CHAPTER XXII : Exceptions
Article 22-01 : General exceptions.
Article XX of the GATT and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of:
a) Chapters III to IX, except to the extent that any of their provisions apply to services or investment; Y
b) Chapter XIV, except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services,
Nothing in the provisions of:
a) Chapters III to IX, to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services;
b) Chapter XIV, to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services; Y
c) Chapters X and XI,
shall be construed to prevent any Party from adopting or enforcing the measures necessary to ensure compliance with laws or regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to health and safety, and consumer protection; provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 22-02 : National security.
Other than as provided in Article 15-19, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to mean:
a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;
b) prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:
i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on goods, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment ;
ii) adopted in time of war or other emergencies in international relations; either
iii) regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; either
c) prevent any Party from adopting measures in accordance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.
Article 22-03 : Disclosure of information.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to oblige a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which would impede compliance with the laws of the Party or would be contrary to its Constitution or its laws as regards the protection of the privacy of people, financial affairs and bank accounts of individual clients of financial institutions, among others.
CHAPTER XXIII: Final provisions
Article 23-01 : Annexes.
The annexes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.
Article 23-02 : Amendments.
The Parties may agree to any modification or addition to this Agreement.
The agreed modifications and additions will enter into force once they are approved according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party and will constitute an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 23-03 : Convergence.
The Parties will promote the convergence of this Treaty with other integration agreements of the Latin American countries, in accordance with the mechanisms established in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty.
Article 23-04 : Entry into force.
This Treaty will enter into force on January 1, 1995, once the communications certifying that the necessary legal formalities have been completed are exchanged.
The provisions of paragraph 1 do not prevent a Party, in accordance with its legislation, from provisionally applying this Agreement.
Article 23-05 : Validity.
This Agreement will have a minimum validity of three years. Once that period has elapsed, its duration will be indefinite.
Article 23-06 : Reserves.
This Treaty may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations at the time of its ratification.
Article 23-07 : Accession.
This Treaty will be open to the accession of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, either for a country or group of countries, after negotiation between that country or group of countries and the Parties.
The accession will enter into force once the communications certifying that the legal formalities have been completed are exchanged.
Article 23-08 : Complaint.
Any Party may denounce this Agreement. This denunciation will take effect 180 days after it is communicated to the other Parties and the denunciation is communicated to the General Secretariat of ALADI, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term.
The denunciation of this Agreement by one Party does not affect its validity between the other Parties.
Article 23-09 : Evaluation of the Treaty.
The Parties will periodically evaluate the development of this Agreement in order to seek its improvement and consolidate the integration process in the region, promoting an active participation of the productive sectors.