FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
CROATIA AND SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
_______________
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA AND SERBIA AND
MONTENEGRO
ON AMENDMENTS TO THE FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF
CROATIA AND THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA
The Republic of Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro (hereinafter referred to as “the Contracting
Parties”) by this Agreement on Amendments to the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic
of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, signed in Belgrade on December 23
rd
, 2002
(hereinafter referred to as the “Agreement on Amendments”).
Article 1
The name of the Contracting Party “Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” shall be amended
throughout the Free Trade Agreement of December 23
rd
2002 (hereinafter referred to as “the
Agreement”), as well as its Annexes, Protocols and Appendices being, in accordance with Article
36, their integral part, shall be amended and reads: “Serbia and Montenegro”.
Article 2
Article 2, paragraph 1 of the Agreement shall be amended and reads:
“For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions set out in this Agreement are
to be applied shall be the Most Favoured Nation duty in force on August 15
th
2003 or on the day
of signing of this Agreement on Amendments, whichever being lower”.
Article 3
Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Agreement shall be amended and reads:
“All quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished
on the date of the entry into force of this Agreement, with the exception of the products listed in
Appendix I and Appendix II of this Agreement”.
Article 4
Article 7, paragraph 2 of the Agreement shall be amended and reads:
“All quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished
on the date of the entry into force of this Agreement, with the exception of the products listed in
Appendix III of this Agreement”.
Article 5
Article 9, paragraph 2 of the Agreement shall be amended and reads:
“As of the entering into force of this Agreement the duties to be applied to import of products
originating in the Contracting Parties, listed in Annex I and Annex II of the Protocol 1 shall be
successively reduced in accordance with the following schedule:
Page 2
- as of the entry into force of this Agreement all duties shall be reduced to 60% of the basic duty,
- as of January 1st
2005 all duties shall be reduced to 40% of the basic duty,
- as of January 1st
2006 all duties shall be reduced to 20% of the basic duty,
- as of January 1st
2007 the remaining duties shall be abolished.”
Article 6
Annex I of the Agreement (from Article 6 paragraph 2) shall be amended and the provisions of
the amended Annex I shall be an integral part of the Agreement.
Article 7
After the Annex I of the Agreement, in accordance with Article 3 of the Agreement on
Amendments the Annex II of the Agreement shall be added, being an integral part of it.
Article 8 
Annex II from Article 7, paragraph 2 of the Agreement, becomes, in accordance to Article 4 of
the Agreement on Amendments, Annex III of Agreement, being its integral part.
Article 9
Protocol 1 of Article 9, paragraph 2 of the Agreement shall be amended and the provisions of the
amended Protocol 1 shall be an integral part of the Agreement.
Article 10
Protocol 2 from paragraph 1, Article 11 to the Agreement shall be amended and the provisions of
the amended Protocol shall be an integral part of the Agreement.
Article 11
As an integral part of the Agreement on Amendments shall be understood:
- Appendix I (from Article 6 paragraph 2) to the Agreement – Quantitative restrictions on imports
in Serbia and Montenegro,
- Appendix II (from Article 6, paragraph 2) to the Agreement – Quantitative restrictions on
imports in the Republic of Croatia,
- Appendix III (from Article 7, paragraph 2) to the Agreement – Quantitative restrictions on
exports from the Republic of Croatia,
- Protocol 1 Annex I (from Article 9) to the Agreement – List of sensitive industrial products
originating in Serbia and Montenegro,
- Protocol 1 Annex II (from Article 9) to the Agreement – List of sensitive industrial products
originating in the Republic of Croatia,
- Protocol 2 (from Article 11) to the Agreement – Exchange of agricultural concessions between
the Republic of Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro,
Page 3
- Annex A to the Protocol 2,
- Annex B to the Protocol 2,
- Annex C to the Protocol 2.
Article 12
The Agreement on Amendments shall enter into force on the first day of the second month
following the date of the receipt of the last written notification by which the Contracting Parties
inform each other through diplomatic channels that the internal legal requirements for entry into
force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.
Done at .......................................... on ....................................... in two originals each in Croatian,
Serbian and English languages, all three texts being equally authentic. In case of divergence in
interpretation the English text shall prevail.
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA FOR SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
_______________
Page 4
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA AND THE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA
PREAMBLE
The Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (hereinafter referred to as "the
Contracting Parties"),
Reaffirming their firm commitment to pluralistic democracy based on the rule of law, human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling their intention to participate actively in the process of economic integration in Europe
and expressing their preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways and means to strengthen this
process,
Reaffirming their firm commitment to the principles of a market economy, which constitutes the
basis for their relations,
Recalling their firm commitment to the Final Act on Security and Co-operation in Europe, the
Paris Charter for new Europe, 
Resolved to this end to eliminate progressively the obstacles to mutual trade, in accordance with
the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (hereinafter referred to as
"GATT 1994") and the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation (hereinafter
referred to as "Agreement establishing WTO"),
Firmly convinced that this Agreement will foster the intensification of mutually beneficial trade
relations among them and contribute to the process of integration in Europe,
Considering that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting the Contracting
Parties from their obligations under other international agreements,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Objectives
1. The Contracting Parties shall gradually establish during a transitional period ending on
1
st
January 2007 a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in
conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement establishing the WTO on
substantially all their bilateral trade.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
- to promote through the expansion of trade, the harmonious development of economic relations
between the Contracting Parties and thus to foster the advance of their economy,
the improvement of living and employment conditions, and increase financial
stability in their countries,
- to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Contracting Parties,
Page 5
- to contribute by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious development and expansion
of the world trade.
Article 2
Basic Duties
1. For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions set out in this
Agreement are to be applied shall be the Most Favoured Nation rate of duty in force on the date
signing of this Agreement or the duty in force on 1st
January 2003, whichever is lower.
2. If, after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga
omnes basis, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article as from that date when such reductions are applied.
3. The reduced duties, calculated in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be
applied rounded to the one decimal place.
4. The Contracting Parties shall communicate to each other their respective customs
duties.
Article 3
Customs Duties On Imports And Charges Having Equivalent Effect 
1. No new customs duties on imports or charges having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties or the existing duties increased as from the
date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
2. All charges having equivalent effect as customs duties shall be abolished on the date of
the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 4
Fiscal Duties
1. The Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of Article 3 apply also to other import
customs duties of a fiscal nature.
2. The Contracting Parties shall abolish all import customs duties of a fiscal nature as
from the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 5
Customs Duties On Exports And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new customs duties on exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties as from the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All customs duties on export and charges having equivalent effect shall be abolished
on the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 6
Quantitative Restrictions On Imports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
Page 6
1. No new quantitative restrictions on imports or measures having equivalent effect shall
be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties, as from the date of the entry into force of
this Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished on the date of the entry into force of this Agreement, with the exception of the products
listed in Appendix I to this Agreement.
Article 7
Quantitative Restrictions On Exports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new quantitative restrictions on exports or measures having equivalent effect shall
be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties, as from the date of the entry into force of
this Agreement. 
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished on the date of the entry into force of this Agreement, with the exception of the products
listed in Appendix II to this Agreement.
CHAPTER I: INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
Article 8
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products originating in the
Contracting Parties.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term “industrial products“ means the products
falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System,
with the exception of the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.
Article 9
Customs Duties On Imports
1. With the entry into force of this Agreement, the customs duties and charges having
equivalent effect are mutually abolished on imports of products originating in the Contracting
Parties, except on imports of products listed in Annex I and Annex II of Protocol 1 of this
Agreement.
2. Customs duties on imports of products originating in the Contracting Parties which are
listed in this Annex I and Annex II of Protocol 1 shall be progressively reduced in accordance
with the following timetable:
- On the date of entry into force of the Agreement, duties shall be reduced to 70% of the basic
duty,
- On 1 January 2004, duty shall be reduced to 50% of the basic duty,
- On 1 January 2005, duty shall be reduced to 30% of the basic duty,
- On 1 January 2006, duty shall be reduced to 15% of the basic duty,
- On 1 January 2007, the remaining duties shall be abolished.
Page 7
CHAPTER II: AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
Article 10
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products originating in the
Contracting Parties.
2. The term "agricultural products" means for the purpose of this Agreement the products
falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System
and the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.
Article 11
Exchange Of Concessions 
1. The Contracting Parties shall grant each other the concessions specified in Protocol 2 to this
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "Protocol 2") as laid down in that Protocol and in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Taking account of:
- the role of agriculture in their economies,
- the development of trade in agricultural products between the Parties,
- the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products,
- the rules of their agricultural policies,
- the results of the multilateral trade negotiations under the WTO.
the Contracting Parties shall examine within the framework of the Joint Committee referred in
Article 33 of this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “Joint Committee”) the possibilities of
granting each other further concessions in trade in agricultural products.
Article 12
Concessions And Agricultural Policies
1. Without prejudice to the concessions granted under Article 11 to this Agreement the
provisions of this Chapter shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective agricultural
policies of the Contracting Parties or the taking of any measures under such policies, including
the implementation of the respective provisions under the WTO.
2. The Contracting Parties shall notify the Joint Committee about the changes in their
respective agricultural policies pursued or measures applied, which may affect the conditions of
trade in agricultural products between them as provided for in this Agreement. On the request of
any Contracting Party prompt consultations shall be held to examine the situation.
Article 13
Specific Safeguards
Page 8
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Article 26 to this
Agreement, and given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, if imports of products
originating in a Contracting Party, which are subject to the concessions granted under this
Agreement, cause serious disturbances to the markets of the other Contracting Party, the
Contracting Party concerned shall immediately enter into consultations to find an appropriate
solution. Pending such solution, the Contracting Party concerned may take the measures it deems
necessary. The type and duration of the measure should not go beyond what is strictly necessary
to remedy the situation.
Article 14
Sanitary And Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Contracting Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary and phytosanitary
matters in a non-discriminatory fashion and shall not introduce any measures that have the effect
of unduly obstructing trade.
2. The veterinary and sanitary measures and the work of the veterinary services will be in
accordance with international conventions in this field.
3. The phytosanitary measures and the work of the plant protection service will be in
accordance with international conventions in this field. 
CHAPTER III: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 15
Rules Of Origin And Co-operation In Customs Matters
1. Protocol 3 to this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “the Protocol 3") lays down the
rules of origin and related methods of administrative co-operation.
2. The Contracting Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews by
the Joint Committee and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the
provisions of this Agreement are effectively and harmoniously applied, and to reduce, as far as
possible, the formalities imposed on trade, and to achieve mutually satisfactory solutions to any
difficulties arising from the operation of those provisions.
Article 16
Internal Taxation
1. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal
nature establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products
originating in the Contracting Parties.
2. Products exported to the territory of the Contracting Parties may not benefit from
repayment of internal taxes in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxes imposed on them.
Page 9
Article 17
General Exceptions
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in
transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; of the protection
of health and life of humans, animals or plants; of the protection of national treasures possessing
artistic, historic or archaeological value; of the protection of intellectual property or of the rules
relating to trade in gold or silver or to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources, if such
measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or
consumption. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting Parties.
Article 18
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking any measure, which it
considers necessary:
1. to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
2. for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies relating to:
- the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided that such measures do not
impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for
specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in other goods, materials and 
services as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a
military establishment; or
- non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices; or
- measures taken in time of war or other serious international tension.
Article 19
State Monopolies
1. The Contracting Parties shall adjust progressively any state monopoly of a commercial
character so as to ensure that by the end of the transitional period stipulated in Article 1 of this
Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and
marketed exists between legal and natural persons of the Contracting Parties.
2. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any body through which the competent authorities
of the Contracting Parties, in law or in fact, directly or indirectly supervise, determine or
appreciably influence imports or exports between the Contracting Parties. These provisions shall
likewise apply to monopolies delegated by the state to other bodies.
Article 20
Payments
Page 10
1. Payments in convertible currencies relating to trade in goods between the Contracting
Parties and the transfer of such payments to the territory of the Contracting Party, where the
creditor resides, shall be free from any restrictions.
2. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions
on the grant, repayment or acceptance of short and medium term credits related to trade in goods
in which a resident in one of the Contracting Parties participates.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 2 of this Article, any measures
concerning current payments connected with the movement of goods shall be in conformity with
the conditions laid down under Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the International
Monetary Fund.
Article 21
Rules Of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in so far
as they may affect trade between the Contracting Parties:
- all agreements between legal persons and undertakings ( hereinafter referred to as
“undertakings”), decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted
practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
- abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the Contracting
Parties as a whole or in substantial part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall apply to the activities of all
undertakings including public undertakings and undertakings to which the Contracting Parties
grant special or exclusive rights. Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general 
economic interest or having the character of a revenue-producing monopoly, shall be subject to
provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article in so far as the application of these provisions does not
obstruct the performance, in law or fact, of the particular public tasks assigned to them.
3. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II to this Agreement the provisions
stipulated first subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to such agreements,
decisions and practices which form an integral part of a national market organisation.
4. If a Contracting Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with paragraphs
1, 2 and 3 of this Article or if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the
interest of that Contracting Party or material injury to its domestic industry, the Contracting Party
concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 29 of this Agreement.
Article 22
State Aid
1. Any aid granted by a Contracting Party or through state resources in any form
whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or
the production of certain goods shall, in so far as it may affect trade between the Contracting
Parties, be incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to products covered by
Chapter II to this Agreement.
Page 11
3. The Joint Committee shall within the period of three years from enforcement of the
Agreement adopt criteria for appraisal of activities being contrary to paragraph 1 of this Article,
as well as the corresponding implementation procedures.
4. The Contracting Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid, inter alia, by
reporting annually to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given
and by providing to the other Contracting Party, upon request, information on aid schemes and on
particular individual cases of state aid.
5. If a Contracting Party considers that a particular practice:
- is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1 of this Article, or the appropriate procedure
relating to rules laid down in paragraph 3 of this Article has not been applied, or
- in the absence of rules laid down in paragraph 3 of this Article, causes or threatens to cause
serious prejudice to the interest of that Contracting Party or material injury to its
domestic industry,
it may take appropriate measures under the conditions of and in accordance with the provisions
laid down in Article 29 of this Agreement.
6. Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with the procedures and
under the conditions laid down by the GATT 1994 and the Agreement establishing WTO and any
other relevant instruments negotiated under their auspices, which are applicable between the
Contracting Parties. 
Article 23
Public Procurement
1. The Contracting Parties consider the liberalisation of their respective public
procurement markets as an objective of this Agreement.
2. The Contracting Parties shall progressively develop their respective regulations for
public procurement with a view to granting suppliers of the other Contracting Party access to
contract award procedures on their respective public procurement markets.
3. The Joint Committee shall examine developments related to the achievement of the
objectives of this Article and may recommend practical modalities of implementing the
provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article so as to ensure free access, transparency, full balance of
rights and obligations and mutual opening of respective public procurement markets the
Contracting Parties.
Article 24
Protection Of Intellectual Property
1. The Contracting Parties shall ensure the protection of intellectual property rights on a
non-discriminatory basis, including measures for granting and enforcing such rights. This
protection shall be gradually improved to reach, before the end of the transitional period set out in
Article 1 of
Page 12
this Agreement, the level corresponding to the substantive standards of the multilateral
agreements specified in Annex II to this Agreement.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "intellectual property" refers in particularly
to: protection of copyright and related right, including computer programs and databases, trade
marks for goods and services, geographical indications including mark of origin, patents,
industrial design, new plant varieties, topographies of integrated circuits, as well as undisclosed
information on “know-how”.
3. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate in matters of intellectual property. They shall
hold, upon request of any Contracting Party, expert consultations on these matters, in particular,
on activities relating to the existing or to future international conventions on harmonisation,
administration or protection of the intellectual property and on activities in international
organizations, such as the WTO and the World Intellectual Property Organisation, as well as
relations of the Contracting Parties with any third country on matters concerning intellectual
property.
Article 25
Dumping
If a Contracting Party finds that dumping within the meaning of Article VI of the GATT 1994 is
taking place in trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures
against that practice in accordance with the Article VI of the GATT 1994 and WTO Agreement 
on application of Article VI of the GATT 1994, under the conditions and in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 29 to this Agreement.
Article 26
General Safeguards
Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to
cause or threaten to cause:
- serious injury to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the territory of
the importing Contracting Party, or
- serious disturbances in any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring about
serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region,
the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 29 of this Agreement.
Article 27
Re-Export And Serious Shortage
Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 5 and 7 of this Agreement leads to:
- re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Contracting Party maintains for
the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures
or charges having equivalent effect; or
- a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Contracting Party;
Page 13
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to major difficulties
for the exporting Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may take appropriate measures under
the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 29 of this Agreement.
Article 28
Fulfilment Of Obligations
1. The Contracting Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil
their obligations under this Agreement. They shall ensure to it that the objectives set out in this
Agreement are achieved.
2. If a Contracting Party considers that the other Contracting Party has failed to fulfil an
obligation under this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures
under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 29 of this
Agreement.
Article 29
Procedure For The Application Of Safeguard Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in the
following paragraphs of this Article, the Contracting Parties shall endeavour to solve any
differences between them through direct consultations.
2. In the event of a Contracting Party subjecting imports of products liable to give rise to
the situation referred to in Article 26 of this Agreement to an administrative procedure having its
purpose the rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other
Contracting Party. 
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 7 of this Article, a Contracting Party which considers
resorting to safeguard measures shall promptly notify the other Contracting Party thereof and
supply all relevant information. Consultations between the Contracting Parties shall take place
without delay, but not later than 30 days from submission of request, in the Joint Committee with
a view to finding a solution acceptable to the Contracting Parties.
4. With regards to:
1) Articles 25, 26 and 27 of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall examine the case or
situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to the difficulties notified by the
Contracting Party concerned. In case of absence of such decision within thirty days of the matter
being referred to the Joint Committee, the Contracting Party concerned may adopt the measures
necessary in order to remedy the situation.
2) Article 28 of this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures
after the consultations have been concluded or a period of three months has elapsed from the date
of the first written notification to the other Contracting Party.
3) Articles 20 and 21 of this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned shall give the Joint
Committee all the assistance required in order to examine the case and, where appropriate to
eliminate the practice objected to. If the other Contracting Party fails to put an end to the practice
objected to within the period fixed by the Joint Committee or if the Joint Committee fails to reach
an agreement within thirty days of the matter being referred to it, the Contracting Party concerned
may adopt appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the practice in
question.
Page 14
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the other Contracting
Party. They shall be limited with regard to their extent and to their duration to what is strictly
necessary in order to rectify the situation giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess
of the injury caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such
measures as will least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.
6. The safeguard measures taken shall be the object of periodic consultations with a view
to their relaxation as soon as possible or abolition when conditions no longer justify their
maintenance.
7. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 25, 26 and 27 of this
Agreement, apply forthwith the provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation.
The measures taken shall be notified without delay and consultations between the Contracting
Parties shall take place as soon as possible within the Joint Committee.
Article 30
Balance Of Payments Difficulties
1. The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures
including measures relating to imports for balance of payments purposes.
2. Where one of the Contracting Parties is in serious balance of payments difficulties, or
under imminent threat thereof, the Contracting Party concerned may, in accordance with the
conditions established under the GATT 1994 and the WTO adopt restrictive measures, including 
measures related to imports, which shall be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is
necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The measures shall be progressively
relaxed as balance of payments conditions improve and they shall be eliminated when conditions
no longer justify their maintenance. The Contracting Party concerned shall inform the other
Contracting Party forthwith of their introduction and, whenever practicable, of a time schedule
for their removal.
Article 31
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where a Contracting Party considers that it would be useful in the interests of the
economies of the Contracting Parties to develop and deepen the relations established by this
Agreement by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to
the other Contracting Party. The Contracting Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine
such a request and, where appropriate, may make recommendations, particularly with a view to
opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article will
be subject to approval by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their internal legislation.
CHAPTER IV: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 32
The Joint Committee
Page 15
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established and shall be composed of representatives of
the Contracting Parties.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be administered by the Joint Committee.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Contracting
Parties shall exchange information and, at the request of any Contracting Party, shall hold
consultations within the Joint Committee. The Committee shall keep under review the possibility
of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Contracting Parties.
4. The Joint Committee may take decisions in cases provided for in this Agreement. On
other matters the Committee may make recommendations.
5. The decisions of the Joint Committee shall be subject to approval by the Contracting
Parties in accordance with their internal legislation. The decision shall enter into force on the day
of receipt of the second written notification that such requirements have been fulfilled.
Article 33
Procedures Of The Joint Committee 
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall meet
whenever necessary but at least once a year. Each Contracting Party may request that a meeting
be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall act by consensus.
3. For the purpose of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of
procedure which shall, inter alia, contain provisions for convening meetings and for the
designation of the Chair person and its term of office.
4. The Joint Committee may decide to set up subcommittees and working groups it
considers necessary for assistance in accomplishing of its tasks.
Article 34
Services And Investment
1. The Contracting Parties recognise the growing importance of certain areas, such as
services and investments. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden their co-operation, in
particular in the context of the European integration, they will co-operate with the aim of
achieving a progressive liberalisation and mutual opening of their markets for investments and
trade in services, taking into account relevant provisions of the General Agreement on Trade in
Services.
2. The Contracting Parties will discuss in the Joint Committee the possibilities to extend
their trade relations to the fields of foreign direct investment and trade in services.
Article 35
Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas And Frontier Trade
This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free trade
areas or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that these do not negatively affect the trade
regime of the Contracting Parties and in particular the provisions concerning rules of origin
provided for by this Agreement.
Page 16
Article 36
Annexes, Protocols And Appendices
1. The Annexes, Protocols and Appendices to this Agreement are an integral part of it.
2. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Annexes, Protocols and Appendices to
this Agreement.
Article 37
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement shall enter into force in accordance with procedure stipulated in
Article 38 of this Agreement.
Article 38 
Entry Into Force
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date of
the receipt of the last written notification by which Contracting Parties inform each other through
diplomatic channels that the internal legal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement
have been fulfilled.
Article 39
Duration And Termination
1. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Each Contracting Party may denounce this Agreement through diplomatic channels by
a written notification to the other Contracting Party. The denunciation shall become effective on
the first day of the seventh month after the date on which the notification was received.
3. In the event of any Contracting Party becomes a member of the European Union, that
Contracting Party will withdraw from this Agreement at the latest the day before membership
takes effect.
Done at .......... this.............day of............ 200__ in two originals each in the Croatian, Serbian and
English languages, all three texts being equally authentic. In case of divergence in interpretation
the English text shall prevail.
For the Republic of Croatia For the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
_______________
Page 17
RECORD OF UNDERSTANDING
1. The Contracting Parties agree to apply the rules and provisions set out in Annex 1 A of
the Agreement establishing WTO.
2. The Contracting Parties agree that they shall endeavour to abolish all the non-customs
related obstacles restraining mutual trade by the entry into force of this Agreement.
3. Pursuant to Article 39 of this Agreement, in the event of any Contracting Party
becoming a member of the European Union and withdrawing from this Agreement, the other
Contracting Party shall waive its claim to compensation to the Contracting Party becoming a
member of the European Union.
__________ 