FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
AND
THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA
PREAMBLE
Desirous to develop and strengthen friendly relations, especially in the fields of economic
cooperation
and trade, with an aim to contribute to the progress of economic co-operation between
the two countries and to increase the scope of mutual trade exchange,
The Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Lithuania (hereinafter “the Parties”)
CONFIRMING their intention to participate actively in the process of economic integration
in
Europe and expressing their preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways and means t o
strengthen this process;
DECLARING their readiness to undertake activities with a view of promoting harmonious
development of their trade as well as expanding and diversifying their mutual cooperation in the
fields of joint interest, including fields not covered by this Agreement, thus creating a
framework
and supportive environment based on equality, non discrimination, and a balance of
rights and
obligations;
REFERRING to the mutual interest of the Parties in the continual reinforcement of the
multilateral trading system and considering that the provisions and instruments of the
General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (hereinafter “GATT 1994”) and the World Trade
Organization (hereinafter “WTO”) constitute a basis for their foreign trade policy;
RESOLVED to lay down for this purpose provisions aimed at the progressive abolition of
the
obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of these
instruments, in
particular those concerning the establishment of free trade areas;
DETERMINED to implement this Free Trade Agreement with the objective to preserve
and
protect the environment and to ensure an optimal use of natural resources in
accordance with
the principle of sustainable growth;
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the following Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement").
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. The Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area between them in accordance
with the
provisions of this Agreement and in conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and
the
other multilateral agreements on trade in goods annexed to the Agreement establishing
the
WTO.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
a) to increase and enhance the economic cooperation between the Parties and raise the
living standard of the population of the two countries;
b) to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods, including also the
agricultural products;
c) to promote, through the expansion of reciprocal trade, the harmonious development
of
the economic relations between the Parties;
d) to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Parties;
e) to contribute by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious development and
expansion of world trade.
ARTICLE 2
Classification of Goods
1. Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (HS) shall be applied to the
classification of goods.
2. For the commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall apply
their respective Customs Tariffs to the classification of goods for imports into their
customs teritory.
CHAPTER I
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 3
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products originating in the Parties falling
within
Chapters 25 to 97 of Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the
exception
of the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.
ARTICLE 4
Customs Duties on Imports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duty on imports
or
charge having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties.
2. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect on imports shall be abolished on
the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 5
Customs Duties of a Fiscal Nature
The provisions of Article 4 shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
ARTICLE 6
Customs Duties on Exports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duty on exports
or charge
having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties.
2. All customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect shall be abolished
between the Parties on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 7
Quantitative Restrictions on Imports and Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new quantitative restriction
on imports
or measure having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished between the Parties on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8
Quantitative Restrictions on Exports and Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new quantitative restriction
on exports
or measure having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished between the Parties on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 9
Technical Regulations
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to standards or technical regulations
and
related measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers t o
Trade.
2. Each Party, upon request of the other Party, shall provide information on particular
individual
cases of standards, technical regulations and related measures.
3. The Parties shall endavour to reduce technical barriers to trade. To this end the
Parties will
enter where appropriate into negotiations for the conclusion of the agreements on the
mutual
recognition in the field of conformity assessment, in the spirit of the recommendations
of the
WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
CHAPTER II
AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 1 0
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural and fishery products
originating in the
Parties.
2. The term "agricultural and fishery products" means for the purpose of this Agreement
the
products falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and
Coding System and the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.
ARTICLE 1 1
Exchange of Concessions
1. The Parties declare their readiness to foster, in so far as their agricultural policies
allow, the
harmonious development of trade in agricultural and fishery products and to discuss this
issue periodically within the Joint Committee.
2. For the achievement of this objective, the Parties shall grant each other the
concessions
specified in Protocol I, providing measures to promote the trade in agricultural and
fishery
products, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and those laid down in
Protocol I.
3. Taking into account the role of agriculture in their respective economies; the
development of
trade in agricultural and fishery products between the Parties; the high sensitivity of
agricultural products; the rules of their respective agricultural policies, the Parties shall
examine in the Joint Committee the possibilities of granting to each other further
concessions
in trade in agricultural and fishery products.
ARTICLE 1 2
Veterinary, Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
The Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary matters
in a
non-discriminatory manner and shall not introduce any new measure unduly obstructing
trade or
creating an arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade
between
them. The Parties shall apply their veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary measures in
conformity with the provisions of the relevant WTO agreements.
ARTICLE 1 3
Specific Safeguards
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Article 22, given
the
particular sensitivity of the agricultural and fishery products, if imports of products
originating in
the Party, which are the subject to concessions granted under this Agreement, cause
serious
disturbance to the markets of the other Party, both Parties shall enter into consultations
immediately to find an appropriate solution. Pending such a solution, the Party
concerned may
take the measures it deems necessary.
CHAPTER III
SERVICES AND INVESTMENTS
ARTICLE 1 4
Cooperation in the Field of Services and Investments
1. The Parties recognize the growing importance of certain areas, such as services and
investments. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden their co-operation, in
particular
in the context of the European integration, they will co-operate with the aim of achieving
a
progressive liberalization and mutual opening of their markets for investments and trade
in
services, taking into account relevant provisions of the General Agreement on Trade in
Services (GATS).
2. The Parties will discuss in the Joint Committee the possibilities of developing and
deepening
their relations in conformity with this Article.
CHAPTER IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1 5
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature
establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products of one
Party
and like products originating in the other Party.
2. Products exported to the territories of the Parties may not benefit from repayment of
internal
taxes in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxes imposed on them.
ARTICLE 1 6
Trade Relations Governed by Other Agreements
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs
unions, free
trade areas or arrangements for cross-border trade of the Parties with third countries t o
the
extent that these do not negatively affect the trade regime and in particular the
provisions
concerning rules of origin provided for by this Agreement.
2. Exchange of information shall take place, upon request of either Party, within the
Joint
Committee concerning agreements establishing such customs unions or free trade areas.
ARTICLE 1 7
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article
4 may
be taken by the Parties in the form of increased customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce
important social problems.
3. Customs duties on imports applicable in the Party to products originating in the other
Party
introduced by these measures may not exceed 25 % ad valorem and shall maintain an
element of preference for products originating in the other Party. The total value of
imports of
the products which are subject to these measures may not exceed 15 % of total
imports of
industrial products from the other Party as defined in Article 3, during the last year for
which
statistics are available.
4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding five years unless a longer
duration is authorized by the Joint Committee.
5. No such measures can be introduced in respect of a product if more than three years
have
elapsed since the elimination of all duties and quantitative restrictions or charges or
measures having an equivalent effect concerning that product.
6. The Parties shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures they intend
t o
take and, at the request of the Party, consultations shall be held in the Joint Committee
on
such measures and the sectors to which they apply before they are applied. When taking
such measures the Parties shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the
elimination of the customs duties introduced under this Article. This schedule shall
provide
for a phasing out of these duties starting at the latest two years after their introduction,
at
equal annual rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a different schedule.
ARTICLE 1 8
Dumping
If a Party finds that dumping, within the meaning of Article VI of GATT 1994 is taking
place in
trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures against
that
practice in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the rules established by the
WTO
agreements related to that Article, under the conditions and in accordance with the
procedures
laid down in Article 22 of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 1 9
Emergency Action on Imports of Particular Products
Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such
conditions as
to cause, or threaten to cause:
a) serious injury to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products, or
b) serious disturbances in any sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring
about
serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region,
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance
with the procedures laid down in Article 22.
ARTICLE 2 0
Re-export and Serious Shortage
Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 6 and 8 leads to:
a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party maintains for the
product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or
charges
having equivalent effect; or
b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to major
difficulties
for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions
and in
accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 22. The measures shall be
nondiscriminatory
and shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
ARTICLE 2 1
State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall progressively adjust any state monopoly of a commercial character
so as t o
ensure that by the end of the fourth year following the entry into force of this
Agreement, no
discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed
will
exist between nationals of the Parties.
2. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to implement this
objective.
ARTICLE 2 2
Procedure for the Application of Safeguard Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in
this Article
the Party shall inform the other Party. The Parties shall endeavor to solve any
differences
between them through direct consultations.
2. In cases specified in Articles 13, 18, 19, 20, 25, 26 and 34 a Party which is
considering t o
resort to safeguard measures shall promptly notify the Joint Committee thereof. The
Party
concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with all relevant information and the
assistance
required to examine the case. Consultations between the Parties shall take place without
delay in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
3. If, within one month of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the Party in
question
fails to put an end to the practice objected to or to the difficulties notified and in the
absence
of a decision by the Joint Committee on the matter, the concerned Party may adopt the
safeguard measures it considers necessary to remedy the situation.
4. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee.
They
shall be restricted, with regard to their extent and duration, to what is strictly necessary
in
order to rectify the situation giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of
the
damage caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given t o
such
measures that will least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject to regular consultations within the
Joint
Committee with a view to their relaxation, or abolition when conditions no longer justify
their
maintenance.
6. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 13, 18, 19, 20, 25, 26 and
3 4
apply forthwith the precautionary measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation.
The
measures shall be notified without delay to the Joint Committee and consultations
between
the Parties shall take place within the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 2 3
Rules of Origin and Cooperation between the Customs Administrations
1. Protocol II lays down the rules of origin and methods of administrative cooperation.
2. Protocol III determines the methods of assistance between the Parties in customs
matters.
ARTICLE 2 4
Payments
1. Any payment in freely convertible currency, arising from commercial exchanges
covered by
this Agreement and the transfers of such payments to the territory of the Party where
creditor
resides, shall be free from any restrictions.
2. The Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the grant,
repayment or acceptance of short and medium-term credits, related to trade in goods in
which a resident of a Party participates.
ARTICLE 2 5
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in so far
as
they may affect trade between the Parties:
a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territory of a Party
as a
whole or in substantial part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to the activities of all undertakings including
public
undertakings and undertakings to which the Parties grant special or exclusive rights.
Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest or
having
the character of a revenue-producing monopoly, shall be subject to provisions of
paragraph
1 in so far as the application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in
law
or fact, of the particular public tasks assigned to them.
3. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II the provisions stipulated in paragraph
1 (a)
shall not apply to such agreements, decisions and practices which form an integral part
of a
national market organization.
4. If a Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3
of this
Article or if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest
of
that Party or material injury to its domestic industry, the Party concerned may take
appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid
down
in Article 22.
ARTICLE 2 6
State Aid
1. Any aid granted by a Party or through state resources in any form whatsoever which
distorts
or threatens to distort competition by favoring certain undertakings or the production of
certain goods shall, in so far as it may affect trade between the Parties, be incompatible
with
the proper functioning of this Agreement.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to products referred to in Chapter II.
3. The Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid, in accordance with the
provisions of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and the
WTO/GATT
1994 and either Party, upon request of the other Party, will provide information on aid
schemes and on particular individual cases of state aid.
4. If a Party considers that a particular practice:
- is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1, and
- causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Party or material
injury to its domestic industry,
it may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the
provisions
laid down in Article 22. Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with
the
procedures and under the conditions laid down in the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade
1994 and by the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization, in particular by
the
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing measures, and any other relevant instrument
negotiated under their auspices which are applicable between the Parties.
ARTICLE 2 7
Balance of Payments Difficulties
Where either Party is in a serious balance of payments difficulties or under threat
thereof, the
Party concerned may in accordance with the conditions laid down within the framework
of
WTO/GATT 1994 and with Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of International
Monetary
Fund, adopt restrictive measures, which shall be of limited duration and may not go
beyond what
is necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The Party concerned shall
inform the
other Party forthwith of their introduction and present to the other Party, as soon as
possible, a
time schedule of their removal.
ARTICLE 2 8
Intellectual, Industrial and Commercial Property
1. The Parties shall provide suitable and effective protection of intellectual, industrial and
commercial property rights in line with WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) and other international Agreements. This shall
encompass effective means of enforcing such rights.
2. Implementation of this Article shall be regularly assessed by the Parties. If difficulties
which
affect trade arise in connection with intellectual, industrial and commercial property
rights,
either Party may request urgent consultations to find mutually satisfactory solutions.
ARTICLE 2 9
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the opening up of the award of public contracts on the basis of
nondiscrimination
and reciprocity, to be a desirable objective.
2. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, both Parties shall grant each other’s
companies
access to contract award procedures a treatment no less favorable than that accorded
t o
companies of any other country.
ARTICLE 3 0
Establishment of the Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which the Parties shall be represented. The
Joint
Committee shall be responsible for the administration of this Agreement and shall ensure
its
proper implementation.
2. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall
exchange
information and, at the request of either Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint
Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further
removal of
the obstacles to trade between the Parties.
3. The Joint Committee may, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article
31, take
decisions in cases provided for in this Agreement. On other matters the Joint Committee
may
make recommendations.
ARTICLE 3 1
Procedures of the Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet at
an
appropriate level whenever necessary upon request but at least once a year. Either Party
may request a meeting be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall decide by concensus.
3. If a representative of a Party in the Joint Committee has accepted a decision subject
t o
reservation of the fulfillment of constitutional requirements the decision shall enter into
force,
if no later date is contained therein, on the date of the receipt of the written notification
stating
that such requirements have been fulfilled.
4. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working groups
as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
ARTICLE 3 2
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties from taking any measures which
they
consider necessary:
a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to their essential security interests;
b) for the protection of their essential security interests or for the implementation of
international
obligations or national policies:
i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in
other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose
of supplying a military establishment; or
ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices; or
iii) in time of war or other serious international tension constituting threat of war.
ARTICLE 3 3
General Exceptions
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or
goods in
transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the
protection of
health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures
possessing
artistic, historic or archaeological value; the protection of intellectual, industrial and
commercial
property. Such prohibitions or restrictions must not, however, constitute a means of
arbitrary
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 3 4
Fulfillment of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the
objectives of
this Agreement and the fulfillment of their obligations under this Agreement.
2. If either Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation under
this
Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the
conditions
and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 22 of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 3 5
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where either Party considers that it would be useful and in the interest of the
economies of
the Parties to develop the relations established by this Agreement by extending them t o
fields
not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Party. The Parties
may
instruct the Joint Committee to examine this request and, where appropriate, to make
recommendations to them, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 shall be subject
t o
ratification or approval by the Parties to this Agreement in accordance with their
national
legislation.
ARTICLE 3 6
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement, as well as to its Annexes and Protocols, shall enter into
force
on the first day of the second month following the receipt of the later written
notification through
diplomatic channels, by which the Parties inform each other that all necessary
requirements
foreseen by their national legislation for the entry into force of this Agreement, have
been
fulfilled.
ARTICLE 3 7
Protocols and Annexes
Protocols and Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. The Joint
Committee may decide to amend the Protocols and Annexes in accordance with the
national
legislation of the Parties.
ARTICLE 3 8
Duration and Termination
1. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Either party may denounce this Agreement by a written notification to the other
Party. The
denunciation shall take effect on the first day of the seventh month following the date
on
which the other Party received the denunciation notice.
3. The Parties agree that in case of accession of either Party to the European Union, the
Agreement shall be terminated without compensation to the other Party.
ARTICLE 3 9
Entry into Force
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month, following the
date of
the receipt of the later written notification through diplomatic channels, by which the
Parties
inform each other that all necessary requirements foreseen by their national legislation
for the
entry into force of this Agreement, have been fulfilled.
DONE at ………, this.....day of ………, in two originals each in the Croatian, Lithuanian,
and
English languages, all texts being equally authentic. In case of any divergence in the
interpretation of this Agreement, the English text shall prevail.
For the Republic of Croatia For the Republic of Lithuania

ANNEX TEXT:


PROTOCOL II
CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF
"ORIGINATING PRODUCTS" AND
METHODS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1 Definitions
TITLE II DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
Article 2 General requirements
Article 3 Cumulation in Croatia
Article 4 Cumulation in Lithuania
Article 5 Wholly obtained products
Article 6 Sufficiently worked or processed products
Article 7 Insufficient working or processing
Article 8 Unit of qualification
Article 9 Accessories, spare parts and tools
Article 10 Sets
Article 11 Neutral elements
TITLE III TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Article 12 Principle of territoriality
Article 13 Direct transport
Article 14 Exhibitions
TITLE IV DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
Article 15 Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
TITLE V PROOF OF ORIGIN
Article 16 General requirements
Article 17 Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1
Article 18 Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
Article 19 Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
Article 20 Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin
issued or made out previously
Article 20a Accounting segregation
Article 21 Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
Article 22 Approved exporter
Article 23 Validity of proof of origin
Article 24 Submission of proof of origin
Article 25 Importation by instalments
Article 26 Exemptions from proof of origin
Article 27 Supporting documents
Article 28 Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
Article 29 Discrepancies and formal errors
Article 30 Amounts expressed in euro
TITLE VI ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
Article 31 Mutual assistance
Article 32 Verification of proofs of origin
Article 33 Dispute settlement
Article 34 Penalties
Article 35 Free zones
2
TITLE VII FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 36 Annexes
Article 37 Goods in transit or storage
List of Annexes
Annex I: Introductory notes to the list in Annex II
Annex II: List of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating
materials in order that
the product manufactured can obtain originating status
Annex III: Specimens of movement certificate EUR.1 and application for a movement
certificate EUR.1
Annex IV: Text of the invoice declaration
3
TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
a) "manufacture" means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific
operations;
b) "material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the
manufacture of the product;
c) "product" means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use
in another manufacturing
operation;
d) "goods" means both materials and products;
e) "customs value" means the value as determined in accordance with the Agreement
on implementation of
Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (WTO Agreement on
customs valuation);
f) "ex-works price" means the price paid for the product ex works to the manufacturer in
Croatia or in Lithuania in
whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price
includes the value of all the
materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product
obtained is exported;
g) "value of materials" means the customs value at the time of importation of the nonoriginating materials used, or,
if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the
materials in Croatia or in
Lithuania;
h) "value of originating materials" means the value of such materials as defined in (g)
applied mutatis mutandis;
i) "value added" shall be taken to be the ex-works price minus the customs value of
each of the materials
incorporated which originate in the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 or,
where the customs value is
not known or cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials
in Croatia or in Lithuania;
j) "chapters" and "headings" mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes)
used in the nomenclature which
makes up the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, referred to in this
Protocol as "the
Harmonized System" or "HS";
k) "classified" refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular
heading;
l) "consignment" means products which are either sent simultaneously from one
exporter to one consignee or
covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter t o
the consignee or, in the
absence of such a document, by a single invoice;
m) "territories" includes territorial waters.
TITLE II
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
ARTICLE 2
General requirements
1. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be
considered as originating in
Croatia:
a) products wholly obtained in Croatia within the meaning of Article 5;
b) products obtained in Croatia incorporating materials which have not been wholly
obtained there, provided that
such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in Croatia within the
meaning of Article 6;
2. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be
considered as originating in
Lithuania:
a) products wholly obtained in Lithuania within the meaning of Article 5;
b) products obtained in Lithuania incorporating materials which have not been wholly
obtained there, provided
that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in Lithuania within
the meaning of
Article 6.
ARTICLE 3
Cumulation in Croatia
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2 (1), products shall be considered as
originating in Croatia if such
products are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in Lithuania, Bulgaria,
Switzerland (including
4
Liechtenstein)1, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Iceland, Croatia, Latvia, Norway,
Poland, Romania,
Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, Turkey or in the European Community in accordance with
the provisions of the
Protocol on rules of origin annexed to the Agreements between Croatia and each of
these countries, provided
that the working or processing carried out in Croatia goes beyond the operations
referred to in Article 7. It shall
not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing.
2. Where the working or processing carried out in Croatia does not go beyond the
operations referred to in Article 7,
the product obtained shall be considered as originating in Croatia only where the value
added there is greater
than the value of the materials used originating in any one of the other countries
referred to in paragraph 1. If this
is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country which
accounts for the highest
value of originating materials used in the manufacture in Croatia.
3. Products, originating in one of the countries referred to in paragraph 1, which do not
undergo any working or
processing in Croatia, retain their origin if exported into Lithuania.
4. The cumulation provided for in this Article may only be applied to materials and
products, which have acquired
originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those given in this
Protocol.
Croatia shall provide Lithuania with details of the Agreements and their corresponding
rules of origin, which are
applied with the other countries referred to in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 4
Cumulation in Lithuania
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2), products shall be considered as
originating in Lithuania if such
products are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in Croatia, Bulgaria,
Switzerland (including
Liechtenstein)1, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Iceland, Lithuania, Latvia,
Norway, Poland, Romania,
Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, Turkey or in the European Community in accordance with
the provisions of the
Protocol on rules of origin annexed to the Agreements between Lithuania and each of
these countries, provided
that the working or processing carried out in Lithuania goes beyond the operations
referred to in Article 7. It shall
not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing.
2. Where the working or processing carried out in Lithuania does not go beyond the
operations referred to in Article
7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in Lithuania only where the
value added there is
greater than the value of the materials used originating in any one of the other countries
referred to in paragraph
1. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country
which accounts for the
highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in Lithuania.
3. Products, originating in one of the countries referred to in paragraph 1, which do not
undergo any working or
processing in Lithuania, retain their origin if exported into Croatia.
4. The cumulation provided for in this Article may only be applied to materials and
products, which have acquired
originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those given in this
Protocol.
5. Lithuania shall provide Croatia with details of the Agreements and their corresponding
rules of origin, which are
applied with the other countries referred to in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 5
Wholly obtained products
1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in Croatia or in Lithuania:
a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed;
1 The Principality of Liechtenstein has a customs union with Switzerland, and is a
Contracting Party to the
Agreement on the European Economic Area.
1 The Principality of Liechtenstein has a customs union with Switzerland, and is a
Contracting Party to the
Agreement on the European Economic Area.
5
b) vegetable products harvested there;
c) live animals born and raised there;
d) products from live animals raised there;
e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;
f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the territorial
waters of Croatia or of
Lithuania by their vessels;
g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in (f);
h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including used
tyres fit only for
retreading or for use as waste;
i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;
j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside their territorial waters provided
that they have sole
rights to work that soil or subsoil;
k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in (a) to (j).
2. The terms "their vessels" and "their factory ships" in paragraph 1(f) and (g) shall
apply only to vessels and
factory ships:
a) which are registered or recorded in Croatia or in Lithuania;
b) which sail under the flag of Croatia or of Lithuania;
c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50 per cent by nationals of Croatia or of
Lithuania, or by a company
with its head office in one of these States, of which the manager or managers, Chairman
of the Board of
Directors or the Supervisory Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are
nationals of Croatia
or of Lithuania and of which, in addition, in the case of partnerships or limited
companies, at least half the
capital belongs to those States or to public bodies or nationals of the said States;
d) of which the master and officers are nationals of Croatia or of Lithuania;
and
e) of which at least 75 per cent of the crew are nationals of Croatia or of Lithuania.
ARTICLE 6
Sufficiently worked or processed products
1. For the purposes of Article 2, products, which are not wholly obtained are considered
to be sufficiently worked or
processed when the conditions set out in the list in Annex II are fulfilled.
The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by the Agreement,
the working or processing,
which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply
only in relation to such
materials. It follows that if a product which has acquired originating status by fulfilling
the conditions set out in the
list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the
product in which it is
incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating
materials which may have
been used in its manufacture.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the
conditions set out in the list,
should not be used in the manufacture of a product may nevertheless be used, provided
that:
a) their total value does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the product;
b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating
materials are not exceeded
through the application of this paragraph.
This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the
Harmonized System.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply subject to the provisions of Article 7.
6
ARTICLE 7
Insufficient working or processing
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as
insufficient working or
processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements
of Article 6 are satisfied:
a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during
transport and storage;
b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;
c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
d) ironing or pressing of textiles;
e) simple painting and polishing operations;
f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;
g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;
h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;
i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching; (including the making-up of
sets of articles);
k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards
and all other simple
packaging operations;
l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products
or their packaging;
m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds,
n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of
products into parts;
o) a combination of two or more operations specified in (a) to (n);
p) slaughter of animals.
2. All operations carried out either in Croatia or in Lithuania on a given product shall be
considered together when
determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be
regarded as insufficient within
the meaning of paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 8
Unit of qualification
1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall be
the particular product, which
is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of
the Harmonized
System.
It follows that:
a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the
terms of the Harmonized
System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification;
b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the
same heading of the
Harmonized System, each product must be taken individually when applying the
provisions of this Protocol.
2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonized System, packaging is included with
the product for
classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.
ARTICLE 9
Accessories, spare parts and tools
7
Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine,
apparatus or vehicle, which are
part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not
separately invoiced, shall be regarded
as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.
ARTICLE 1 0
Sets
Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded as
originating when all component
products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and nonoriginating products, the set as
a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating
products does not exceed
15 per cent of the ex-works price of the set.
ARTICLE 1 1
Neutral elements
In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary t o
determine the origin of the following,
which might be used in its manufacture:
a) energy and fuel;
b) plant and equipment;
c) machines and tools;
d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final
composition of the product.
TITLE III
TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 1 2
Principle of territoriality
1. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4 and paragraph 3 of this Article, the
conditions for acquiring originating
status set out in Title II must be fulfilled without interruption in Croatia or in Lithuania.
2. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4, where originating goods exported from
Croatia or from Lithuania t o
another country return, they must be considered as non-originating, unless it can be
demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
a) the returning goods are the same as those exported;
and
b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in
good condition while in
that country or while being exported.
3. The acquisition of originating status in accordance with the conditions set out in Title
II shall not be affected by
working or processing done outside Croatia or Lithuania on materials exported from
Croatia or from Lithuania
and subsequently re-imported there, provided:
a) the said materials are wholly obtained in Croatia or in Lithuania or have undergone
working or processing
beyond the operations referred to in Article 7 prior to being exported;
and
b) it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(i) the re-imported goods have been obtained by working or processing the exported
materials;
i)
and
ii) the total added value acquired outside Croatia or Lithuania by applying the provisions
of this Article
does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the end product for which
originating status is
claimed.
8
4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the conditions for acquiring originating status set
out in Title II shall not apply t o
working or processing done outside Croatia or Lithuania. But where, in the list in Annex
II, a rule setting a
maximum value for all the non-originating materials incorporated is applied in
determining the originating status
of the end product, the total value of the non-originating materials incorporated in the
territory of the party
concerned, taken together with the total added value acquired outside Croatia or
Lithuania by applying the
provisions of this Article, shall not exceed the stated percentage.
5. For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4, 'total added value'
shall be taken to mean all
costs arising outside Croatia or Lithuania, including the value of the materials
incorporated there.
6. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which do not fulfil
the conditions set out in the
list in Annex II or which can be considered sufficiently worked or processed only if the
general tolerance fixed in
Article 6(2) is applied.
7. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products of Chapters 50 t o
63 of the Harmonized System
8. Any working or processing of the kind covered by the provisions of this Article and
done outside Croatia or
Lithuania shall be done under the outward processing arrangements, or similar
arrangements.
ARTICLE 1 3
Direct transport
1. The preferential treatment provided for under the Agreement applies only t o
products, satisfying the
requirements of this Protocol, which are transported directly between Croatia and
Lithuania or through the
territories of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4. However, products
constituting one single
consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion
arise, trans-shipment or
temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they remain under the
surveillance of the customs
authorities in the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other
than unloading,
reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition.
Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of
Croatia or Lithuania.
2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be
supplied to the customs
authorities of the importing country by the production of:
a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting country
through the country of transit;
or
b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:
(i) giving an exact description of the products;
(ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable,
the names of the
ships, or the other means of transport used;
and
(iii)certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or
c) failing these, any substantiating documents.
ARTICLE 1 4
Exhibitions
1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in a country other than Croatia and Lithuania
and sold after the exhibition
for importation in Croatia or in Lithuania shall benefit on importation from the provisions
of the Agreement
provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
a) an exporter has consigned these products from Croatia or from Lithuania to the
country in which the
exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;
b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in
Croatia or in Lithuania;
c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in
the state in which they
were sent for exhibition;
9
and
d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any
purpose other than
demonstration at the exhibition.
2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of
Title V and submitted to the
customs authorities of the importing country in the normal manner. The name and
address of the exhibition must
be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the
conditions under which they
have been exhibited may be required.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or
similar public show or
display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a
view to the sale of
foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs control.
TITLE IV
DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
ARTICLE 1 5
Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
1. Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in Croatia or
in Lithuania for which a
proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V shall
not be subject in Croatia or
in Lithuania to drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.
2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund, remission or
non-payment, partial or
complete, of customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect, applicable in Croatia
or in Lithuania t o
materials used in the manufacture, where such refund, remission or non-payment
applies, expressly or in effect,
when products obtained from the said materials are exported and not when they are
retained for home use there.
3. The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit at
any time, upon request from
the customs authorities, all appropriate documents proving that no drawback has been
obtained in respect of the
non-originating materials used in the manufacture of the products concerned and that all
customs duties or
charges having equivalent effect applicable to such materials have actually been paid.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging within the
meaning of Article 8(2),
accessories, spare parts and tools within the meaning of Article 9 and products in a set
within the meaning of
Article 10 when such items are non-originating.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials, which are
of the kind to which the
Agreement applies. Furthermore, they shall not preclude the application of an export
refund system for agricultural
products, applicable upon export in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement.
TITLE V
PROOF OF ORIGIN
ARTICLE 1 6
General requirements
1. Products originating in Croatia shall, on importation into Lithuania and products
originating in Lithuania shall, on
importation into Croatia benefit from the Agreement upon submission of either:
a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III; or
b) in the cases specified in Article 21(1), a declaration, subsequently referred to as the
"invoice declaration",
given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document
which describes the
products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified; the text of the
invoice declaration
appears in Annex IV.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol
shall, in the cases
specified in Article 26, benefit from the Agreement without it being necessary to submit
any of the documents
referred to above.
ARTICLE 1 7
Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1
1 0
1. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the
exporting country on application
having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by
his authorised
representative.
2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out both the
movement certificate EUR.1
and the application form, specimens of which appear in Annex III. These forms shall be
completed in one of the
languages in which this Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of
the domestic law of the
exporting country. If they are hand-written, they shall be completed in ink in printed
characters. The description
of the products must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any
blank lines. Where the box
is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the
description, the empty space
being crossed through.
3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be prepared
to submit at any time, at
the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country where the movement
certificate EUR.1 is issued,
all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as
well as the fulfilment of the
other requirements of this Protocol.
4. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of Croatia or
of Lithuania if the
products concerned can be considered as products originating in Croatia, in Lithuania or
in one of the other
countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this
Protocol.
3. “Remarks” box of the movement ceritificate EUR.1 issued in the cases set out in
Articles 3 and 4 shall contain
the remark:
4. “....................... cumulation”
5. (name of country(ies))
6. The customs authorities issuing movement certificates EUR.1 shall take any steps
necessary to verify the
originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this
Protocol. For this purpose,
they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the
exporter's accounts or any
other check considered appropriate. They shall also ensure that the forms referred to in
paragraph 2 are duly
completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description
of the products has
been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
7. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in Box 11 of
the certificate.
8. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made
available to the exporter as
soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.
ARTICLE 1 8
Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 17(7), a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be
issued after exportation of the
products to which it relates if:
a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary
omissions or special
circumstances;
or
b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement
certificate EUR.1 was issued
but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.
2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application
the place and date of
exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and state
the reasons for his
request.
3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only
after verifying that the
information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the corresponding
file.
4. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively must be endorsed with one of the
following phrases:
HR “NAKNADNO IZDANO”
LT "I_DUOTAS PO EKSPORTAVIMO"
EN "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY"
5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of
the movement certificate
EUR.1.
1 1
ARTICLE 1 9
Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the
exporter may apply to the customs
authorities, which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export
documents in their possession.
2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with one of the following words:
HR “DUPLIKAT”
LT "DUBLIKATAS"
EN "DUPLICATE"
3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of
the duplicate movement
certificate EUR.1.
4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate
EUR.1, shall take effect as
from that date.
ARTICLE 2 0
Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a
proof of origin issued or made out previously
When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in Croatia or
in Lithuania, it shall be
possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates
EUR.1 for the purpose of sending
all or some of these products elsewhere within Croatia or Lithuania. The replacement
movement certificate(s) EUR.1
shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.
ARTICLE 20a
Accounting segregation
1. Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks of
originating and nonoriginating
materials, which are identical and interchangeable, the customs authorities may, at the
written request
of those concerned, authorise the so-called "accounting segregation" method to be used
for managing such
stocks.
2. This method must be able to ensure that, for a specific reference-period, the number
of products obtained which
could be considered as "originating" is the same as that which would have been obtained
if there had been
physical segregation of the stocks.
3. The customs authorities may grant such authorisation, subject to any conditions
deemed appropriate.
4. This method is recorded and applied on the basis of the general accounting principles
applicable in the country
where the product was manufactured.
5. The beneficiary of this facilitation may issue or apply for proofs of origin, as the case
may be, for the quantity of
products, which may be considered as originating. At the request of the customs
authorities, the beneficiary shall
provide a statement of how the quantities have been managed.
6. The customs authorities shall monitor the use made of the authorisation and may
withdraw it at any time
whenever the beneficiary makes improper use of the authorisation in any manner
whatsoever or fails to fulfil any
of the other conditions laid down in this Protocol.
ARTICLE 2 1
Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
1. An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 16(1)(b) may be made out:
a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 22,
or
b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing
originating products
whose total value does not exceed EUR 6,000.
1 2
2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered
as products originating in
Croatia, in Lithuania or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and
fulfil the other
requirements of this Protocol.
3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any
time, at the request of the
customs authorities of the exporting country, all appropriate documents proving the
originating status of the
products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or
printing on the invoice, the
delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration, the text of which
appears in Annex IV, using one
of the linguistic versions set out in that Annex and in accordance with the provisions of
the domestic law of the
exporting country. If the declaration is hand-written, it shall be written in ink in printed
characters.
5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript.
However, an approved
exporter within the meaning of Article 22 shall not be required to sign such declarations
provided that he gives
the customs authorities of the exporting country a written undertaking that he accepts
full responsibility for any
invoice declaration, which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.
6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which
it relates are exported, or
after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing country no longer
than two years after the
importation of the products to which it relates.
ARTICLE 2 2
Approved exporter
1. The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorise any exporter,
hereinafter referred to as
'approved exporter', who makes frequent shipments of products under this Agreement
to make out invoice
declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking
such authorisation must
offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify
the originating status of the
products as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any
conditions, which they
consider appropriate.
3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation
number, which shall
appear on the invoice declaration.
4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved
exporter.
5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so
where the approved
exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, no longer fulfils the
conditions referred to in
paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorisation.
ARTICLE 2 3
Validity of proof of origin
1. A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the exporting
country, and must be
submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing country.
2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing
country after the final date for
presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of applying
preferential treatment, where
the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional
circumstances.
3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing
country may accept the proofs of
origin where the products have been submitted before the said final date.
ARTICLE 2 4
Submission of proof of origin
Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country
in accordance with the
procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require a translation of a
proof of origin and may also
require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer t o
the effect that the products meet
the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement.
1 3
ARTICLE 2 5
Importation by instalments
Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs
authorities of the importing
country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a)
of the Harmonized System
falling within Sections XVI and XVII or headings 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonized
System are imported by
instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs
authorities upon importation of
the first instalment.
ARTICLE 2 6
Exemptions from proof of origin
1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming
part of travellers' personal
luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a
proof of origin, provided
that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting
the requirements of this
Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the
case of products sent by
post, this declaration can be made on the customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a
sheet of paper annexed t o
that document.
2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of
the recipients or travellers or
their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the
nature and quantity of the
products that no commercial purpose is in view.
3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the case
of small packages or
EUR 1,200 in the case of products forming part of travellers' personal luggage.
ARTICLE 2 7
Supporting documents
The documents referred to in Articles 17(3) and 21(3) used for the purpose of proving
that products covered by a
movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice declaration can be considered as products
originating in Croatia, in
Lithuania or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the
other requirements of this Protocol
may consist inter alia of the following:
a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the
goods concerned, contained
for example in his accounts or internal book-keeping;
b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in
Croatia or in Lithuania where
these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in Croatia or in Lithuania,
issued or made out in Croatia
or in Lithuania, where these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating status of
materials used, issued or
made out in Croatia or in Lithuania in accordance with this Protocol, or in one of the
other countries referred to in
Articles 3 and 4, in accordance with rules of origin which are identical to the rules in this
Protocol.
ARTICLE 2 8
Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at
least three years the
documents referred to in Article 17(3).
2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least three years a
copy of this invoice
declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 21(3).
3. The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement certificate
EUR.1 shall keep for at least
three years the application form referred to in Article 17(2).
4. The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep for at least three years
the movement
certificates EUR.1 and the invoice declarations submitted to them.
ARTICLE 2 9
1 4
Discrepancies and formal errors
1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of
origin and those made in the
documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the
formalities for importing the
products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly
established that this document
does correspond to the products submitted.
2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause this
document to be rejected if
these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the
statements made in this
document.
ARTICLE 3 0
Amounts expressed in euro
1. For the application of the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) and Article 26(3) in cases
where products are invoiced in a
currency other than euro, amounts in the national currencies of Croatia or Lithuania
equivalent to the amounts
expressed in euro shall be fixed annually by each of the countries concerned.
2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) or Article 26(3)
by reference to the currency in
which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the country concerned.
3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that
currency of the amounts
expressed in euro as at the first working day of October. The amounts shall be
communicated by 15 October and
shall apply from 1 January the following year.
4. A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its
national currency of an amount
expressed in euro. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount resulting
from the conversion by
more than 5 per cent. A country may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent
of an amount expressed
in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the
conversion of that amount, prior t o
any rounding-off, results in an increase of less than 15 per cent in the national currency
equivalent. The national
currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a
decrease in that equivalent
value.
5. The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee at the
request of Croatia or of
Lithuania. When carrying out this review, the Joint Committee shall consider the
desirability of preserving the
effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify
the amounts expressed in
euro.
TITLE VI
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
ARTICLE 3 1
Mutual assistance
1. The customs authorities of Croatia and of Lithuania shall provide each other with
specimen impressions of
stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of movement certificates EUR.1 and
with the addresses of the
customs authorities responsible for verifying those certificates and invoice declarations.
2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, Croatia and Lithuania shall
assist each other, through
the competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement
certificates EUR.1 or the
invoice declarations and the correctness of the information given in these documents.
ARTICLE 3 2
Verification of proofs of origin
1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or
whenever the customs authorities of
the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents,
the originating status of
the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs
authorities of the importing country
shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and the invoice, if it has been submitted,
the invoice declaration, or
a copy of these documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving,
where appropriate, the
reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the
information given on the
proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.
1 5
3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting
country. For this purpose, they
shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the
exporter's accounts or any
other check considered appropriate.
4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of
preferential treatment to the
products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products
shall be offered to the
importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.
5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of
this verification as soon as
possible. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and
whether the products
concerned can be considered as products originating in Croatia, in Lithuania or in one of
the other countries
referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten months of the date of the
verification request or if the
reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the
document in question or the real
origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional
circumstances, refuse
entitlement to the preferences.
ARTICLE 3 3
Dispute settlement
Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 32, which
cannot be settled between the
customs authorities requesting verification and the customs authorities responsible for
carrying out this verification or
where they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be
submitted to the Joint Committee.
In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs
authorities of the importing country shall
be under the legislation of the said country.
ARTICLE 3 4
Penalties
Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a
document, which contains
incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for products.
ARTICLE 3 5
Free zones
1. Croatia and Lithuania shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products traded
under cover of a proof of
origin which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory, are not
substituted by other
goods and do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent
their deterioration.
2. By means of an exemption to the provisions contained in paragraph 1, when products
originating in Croatia or in
Lithuania are imported into a free zone under cover of a proof of origin and undergo
treatment or processing, the
authorities concerned shall issue a new movement certificate EUR.1 at the exporter's
request, if the treatment or
processing undergone is in conformity with the provisions of this Protocol.
TITLE VII
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 3 6
Annexes
The Annexes to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.
ARTICLE 3 7
Goods in transit or storage
The provisions of the Agreement may be applied to goods which comply with the
provisions of this Protocol and which
on the date of entry into force of the Agreement are either in the transit or are in
Croatia or Lithuania in temporary
storage in bonded warehouses or in free zones, subject to the submission to the
customs authorities on importation
into Croatia or Lithuania, within four months of that date, of the proof of origin issued
retrospectively together with the
documents showing that the goods have been transported directly.
_
PROTOCOL III
REGARDING MUTUAL ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS
ARTICLE 1
Definitions
For the purpose of this Protocol:
a) “customs legislation” shall mean laws and regulations applicable in the territories of
the
states of the Parties governing the import, export, transit of goods or any other
customs
procedure including measures of prohibition, restriction and control;
b) “customs duties” shall mean all duties, taxes, fees and other charges which are levied
and
collected in the territories of the states of the Parties, in application of customs
legislation,
but not including fees and charges which are limited in amount to the approximate costs
of
services rendered;
c) “offence” shall mean any breach or attempted breach of customs legislation;
d) “applicant authority” shall mean the customs authority that requests assistance;
e) “requested authority” shall mean the customs authority from which assistance is
requested;
f) “customs authority” shall mean in the Republic of Croatia – Customs Directorate under
the
Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Croatia and in the Republic of Lithuania – the
Customs
Department under the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Lithuania.
ARTICLE 2
Scope of the Protocol
1. The Parties shall assist each other, in the manner and under the conditions laid down
in this
Protocol, in ensuring that customs legislation is correctly applied, in particular by the
prevention, detection and investigation of offences to this legislation.
2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall be rendered in
accordance with the legislation in force in the territory of the state of the requested
Party and
within the competence and resources of the requested authority. If necessary, the
requested
authority can arrange for assistance to be provided by another authority, in accordance
with
the legislation in force in the territory of the state of the requested Party. This Protocol
shall
not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in the field of crime investigations.
ARTICLE 3
Assistance on Request
1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall provide, t o
the extent
of its legal means, all relevant information to ensure that customs legislation is correctly
applied, including information regarding information regarding operations carried out or
planned which breach or would breach such legislation.
2. Upon request, the customs authorities shall inform each other whether goods
exported from
the territory of the state of one Party have been legally imported into the territory of
the state
of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the
goods.
At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall take the
necessary
steps to ensure that the surveillance is kept on:
a) natural or legal persons known or suspected of committing offences, particularly
those
moving into and out of the territory of the requested Party;
b) movements of goods known or suspected as giving rise to substantial illicit traffic t o
or
from its territory;
c) means of transport known or suspected of being used for committing offences
against
the customs legislation in force in the territory of the other Party.
ARTICLE 4
Spontaneous Assistance
The Parties shall provide each other with assistance, in accordance with the laws and
regulations, if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs
legislation, particularly when they obtain information pertaining to:
a) operations which have breached, breach or would breach the customs legislation and
which
may be of interest to the other Party;
b) new means or methods employed in realizing such operations;
c) goods known to be subject to serious offences to customs legislation.
ARTICLE 5
Delivery/Notification
At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, in accordance
with the
legislation in force on the territory of the state of the requested Party, deliver all
documents and
notify decisions issued by the applicant authority falling within the scope of this Protocol
to an
addressee, residing or established in its territory. In such case Article 6 (3) is applicable.
ARTICLE 6
Form and Substance of Requests for Assistance
1. Requests pursuant to the present Protocol shall be made in writing. Documents
necessary
for the execution of such requests shall accompany the request. When required because
of
the urgency of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in
writing
immediately.
2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall include the following
information:
a) the name of the applicant authority transmitting the request;
b) the measure requested;
c) the object of and the reason for the request;
d) the laws, regulations and other relevant legal acts;
e) indications as exact and comprehensive as possible on the natural or legal persons
being
the target of the investigations;
f) a summary of the relevant facts, except in cases provided for in Article 5.
3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the requested authority, in
English, or
in a language acceptable to such authority.
4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements, its correction or completion may
be
demanded.
5. The documents provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article may be replaced by
computerized
information produced in any form for the same purpose. All relevant information for the
implementation or utilization of the material should be supplied at the same time.
ARTICLE 7
Execution of Requests
1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority, or, when
the latter
cannot act on its own, another competent authority to which the request has been
addressed
by the requested authority, shall proceed, within its competence and available resources,
as
though it were acting on its own account or at the request of the other authorities of
that
same Party, by supplying information already possessed, by carrying out appropriate
inquiries or by arranging for them to be carried out.
2. Requests for assistance will be executed in accordance with the laws and other legal
instruments of the requested Party.
3. Dully authorized officials of one of the Parties may, with the agreement of the other
Party
involved and within the conditions laid down by the latter, obtain from the offices of the
requested authority or other authority for which the requested authority is responsible,
information relating to the offence to customs legislation which the applicant authority
needs
for the purposes of this Protocol.
4. Officials of one of the Parties may, with the agreement of the other Party involved
and within
the conditions laid down by the latter, be present at inquiries carried out in the latter’s
state
territory. They shall not have the right to perform any legal proceedings.
ARTICLE 8
Exceptions from the Obligation to Provide Assistance
1. The Parties may refuse to provide assistance, to provide it partially or subject t o
certain
conditions or requirements of this Protocol, where to do so would:
a) be likely to prejudice sovereignty, public order, security or other essential interests of
the
requested Party; or
b) involve violation of an industrial, commercial or professional secret.
2. If the applicant authority asks for assistance which it itself would be unable to provide
if so
asked, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. Compliance with such a request
shall
be at the discretion of the requested authority.
3. If assistance is postponed or denied, reasons for the denial or postponement shall be
notified
to the applicant authority without delay.
ARTICLE 9
Obligation to Observe Confidentiality
1. Information, documents and other communications received under this Protocol shall
not be
used for purposes other than those specified in this Protocol, without the written
consent of
the customs authority, which has furnished them.
2. Any information communicated in whatever form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of
a
confidential nature. It shall be covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shall
enjoy the
protection extended to the same kind of information and documents under the
legislation in
force in the territory of the state of the Party, which received it.
3. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not impede the use of information in any judicial or
administrative proceedings subsequently instituted for failure to comply with customs
legislation.
ARTICLE 1 0
Use of Information
The requested authority shall communicate results of inquiries to the applicant authority
in the
form of reports, records of evidence or certified copies of documents. Original files and
documents shall be requested only in cases where certified copies would be insufficient.
Files
and documents, which have been transmitted, shall be returned at the earliest
opportunity.
ARTICLE 1 1
Experts and Witnesses
The requested authority of one Party may authorize its officials upon request of the
applicant
authority of the other Party, to appear as experts or witnesses in judicial or
administrative
proceedings relating to the scope covered by the present Protocol in the territory of the
state of
the other Party.
ARTICLE 1 2
Assistance Expenses
The Parties shall waive all claims for the reimbursement of costs incurred in the
execution of this
Protocol, with the exception of expenses for experts, witnesses, interpreters and
translators who
are not public employees.
ARTICLE 1 3
Implementation
1. The management of this Protocol shall be entrusted to the Customs Department
under the
Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Lithuania and the Customs Directorate under the
Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Croatia. They shall decide on practical measures
and
arrangements necessary for the application of this Protocol, taking into consideration
rules in
the field of data protection.
2. The customs authorities of the Parties may arrange for their respective services to be
in
direct communication with each other.