1
 REVISED INDO-NEPAL
TREATY OF TRADE
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA NEW DELHI
Oct 2009 
2
REVISED TREATY OF TRADE BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF NEPAL
The Government of India and the Government of Nepal (hereinafter referred
to as the Contracting Parties),
Being conscious of the need to fortify the traditional connection between the
markets of the two countries,
Being animated by the desire to strengthen economic cooperation between
them,
Impelled by the urge to develop their economies for their several and mutual
benefit, and
Convinced of the benefits of mutual sharing of scientific and technical
knowledge and experience to promote mutual trade,
Have resolved to conclude a Treaty of Trade in order to expand trade
between their respective territories and encourage collaboration in economic
development, and
Have for this purpose appointed as their Plenipotentiaries the following
persons, namely,

 For the Government of India

(Anand Sharma)
Commerce and
Industry Minister

For the Government of Nepal
 (Rajendra Mahto)
Minister of Commerce and
Supplies
Who, having exchanged their full powers and found them good and in due
form, have agreed as follows:
 
3

ARTICLE I
The Contracting Parties shall explore and undertake all measures, including
technical cooperation, to promote, facilitate, expand and diversify trade
between their two countries.
ARTICLE II
The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to grant maximum facilities and to
undertake all necessary measures for the free and unhampered flow of
goods, needed by one country from the other, to and from their respective
territories.
ARTICLE III
Both the Contracting Parties shall accord unconditionally to each other
treatment no less favourable than that accorded to any third country with
respect to (a) customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on or in
connection with importation and exportation, and (b) import regulations
including quantitative restrictions.
ARTICLE IV
The Contracting Parties agree, on a reciprocal basis, to exempt from basic
customs duty as well as from quantitative restrictions the import of such
primary products as may be mutually agreed upon, from each other.
ARTICLE V
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article III and subject to such exceptions
as may be made after consultation with the Government of Nepal, the
Government of India agree to promote the industrial development of Nepal
through the grant on the basis of non-reciprocity of specially favorable
treatment to imports into India of industrial products manufactured in Nepal
in respect of customs duty and quantitative restrictions normally applicable
to them.
ARTICLE VI
With a view to facilitating greater interchange of goods between the two
countries, the Government of Nepal shall endeavour to exempt, wholly or
partially, imports from India from customs duty and quantitative restrictions 
4
to the maximum extent compatible with their development needs and
protection of their industries.
ARTICLE VII
Payment for transactions between the two countries will continue to be made
in accordance with their respective foreign exchange laws, rules and
regulations. The Contracting Parties agree to consult each other in the event
of either of them experiencing difficulties in their mutual transactions with a
view to resolving such difficulties.
ARTICLE VIII
The Contracting Parties agree to co-operate effectively with each other to
prevent infringement and circumvention of the laws, rules and regulations of
either country in regard to matters relating to foreign exchange and foreign
trade.
ARTICLE IX
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, either Contracting Party may
maintain or introduce such restrictions as are necessary for the purpose of:
(a) Protecting public morals,
(b) Protecting human, animal and plant life,
(c) Safeguarding national treasures,
(d) Safeguarding the implementation of laws relating to the import and
export of gold and silver bullion, and
(e) Safeguarding such other interests as may be mutually agreed upon.
ARTICLE X
Nothing in this treaty shall prevent either Contracting Party from taking any
measures which may be necessary for the protection of its essential security
interests or in pursuance of general international conventions, whether
already in existence or concluded hereafter, to which it is a party relating to
transit, export or import of particular kinds of articles such as narcotics and
psychotropic substances or in pursuance of general conventions intended to
prevent infringement of industrial, literary or artistic property or relating to 
5
false marks, false indications of origin or other methods of unfair
competition.
ARTICLE XI
 In order to facilitate effective and harmonious implementation of this
Treaty, the Contracting Parties shall consult each other regularly.
ARTICLE XII
(a) This Treaty shall come into force on the date of its signature. It shall supercede
the Treaty of Trade concluded between the Government of India and the
Government of Nepal on 6th December 1991, as amended or modified from time to
time.
(b) This Treaty shall remain in force for a period of seven years and shall be
automatically extended for further periods of seven years at a time, unless either of
the parties gives to the other a written notice, three months in advance, of its
intention to terminate the Treaty.
(c) This Treaty may be amended or modified by mutual consent of the Contracting
Parties.
(d) The Protocol annexed to this Treaty shall constitute its integral part.
Done in duplicate in Hindi, Nepali and English languages, all the texts being
equally authentic, at Kathmandu on 27th October, 2009. In case of doubt, the
English text will prevail.
 (Anand Sharma)
 Commerce and Industry Minister
 (Rajendra Mahto)
Minister of Commerce and
Supplies
For the Government of India For the Government of Nepal
 
6
PROTOCOL TO THE TREATY OF TRADE
I. With Reference to Article I
1. It is understood that the trade between the two Contracting Parties shall
be conducted through the mutually agreed routes as are mentioned in the
Annexure A. Such mutually agreed routes would be subject to joint review
as and when required.
2. It is further understood that the exports to and imports from each other
of goods which are not subject to prohibitions or duties on exportation or
importation shall continue to move through the traditional routes on the
common border.
3. The Government of India, on request from the Government of Nepal,
will make best endeavour to assist Nepal to increase its capacity to trade
through improvement in technical standards, quarantine and testing facilities
and related human resource capacities.
4. Both Contracting Parties will facilitate cross-border flow of trade through
simplification, standardization and harmonization of customs, transport
and other trade related procedures and development of border
infrastructure.
5. The Contracting Parties shall undertake measures to reduce or eliminate
non-tariff, para-tariff and other barriers that impede promotion of bilateral
trade.
6. Both parties shall allow duty free, temporary importation of the used
machinery and equipments into their territory for the purpose of repair and
maintenance of such machinery and equipments ten years from the date of
exportation subject to the following conditions:
(i) Goods are re-exported within six months of the date of reimportation
(ii) The Customs is satisfied as regards to the proof of identity of the
used machinery and equipments.
(iii) The importer at the time of importation executes a bond undertaking
to:
(a) export the goods after repairs or reconditioning within the period
as stipulated;
(b) pay on demand, in the event of its failure to comply with any of
the aforesaid conditions the applicable customs duties.
7. Both parties shall take measures to exchange trade related data with each
other from time to time, with a view to facilitate the flow of trade and
transport.
 
7
II.With Reference to Article II
1. It is understood that all goods of Indian or Nepalese origin shall be
allowed to move unhampered to Nepal or India respectively without being
subjected to any quantitative restrictions, licensing or permit system with the
following exceptions:
(a) Goods restricted for export to third countries,
(b) Goods subject to control on price for distribution or movement
within the domestic market, and
(c) Goods prohibited for export to each other’s territories to prevent
deflection to third countries.
2. In order to facilitate the smooth flow of goods across the border, the list
of commodities subject to restrictions/prohibitions on exports to each other’s
territories shall be immediately communicated through diplomatic channels
as and when such restrictions/prohibitions are imposed or relaxed.
3. It is further understood that when notifications regarding restrictions on
exports to each other are issued, adequate provisions will be made therein to
allow the export to each other of the goods which are already covered under
the forward contract or by Letter of Credit or goods which are already in
transit and/or booked through the railways or other public sector transport
undertakings or goods which have already arrived at the border customs
posts on the day of the notification.
4. In respect of goods falling under prohibited or restricted categories as
mentioned in paragraph 1 above and where needed by one Contracting
Party, the other shall authorise exports of such goods subject to specific
annual quota allocations. Specific request list of such goods shall be
furnished to each other by the end of November, and specific quota
allocations for the following calendar year shall be made by the end of
December with due regard to the supply availability and the overall need of
the other Contracting Party. The quota list may be jointly reviewed as and
when necessary.
5. The Contracting Parties shall take appropriate measures and co-operate
with each other to prevent unauthorized import in excess of the quota of
goods the export of which is prohibited or restricted from the territory of the
other Contracting Party.
6. Both parties shall grant recognition to the Sanitary and Phytosanitary
certificates (including health certificates) issued by the competent authority
of the exporting country, based on assessment of their capabilities, in the area 
8
of food and agriculture product (including primary, semi processed and
processed), and shall allow entry of these products into their markets on the
basis of these certificates subject to meeting the mandatory requirement of
the importing country.
III. With Reference to Article III
1. The Government of India will allow the Government of Nepal payment
of the excise and other duties collected by the Government of India on goods
produced in India and exported to Nepal provided that:
(i) Such payment shall not exceed the import duties and like charges levied
by the Government of Nepal on similar goods imported from any other
country, and
(ii) The Government of Nepal shall not collect from the importer of the said
Indian goods so much of the import duty and like charges as is equal to the
payment allowed by the Government of India.
IV. With Reference to Article IV
1. The following primary products would be eligible for preferential
treatment:
1. Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture and forest produce,
2. Minerals which have not undergone any processing,
3. Rice, pulses, flour, atta, bran and husk,
4. Timber,
5. Jaggery (gur and shakar),
6. Livestock, Poultry bird and fish,
7. Bees, bees-wax and honey,
8. Raw wool, goat hair, bristles and bones as are used in the manufacture of
bone-meal,
9. Milk, home made products of milk and eggs,
10. Ghani-produced oil and oilcakes,
11. Herbs, ayurvedic and herbal medicines, including essential oils and its
extracts,
12. Articles produced by village artisans as are mainly used in villages,
13. Akara,
14. Yak Tail,
15. Stone aggregate, boulder, sand and gravel,
16. Any other primary products, which may be mutually agreed upon.
2. It is understood that in the matter of internal taxes or charges the
movement of primary products of either Contracting Party to any market
destinations in the territory of the other shall be accorded treatment no less
favorable than that accorded to the movement of its own primary products
within its territory. 
9
3. It is also understood that the aforesaid provisions will not preclude a
Contracting Party from taking any measures, which it may deem necessary
on the exportation of primary products to the other.
V. With Reference to Article V
1. The Government of India will provide preferential access to the Indian
market free of customs duties normally applicable and quantitative
restrictions except as mentioned elsewhere, for all articles manufactured in
Nepal, provided they fulfill the qualifying criteria given below:
(a) The articles are manufactured in Nepal wholly from Nepalese materials
or Indian materials or Nepalese and Indian materials. In addition, the
following products, but not limited to, shall be considered as wholly
produced or manufactured.
(i) Raw materials or mineral products extracted from soil, water,
riverbed or beneath the riverbed.
(ii) Products taken from the seabed, ocean floor or sub-soil thereof
beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, provided it has the exclusive rights
to exploit that seabed, ocean floor or sub-soil thereof, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nation’s Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS).
(iii) Used articles collected there, fit only for the recovery of raw
materials.
(iv) Waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations
conducted there.
(b) (i) The articles involve a manufacturing process in Nepal that brings
about a change in classification, at four digit level, of the Harmonized
Commodities Description and Coding System, different from those, in which
all the third country origin materials used in its manufacture are classified;
and the manufacturing process is not limited to insufficient working or
processing as indicated in Annexure “B”, and
(ii) The total value of materials, parts or produce originating from nonContracting Parties or of undetermined origin used does not exceed 70%
(seventy percent) of the FOB price of the articles produced, and the final
process of manufacturing is performed within the territory of Nepal.
Note:
The value of materials, parts or produce originating from non-Contracting
Parties shall be the CIF value at the time of importation of materials, parts or
produce, at the point of entry in Nepal, where this can be proven, or the
earliest ascertainable price paid for the materials, parts or produce of
undetermined origin in the territory of the Contracting Party where the
working or processing takes place. 
10
(c) For Nepalese articles not fulfilling the conditions given in sub-para-1 (b)
(i) above, but fulfilling the condition at sub-para-1 (b)(ii) above, preferential
access may be given by the Government of India, on a case by case basis,
after satisfying itself that such article has undergone a sufficient
manufacturing process within Nepal.
(d) However, the import of Nepalese manufactured articles described in
Annexure “C” which fulfill the criteria in sub-para-1 (a) or (b) (i) & (ii) above
will be governed by the terms specified in this Annexure.
(e) In the case of other articles manufactured in Nepal which do not fulfill
the qualifying criteria specified in sub-para-1 (a) or (b) (i) & (ii) above, the
Government of India will provide normal access to the Indian market
consistent with its MFN treatment. The Certificate of Origin for MFN export
will be as prescribed in Annex D/II
2. Import of articles in accordance with the para-1 above shall be allowed
by the Indian customs authorities on the basis of the Certificate of Origin to
be issued by the agency designated for this purpose by the Government of
Nepal in the format prescribed at Annexure – D/I for each consignment of
articles exported from Nepal to India. Information regarding the basis of
calculation for grant of such Certificates of Origin to the manufacturing
facilities in Nepal will be provided to the Government of India on an annual
basis. Preferential facility shall not be available for the articles listed at
Annexure-“E”.
3. On the basis of a Certificate issued, for each consignment of articles
manufactured in the small-scale units in Nepal, by the Government of
Nepal, that the relevant conditions applicable to the articles manufactured in
similar Small Scale Industrial units in India for relief in the levy of applicable
Excise Duty rates are fulfilled for such a parity, Government of India will
extend parity in the levy of Additional Duty on such Nepalese articles equal
to the treatment provided in the levy of effective Excise Duty on similar
Indian articles under the Indian Customs and Central Excise Tariff.
However, this facility will be applicable only to articles manufactured in
Nepal in such small-scale units, which qualify as small-scale units under the
Nepalese Industrial Policy as on 5th December 2001.
4. The “Additional Duty” rates equal to the effective Indian excise duty
rates applicable to similar Indian products under the Indian Customs &
Central Excise Tariff will continue to be levied on the imports into India of
products manufactured in the medium and large-scale units in Nepal. 
11
5. Whenever imports into India of products manufactured in the medium
and large scale units of Nepal attract an “Additional Duty” over and above
an Additional Duty equivalent to the effective duty of excise applicable to
similar products produced or manufactured in India, Government of India
shall, upon request from Government of Nepal, consider waiver of such
additional duties on imports of products from Nepal.
Explanation: Additional Duty shall mean a duty levied under Section 3(5) of
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 of India.
6. In regard to additional duty collected by the Government of India in
respect of manufactured articles other than those manufactured in “small”
units; Wherever it is established that the cost of production of an article is
higher in Nepal than the cost of production in a corresponding unit in India,
a sum representing such difference in the cost of production, but not
exceeding 25 per cent of the “Additional Duty” collected by the Government
of India, will be paid to the Government of Nepal provided the Government
of Nepal have given assistance to the same extent to the (manufacturers)
exporters.
7. Export of consignments from Nepal accompanied by the Certificate of
Origin will normally not be subjected to any detention/delays at the Indian
customs border check posts and other places en route. However, in case of
reasonable doubt about the authenticity of Certificate of Origin, the Indian
Customs Authority may seek a clarification from the certifying agency,
which will furnish the same within a period of thirty days. Meanwhile, the
subject consignment will be allowed entry into India on provisional basis
against a bond i.e. a legally binding undertaking as required. After
examining the information so provided by the certifying agency, the Indian
Customs Authority would take appropriate action to finalize the provisional
assessment. Whenever considered necessary, request for a joint visit of the
manufacturing facility may be made by the Indian Customs Authority,
which would be facilitated by the concerned Nepalese authority within a
period of thirty days.
8. Where for social and economic reasons, the import of an item into India
is permitted only through public sector agencies or where the import of an
item is prohibited under the Indian Trade control regulations, the
Government of India will consider any request of the Government of Nepal
for relaxation and may permit the import of such an item from Nepal in such
a manner as may be found to be suitable. 
12
9. For the purpose of calculation of import duties customs valuation
procedures, as prescribed under the prevailing customs law, will be
followed.
VI. With reference to Article VI
 The Government of Nepal, with a view to continuing preferences given to
Indian exports, will waive additional customs duty on all Indian exports
during the validity of the Treaty.
VII. With reference to Article VII
Both Contracting Parties shall make provisions so that no discrimination will
be made in respect of tax, including central excise, rebate and other benefits
to exports merely on the basis of payment modality and currency of payment
of trade. This would be made effective from the date to be mutually agreed
to, after which the Protocol to Article III would become redundant.
Both Contracting Parties agreed to develop modalities for transition from the
existing to the new system.
VIII. With Reference to Article IX
In the event of imports under the Treaty, in such a manner or in such
quantities as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic
industry relating to the article, an investigation for application of safeguard
measures may be initiated. The following conditions and limitations shall
apply to an investigation for application of safeguards measures.
a. A Party shall immediately deliver written notice to the other Party upon:
(i) initiating an investigatory process relating to serious injury or threat
thereof and the reasons for it;
(ii) making a finding of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased
imports; and
(iii) taking a decision to apply a safeguard measure;
b. in making the notification referred to in paragraph (a), the Party
proposing to apply a safeguard measure shall provide the other Party with
all pertinent information, which shall include evidence of serious injury or
threat thereof caused by the increased imports, precise description of the
goods involved and the proposed measure, proposed date of introduction
and expected duration; the Party proposing to apply a measure is also
obliged to provide any additional information which the Party considers
pertinent;
c. a Party proposing to apply a measure shall provide adequate
opportunity for prior consultations with the other Party as far in advance of 
13
taking any such measure as practicable, with a view to reviewing the
information arising from the investigation, exchanging views on the measure
and reaching an agreement. Such consultation shall take place at the Joint
Committee meeting set up by the two governments. If the consultations in
the Joint Committee fail to resolve the issue within a period of sixty days
from the date of request for consultation, then the requesting government
shall be free to take appropriate remedial measures. The Nepal-India Inter
Governmental Committee (IGC) will review such measures.
Explanation: The terms “Domestic Industry” and “Serious Injury” shall be
interpreted as defined in the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.
The determination of ‘Serious injury’ shall be as per the WTO Safeguard
Agreement.
“Threat of injury” means a situation in which a substantial increase of
imports under the Treaty is of a nature so as to cause injury to the domestic
producers, and that such injury, although not yet existing is clearly
imminent. A determination of threat of injury shall be based on facts and not
on mere allegation, conjecture, or remote or hypothetical possibility.
IX. With reference to Article XI
1. In case of problems arising in clearance of goods at the land customs
stations, provided that the quality of goods in questions would deteriorate or
perishes due to delays, such problem shall be dealt at the joint meeting of the
local authorities comprising of the followings:
(a) Customs officers
(b) Quarantine/ food test officers
(c ) Representatives of local chambers
(d) Any other local officials nominated by the respective Government.
2. Such consultation will be carried out with a view to resolving the issue in
an expeditious manner and at facilitating trade through resolving the issues
in situ. However the case will be referred to the respective Government, if
the resolution could not be settled through such consultation.
3. Issues on bilateral trade and other trade related matters will be referred
to an Inter-Governmental Committee (IGC) led by Secretaries in the Ministry
of Commerce of the two Governments. The Committee shall meet at least
once in a six months alternatively in Kathmandu and New Delhi. An InterGovernmental Sub-Committee (IGSC) shall be constituted at the level of Joint
Secretaries of the Ministry of Commerce of the two countries, which shall
meet at the interval of two IGC meetings. The Inter-governmental Subcommittee shall be responsible for taking up extensive consultation and
decisions on trade and trade related issues with a view to facilitating bilateral
trade and making recommendation to Inter-governmental Committee, 
14
whenever necessary. The Sub-Committee shall also work as the Joint
Committee as mentioned in Protocol with reference to Article IX above. 
15
Annexure “ A ”
AGREED ROUTES FOR MUTUAL TRADE
1. Pashupatinagar/Sukhia Pokhari
2. Kakarbhitta/Naxalbari
3. Bhadrapur/Galgalia
4. Biratnagar/Jogbani
5. Setobandha/Bhimnagar
6. Rajbiraj/Kunauli
7. Siraha, Janakpur/Jayanagar
8. Jaleswar/Bhitamore (Sursand)
9. Malangawa/Sonabarsa
10. Gaur/Bairgania
11. Birgunj/Raxaul
12. Bhairahawa/Nautanwa
13. Taulihawa/Khunwa
14. Krishnanagar/Barhni
15. Koilabas/Jarwa
16. Nepalgunj/Nepalgunj Road
17. Rajapur/Katerniyaghat
18. Prithvipur/Sati (Kailali)/Tikonia
19. Dhangadhi/Gauriphanta
20. Mahendranagar/Banbasa
21. Mahakali/Jhulaghat (Pithoragarh)
22. Darchula/Dharchula
23. Maheshpur/Thutibari (Nawalparasi)
24.International Airports connected by Direct Flights between Nepal and
India (Kathmandu/Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkatta and Chennai)
25. Sikta-Bhiswabazar
26. Laukha-Thadi
27. Guleria/Murtia 
16
Annexure “ B ”
ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF
INSUFFICIENT WORKING OR PROCESSING
The following shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to
confer the status of originating or manufactured or produced or made in
Nepal, to an article, whether or not there is a change in heading classification
at four digit level, of the Harmonized Commodities Description and Coding
system, different from those in which all the third country origin materials
used in its manufacture are classified: -
a) Operations to ensure the preservation of articles in good condition
during transport and storage (e.g., ventilation, spreading out, drawing,
chilling, placing in salt, sulphur-dioxide or other aqueous solutions, removal
of damaged parts and like operations);
b) Operations consisting of removal of dust, shifting or screening, sorting,
classifying, matching (including the making up of sets), washing, painting,
cutting up;
c) Changes of packing and breaking up and assembly of consignments;
d) Slicing, cutting, slitting, re-packing, placing in bottles or flasks or bags or
boxes or other containers, fixing on cards or boards, etc., and all other
packing or re-packing operations;
e) The affixing of marks, labels or other like distinguishing signs on articles
or their packaging;
f) Mixing of articles, whether or not of different kinds, where one or more
components of the mixture do not meet the conditions laid down in para 1
(b) of Protocol to Article V of the Treaty to enable them to be considered as
manufactured or produced or made in Nepal;
g) Assembly of parts of an article to constitute a complete article; 
17
h) A combination of two or more operations specified in a) to g) above.
Annexure “ C ”
Nepalese manufactured articles allowed entry into India
free of customs duties on a fixed quota basis.
Sl.
no.
Nepalese Article Quantity in MT per year
1 Vegetable fats (Vanaspati) 100, 000 (One hundred thousand)
2 Acrylic Yarn 10, 000 (Ten thousand)
3 Copper products under
Chapters 74.00 & Heading
85.44 of the H.S. Code
10,000 (Ten thousand)
4 Zinc Oxide 2,500 (two thousand five hundred)
a) Imports into India of the above four commodities for quantities in excess
of the fixed quota mentioned above will be permitted under normal MFN
rates of duty, notwithstanding any concession in any other preferential
arrangement.
b) Imports into India of the above commodities will be permitted through
the Land Customs Stations (LCS) at Kakarbhitta/Naxalbari,
Biratnagar/Jogbani, Birganj/Raxaul, Bhairahawa/Nautanwa,
Nepalgunj/Nepalgunj Road and Mahendranagar/Banbasa.
c) Modalities of operationalization of the fixed quota on vegetable fat
(Vanaspati) shall be as agreed from time to time.
d) The existing administrative arrangements for operationalization of the
fixed quota of Sl. no 2, 3 and 4 shall be reviewed for further simplification, as
required. 
18
Annexure “D/I”
CERTIFICATE OF ORIGIN
FOR EXPORTS FREE OF CUSTOMS DUTIES
UNDER THE TREATY OF TRADE BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF NEPAL AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Reference No. ______________________
1. Articles consigned from (Exporter’s business name, address)
2. Articles consigned to (Consignee’s name, address)
3. Means of transport and route
4. Item Number (HS Tariff Line)
5. Marks and number of package
6. Description of Articles
7. Gross weight or other quantity
8. Number and date of Invoice together with value
9. FOB value of the articles manufactured in Nepal:
10. (i) Whether articles are manufactured in Nepal under Para 1 (a) of the
Protocol to Article V of the Treaty of Trade (Yes / No);
(ii) If articles are manufactured in Nepal under Para 1(b) (i) & (ii) of the
Protocol to Article V of the Treaty of Trade;
(A) CIF value of materials, parts or produce originating from NonContracting Parties (i.e. other than Nepal & India) at the point of entry in
Nepal: -
(B) Value of materials, parts or produce of undetermined origin.
11. Percentage of the sum of the value of col. 10 (ii) (A) & (B) to the value of
col. 9:
12. Declaration by the exporter;
The undersigned hereby declares that the details furnished above are correct,
that the articles are produced in Nepal and that they comply with the Rules
of Origin specified in the Treaty of Trade between the Government of Nepal
and the Government of India.
_______________________
(Place & Date, Signature of authorized signatory). 
19

13. Certification
It is certified that the articles herein referred to are eligible for preferential
treatment as per provisions of the Treaty of Trade between the Government
of Nepal and the Government of India. It is further certified that:
1. The articles have been manufactured in Nepal at a factory
situated at _________________________(name of the place/district) by
M/s._______________________ ___________________________(name of the
company).
2. The articles involve manufacturing activity in Nepal and
that the manufacturing activity satisfies the criteria given in the Protocol to
Article V of the Treaty of Trade.
3. The articles in question are not products of third country
origin.
For the Government of Nepal
(Place and Date, Signature & Stamp of certifying authority)
14. For Official use of Indian Customs
The consignment has been examined and allowed to be imported into India
as it complies with the provisions as stipulated under Article V of the Treaty
of Trade between the Government of Nepal and the Government of India.
_______________________________
Signature & Seal of the
Certifying authority
Dated:
Place:
 For the purpose of the above item No.3, the articles which have undergone a manufacturing process in Nepal as
defined in the Protocol to Article V of the Treaty will not be treated as product of third country origin. 
20
Annexure-“D/II”
Certificate of Origin for export to India under MFN arrangement.
1. Product Name:
2. HS Code:
3. Manufacturing Unit in Nepal:
4. Article consigned from (Exporter's business name, address):
5. Article consigned to (Importer's name and address):
6. Marks and number of packages:
7. Description of Articles:
8. Gross weight or other quantity:
9. Number and date of Invoice together with value:
10. Ex-factory price of the Articles:
11. Declaration by exporter:
The undersigned hereby declares that the details furnished above are true
and correct and complies with the provisions of Nepal-India Trade Treaty.
--------------------------------------
Place and Date, Signature of authorized signatory.
12. Certification by the competent authority:
The above declarations are correct to my knowledge and hence recommend
for export to India under MFN arrangement.
----------------------------------------------
Signature and seal of certifying authority 
21
Annexure “ E ”
MFN LIST OF ARTICLES
WHICH WILL NOT BE ALLOWED
PREFERENTIAL ENTRY FROM NEPAL TO INDIA
ON THE BASIS OF CERTIFICATE OF ORIGIN TO BE
GIVEN BY AGENCY DESIGNATED BY
 THE GOVERNMENT OF NEPAL
1. Alcoholic Liquors/Beverages (*) and their concentrates except
industrial spirits,
2. Perfumes and cosmetics with non-Nepalese/non-Indian Brand
names,
3. Cigarettes and Tobacco
Note: Government of India may, in consultation with the Government of
Nepal modify the above list.
(*) Nepalese beers can be imported into India on payment of the applicable
liquor excise duty equal to the effective excise duty as levied in India on
Indian beers under the relevant rules and regulations of India. (Nepalese
beer has been exempted from the whole of the additional duty vide customs
notification No. 178/2003-customs date 17.12.2003)