AGREEMENT ON TRADE COOPERATION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ALGERIA Article Two (II) Each of the two Contracting Parties shall promote trade exchanges of agricultural products; livestock products; and, natural resources of domestic origin or source between them, in pursuance of the provisions set out in the present Agreement, and in accordance to the regulations and laws applicable in both countries. Article Three (III) Each Contracting Party undertakes to exempt products originating in Jordan and Algeria, and traded directly between the two countries, of customs duties and fees and taxes with equivalent effect imposed on sub-national imports. Commodities contained in the list annexed hereto (Supplement No. 1) shall be excepted from such exemptions. Article Four (IV) The Contracting Parties undertake to exempt products originating in Jordan and Algeria, contained hereinabove under Article III, of all non-customs restrictions, apart from such restrictions the enforcement of which is intended to maintain morality, security, public order, and public health; to serve the purposes of agricultural quarantine and veterinary quarantine; and, to safeguard and protect the environment, the flora, and the national historic, archaeological and artistic heritage. In pursuit of such trade exchanges, both Contracting Parties hereby agree that the commodities traded between them, by virtue of the provisions of the present Agreement, shall be subject to import permits, the issuance of which shall be the responsibility of their respective competent authorities, with an aim to ensure that the flow of trade is streamlined and facilitated, in compliance with the laws and regulations in force in both countries. Article Five (V) The following shall be considered to be originating in Jordan and Algeria: 1. Products that are fully produced in either Party. 2. Products that are produced in Jordan or Algeria, of which the cost of domestic inputs and local labour as well as the cost of domestic production associated therewith shall be no less than forty percent (40%) of the total value. 3. Materials imported from the other Party and used for the production of final commodities of domestic origin, at the time when the percentage of local manufacture is calculated, so as to achieve compliance with the rules of cumulative origin between both Countries. Products and materials imported into, and exported from free trade zones in both countries shall be excepted from the application of the rules included herein. Article Six (VI) The products originating in Jordan and Algeria, which are directly traded between both countries, shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Origin, to be issued in Jordan by Amman Chamber of Industry or Chambers of Commerce, and in Algeria by Algerian Chamber of Commerce and Industry or by the regional chambers of industry and commerce, and shall also be authenticated by the Ministry of Industry and Commerce on the part of Jordan, and by the customs service on the part of Algeria. 