ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LEBANON.
The government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of The Republic of
Lebanon, based on their brotherly ties that connect their two nations and the deep-rooted historical
relations between their two countries, and
Being desirous to enhance the economic and trading relations are seeking on equal footing to expand
the common and mutual interests between them in different sectors and to promote the economic
integration, two countries, and
Based on their belief of the importance to liberate the mutual trading exchange, in harmony with the
provisions of the executive program of the Trade Exchange Development among the Arab countries in
order to establish Great Arab free trade zone, they have agreed on the following:
Article One:
For the purpose of his agreement the following words and terms mentioned below shall have the
meaning stated against them.
1. The Agreement :
The Agreement of a trading free zone between Hashemite Kingdom Of Jordan and The
Republic of Lebanon.
2. The contracting parties:
The government Of Hashemite Kingdom Of Jordan, and the government of The Republic of
Lebanon.
3. The Customs duties and other similar taxation:
The customs imposed by the state under the customs tariff levied on the imported goods and
also the other duties and taxations of similar effect levied on imported goods, but the state’s
products of the contracting party are not subject to whatever the nomenclature of these fees
was.
This definition, however, shall not include the fees that are collected against a specific service
such as demurrage or storage or transportation or shipping off or offloading.
4. Non – customs restrictions:
The measures and procedures that may be taken by the state party to control importing from
the other party which shall include in particular, import licenses quantitative, monetary and
administrative restrictions imposed on imported items.
Article Two 
Both of the Contracting parties may apply reciprocity treatment in case the other party’s failure to
comply with any of this agreement’s provisions, provided to notify the party with this procedure
thereof.
Article Three
1. In accordance with what have been mentioned in paragraph No. (2) (3), of this article, all
Agricultural, livestock, natural and industrial products of national origin (Jordanian or Lebanese)
exchanged directly between the two countries shall be exempted from all customs fees, charges
and other taxes with similar effect, as soon as this agreement came into force.
2. Minuets’ provisions of the Jordanian-Lebanese Agricultural Calendar Meeting, in respect of fresh
vegetables and fruits, shall be applied on the agricultural season for 2002-2003 signed between
the two countries on 5/9/2002 or any other agreement in this respect to be agreed later by the
ministers of agriculture in both countries.
3. Provision of paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall not be applied on prohibited products and items
for religious, health, security or environment reasons, prescribed in the executive program of
Trade Exchange Development Agreement between the Arab countries For the Establishment of
Greater Arab Free Trade Zone.
4. It is not allowed to impose new customs fees or any other fees and taxes with similar effect on
goods and products of national origin exchanged between the two contracting parties after the
signing date of this agreement.
5. Custom fees, charges or any other taxes of same effect applicable at the date of this agreement
came into force as the base upon the application of this agreement. However, if any deduction
has been carried out on the custom fees percentage and/or fees and other taxes, the new fees
shall replace the applicable fees as the date of this agreement application.
6. Custom tariff tables shall be accredited according to coordinated system (H.S) for the purpose of
classifying exchanged goods between the two countries.
7- Both Contracting Parties shall exchange custom tariff, and a list includes other fees percentages
and applicable taxes at the date of the agreement application.
Article Four.
1. Arab rules of origin, accredited by the Social and Economic Council of the Arab League, shall be
applied.
2. Neither of the contracting parties may have the right to impose any kind of non-customs
restrictions on goods of national origin exchanged between them, including procedures of
prevention or limitation of import in any of the two countries and the imports of any country from
the other country, as of this agreement application.
3. Exchanged goods and products between the two contracting parties according to this agreement
shall be conferred the treatment of national products in the country of import in respect of rules
of origins, standards, metrology, and health, security precaution restrictions, and local fees and
taxes.
In accordance with international provisions and rules in respect of technical bases for precaution
procedures, and confronting of dumping and promotion cases. As well to deal with deficiency in
payments balance result from the application of this agreement, and in consistent with the
provisions of the executive program of Trade Exchange Development Agreement between the
Arab countries For the Establishment of Greater Arab Free Trade Zone. Either of the contracting
parties may take any precaution procedures or actions of fighting dumping or promotion cases 
according to applicable rules and legislation in both countries, and pledging to notify the other
party with such procedures.
Article Five
The provisions of this agreement shall not apply on goods manufactured in free zones in either of the
two countries.
Article Six
The agricultural, animal and foodstuff goods exported from one party to another shall be conforming
to the agricultural and health stipulations applicable in the importing country, and that each party
should comply to notify his counterpart with the special law and regulations related to it and
applicable in its country.
Article Seven
The contracting parties shall observe that goods and products of national origin exported from any of
them to the other party should conform to the standards and metrology in operation in the country of
the other party.
In case a local standard is not conforming, international applicable standard and metrology shall be
adopted, provided that the contracting parties shall exchange the laws and regulations applied by
each, and notify the other with any amendment they may sustain.
Article Eight
The contracting parties shall facilitate the exchange of necessary information and statement to
identify the course of trade exchange, whether between the two countries or other countries.
Article Nine
The endorsement of the two contracting parties’ embassies shall not be necessary on certificates of
origin, invoices and documents related to exchanged goods for the purpose of advantages prescribed
in this agreement.
Article Ten
The two parties shall encourage economic and commercial cooperation between them within the
framework of the outstanding rules and laws in their countries including the following means:
1. Encouraging the joint industrial activities including market development activities in their
countries and the joint activities in a third country.
2. Assisting and cooperating in creating promotion channels and marketing in their countries.
3. Encouraging direct communications and contacts among the commercial industrial and economic
agencies.
4. Assisting and facilitating visits for businessmen of both countries.
5. Joint cooperating to protect improve the environment.
6. Encouraging and promoting the activities aiming at facilitating trading exchange including
holding trading fairs (exhibitions) and public fairs, conferences, publicity, advertising, consultant
services and other services. 
Article Eleven
1- The contracting parties shall endeavor to facilitate transit trading, and re –exporting.
2- Payments resulted from the application of this agreement shall be settled by any free convertible
currency according to applicable laws and regulations in both countries.
Article Twelve
The contracting parties shall encourage the participation of their country establishments and
companies to join international fairs, held in the other country, and to hold provisional fairs for the
products of each of them in the other country as well as the trading weeks activities.
Each of them shall provide necessary facilities to realize the foregoing per the laws and regulations
applicable in the contracting parties.
Article Thirteen
The Contracting Parties agreed on the following :
1- Encourage the establishing of joint projects in both countries and current projects to achieve
mutual interest for both countries.
2- Establishment of technical cooperation between their respective countries, and exchange of
scientific studies and researches regarding the industrial, agricultural integration, in order to ensure
the development of their economy and to activate tourism between them in particular and other
countries in general.
3- Encouragement of private sector in both countries to establish joint investment projects in different
economic fields.
Article Fourteen
The two parties shall supply the necessary, effective and non-discriminatory protection and apply
same in relation to intellectual commercial and industrial property including patents trade marks,
industrial design plus protection of literary and artistic works and software’s under the applicable laws
and regulations applicable in the contracting countries.
Article Fifteen
1. For the purpose of supervising the implementation of the provisions of this agreement, a joint
economic-commercial committee shall be formed and chaired by the Minister of Industry for
the Jordanian party and Commerce and the Minister of Economy and Commerce for the
Lebanese party.
2. For the purpose of following-up the implementation of the this agreement’s provisions, and to
deal with problems which might be raised during discussion, a following-up committee shall
be formed and chaired by the General Secretary of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce for
the Jordanian party, and the General Director of Economy and Commerce for the Lebanon
party, and the membership of two representatives for the concerned ministers and authorities
in both countries.
3. The Committee referred to in Para. (1) of this article shall undertake the following
assignments :
- Following-up the implementation of both contracting parties’ obligation in the field of freeing 
trade exchange from non-custom restrictions, custom fees, charges and other taxes of same
effect for custom fees according to this agreement articles.
- Settlement of disputes arise from the application of this agreement, and complains submitted
in this regard and to take necessary procedures to ensure the good conduct of this
agreement.
- Any other assignment, which may be delegated to this committee in the framework of its
specialty.
4. The Committee shall submit its recommendation to the joint economic and trade committee
chaired by the minister of industry and commerce in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and
the Minister of Economy and Commerce in the Republic of Lebanon to review these
recommendations.
5 The permanent joint commercial committee shall meet at least once a year whereas meetings
shall be held alternatively in the capitals of the two countries.
Each party may have the right to invite for a meeting for the committee referred to whenever
it was necessary.
6. The joint economic-commercial committee shall have the right to form sub-committee to
settle disputes related to application of this agreement’s provision and to deal with any
problems or obstacles confronted by either of the contracting parties, as well to suggest
necessary procedures to settle the same.
5. The disputes arising from applying this agreement into effect shall be submitted to the joint
economical-commercial committee formed by virtue of Article 1 of this agreement, in order to
settle it or to suggest mechanism to settle it.
Article Sixteen
1. This agreement shall enter into force after thirty days of the latest notice date notifying that
full ratification procedures between the two countries has been exchanged.
2. This agreement shall replace all previously concluded commercial or economical agreements,
and protocols between the two countries, as the date of its application.
3- This Agreement shall remains applicable, unless either of the contracting parties inform the
other party in writing, through diplomatic channels of his wish to terminate it, six months
prior the termination date requested.
The text of this agreement remains in effect for additional six months after its expiry date,
that is relation to the documentary credits opened for trading contracts concluded while it was
in effect and not implemented until its expiry date.
Written and signed in Beirut on the twenty-fourth of Shaban 1423H.J corresponding to 31st of
October, 2002, of duplicated originals in Arabic language with the same legal effect one copy
for each party.
For The Government of The Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan
Minister of Industry and Commerce
Salah Al-Bashir
For The Government of The Republic of
Lebanon
Minister of Economy and Commerce
Abdullah Hasan Seif.