Agreement of Establishing Free Trade Zone Between The Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, and The Syrian Arab Republic
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, based on Arab fraternal relations of their peoples and historical
links of their countries, and
Being desired to develop and support economic and commercial relations between the
two countries on the basis of equity in order to expand the base of mutual interests and
profits in various aspects and to enhance economic integration between the two
countries, and
As having faith with the importance of freeing trade exchange, in harmony with the
executive program programs of developing and facilitating of trade agreement between
the Arab countries to establish a Great Arab Free Trade Zone, have agreed on the
following:
Article 1
For this agreement purposes, the words and expressions listed herein shall have
the meanings designated from them, unless the text stated otherwise:
1- Agreement:
The Agreement of establishing a free trade zone between the Government of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
2- Contracting Parties :
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
3- Custom fees, charges and other taxes of same effect:
The fees imposed by the contracting state in accordance with custom tariff on
imported goods, as well other taxes and fees of same effect imposed on imported
goods and not subject to the products of the same contracting state, whatever the
name of these taxes and fees.
This definition shall not include fees charged against certain service such as
ground, storage, transfer, cargo, or discharging.
These applicable custom fees, charges and other taxes of the same effect on the
date of this agreement enforcement shall be deemed as a base upon the
application of this agreement’s provisions. If any deduction on the percentage of
custom fees and/or charges and other taxes has been effected, the new fees shall 
replace the applicable fees at the date of this agreement application.
3- Non-Custom Restrictions :
The arrangements and procedures which taken by a contracting state for the
control of import from the other contracting party and shall include in particular
license of import, quantity, monetary, and administrative restrictions imposed on
the import process.
Article 2
Either of the Contracting Parties may apply the principle of similar treatment in
case the other party violate any of this agreement provisions, provided to notify
the other party with this procedure.
Article 3
1- In accordance with paragraphs (2, 3, 4) of this Article, agricultural, animal,
natural and industrial products of national origin ( Jordanian or Syrian), which
directly exchanged between the two countries, shall be exempted from all custom
fees, charges and other taxes of same effect immediately after the application of
this agreement.
2- Commodities of national origin (Jordanian or Syrian) which exchanged
between the Contracting Parties and shown in Annex No. (1) shall be freed by
reducing custom fees, charges and other taxes of same effect as following:
First day of Agreement application 60%
1/1/2003 70%
1/1/2004 85%
1/1/2005 100%
3- Regarding fresh vegetables and fruits, the provisions of agricultural calendar
agreed by the two countries shall be taken into account upon the application of
paragraphs (1 and 2 ) of this Article.
4- Products and articles prohibited for religious, health, security or environmental
reasons which listed in the executive program of agreement of developing and
facilitating trade exchange between the Arab countries to establish a Great Arab
Free Trade Zone, shall be excluded from the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2
above.
5- No new custom fees, or any other charges or taxes of same effect shall be
imposed on commodities and products of national origin exchanged between the
Contracting Parties upon the application of this agreement. 
6- Custom Tariff Tables shall be accredited according to coordinated system
(H.S) for the purpose of classifying the exchanged goods between the
Contracting Parties.
7- The Contracting Parties shall exchange custom tariff and a list of other charges
rates and applicable taxes at the date of this agreement application.
Article 4
1- Arab Origin Rules accredited by the Economical and Social Council of Arab
League, shall be applied for the purpose of this agreement provisions.
2- Both Contracting Parties may not impose any type of non-custom restriction on
commodities of national origin which exchanged between them, including
procedures of prohibiting or restricting import in any of the two countries and
issues regarding the import of either of them to the other Party, as the date of this
agreement application.
3- Commodities exchanged between the Contracting Parties according to this
agreement shall be granted the same treatment of national commodities in
imported states, and that which related to origin rules, standards and preventive,
health, and security conditions, and fees, local taxes.
4- In accordance with provisions, and international rules in respect of technical
basis of preventive procedures and to confront subsidy and dumping cases, and
to deal with flaw in the balance of payments resultant from the application of this
agreement. This shall not contradict with the executive program provisions of the
trade exchange development and facilitating between the Arab countries to
establish Great Arab Free Trade Zone. Either of the Contracting Parties may take
preventive, anti-dumping, or subsidy procedures or fixing the defect in the
balance of payments according to applicable rules and legislation in both
countries with the commitment of notifying the other party with these
procedures.
Article 5
This agreement provisions shall not be applicable on commodities produced in
free zones in any of the two countries.
Article 6
Agricultural, animal and food commodities exported by either of the Contracting
Party to the other Contracting Party shall fulfill agricultural and sanitary
conditions applied in the importing country. Each Contracting Party shall
undertake to notify the other Contracting Party according its applicable laws and
regulations. 
Article 7
Both Contracting Parties shall ensure that commodities and products of national
origin which exported to either of them from the other Contracting Party is
complying with applicable standards and specifications in the other Contracting
Party’s country. In case there is no applied local standard, then international
standards and specification shall be accredited, provided the both Contracting
Parties shall exchange laws and regulations applicable in each of them, and to
notify any amendment thereto.
Article 8
Contracting Parties shall coordinate applicable regulations and custom
procedures in both countries and to exchange their information and data.
Article 9
Both Contracting Parties shall facilitate the exchange of necessary information
and data to identify the course of trade exchange, whether between them or
between them and other countries.
Article 10
Any other Arab country may join this agreement by the approval of the two
Contracting Parties.
Article 11
Both Contracting Parties shall encourage the economical and commercial
cooperation in the frame of applicable laws and regulations in both countries
through :
1- Encouraging joint industrial activities, and those related to the development of
markets in both countries, and joint activities in a third country.
2- Assisting and cooperating in establishing promotion and marketing channels in
both countries.
3- Encouraging direct communications between commercial, industrial and
economical organizations.
4- Facilitating visits of businessmen and economical activities representatives to
both countries.
5-Joint cooperation in protection and developing of environment. 
6- Encouragement and promotion of activities aiming to facilitate trade between
the two countries and conferences, publicity, advertisement, consultant services
and other services.
Article 12
1- The Contracting Parties shall facilitate transit and re-export trade.
2- Payments resultant form the implementation of this agreement shall be settled
in any free exchangeable currency according to applicable laws and regulations
in both countries.
Article 13
Both Contracting Parties shall encourage the participation of corporation,
establishments and economical activities of both countries in international fairs
which held in the other Contracting Party territory. As well they shall encourage
the establishment of temporary, permanent fairs and trade weeks for the products
of both Contracting Parties in the other party’s territory. However, they shall
provide necessary facilitation to achieve that in accordance with applicable laws
and regulations.
Article 14
1- Both Contracting Parties have agreed to encourage the establishment of joint
ventures in both countries or to participate in present projects to achieve mutual
interest for both countries.
2- The Contracting Parties agreed to establish technical cooperation between
their countries, and to exchange scientific studies and researches, concerning
economic and industrial coordination and integration.
3- The Contracting Parties agreed on the encouragement of private sector in both
countries to establish joint investing projects in different economical aspects.
Article 15
The Contracting Parties shall provide enough, effective, non-discriminative and
to apply them regarding trade and industry property rights, including the
registration of patents and trade marks, and industrial design, according to
applicable laws and regulations.
Article 16
First : For the purposes of supervising the implementation of this agreement’s
regulations, an economical and commercial joint committee shall be formed 
chaired by the Jordanian Minister of Industry and Trade and the Syrian Minister
of Economy and External Trade.
Second : For the purposes of following-up the implementation of this
agreement’s regulations, and to deal with problems arise during implementation,
a following-up committee shall be formed chaired by the Jordanian General
Secretary of the Trade and Industry and the Syrian Assistant to the Minister of
Economy and External Trade, and the membership of competent ministers and
authorities in both countries.
Third : The committee referred to in paragraph No.(2) of this Article shall
undertake the following tasks:
1- To follow-up the implementation of Contracting Parties’ obligations in the
field of trade exchange in both countries of non-custom restrictions, and custom
fees, charges and other taxes of same effect for custom fees, according to this
agreement’s articles.
2- To settle disputes and complaint arise from the application of this agreement.
3- Any other task delegated to such committee in the frame of its specialization.
4- To take suitable procedures to ensure the good-conduct of this agreement, and
to deal with any disputes may arise from its application.
Fourth : The Committee shall raise its recommendations to the Economical and
Commercial Joint Committee that headed by the Minister of Trade and Industry
in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Minister of Economy and External
Trade in the Syrian Arab Republic, to review these recommendations and to take
decision thereof.
Fifth: The Economical and Commercial Joint Committee shall meet at least once
every year, and the meetings shall be held consecutively in the capital of either
country. As well each contracting party shall have the right to request the
meeting of such Committee when necessary.
Sixth : The Economical and Trade Joint Committee may form specialized subcommittee to review trade disputes arise from the application of this agreement’s
regulation and to deal with any faced problems, and obstacles by either parties. In
addition to suggest necessary procedures to fix them and to find proper solutions.
Seventh : Trade disputes arise from the application of this agreement shall be
presented to the Economical and Commercial Joint Committee which formed
according to paragraph 1 of this Article, for studying and proposing a mechanism
of their settlement.
Article 17 
1-This Agreement shall come into force after 30 days of the last date of two
notifications with the fulfillment of ratification procedures according to
applicable legislation in both countries.
2- This Agreement shall replace all previously signed economical and
commercial agreements and protocols between the two countries as the date of its
entry into force.
3- This Agreement shall remain effective, unless either of the Contracting Parties
has notified the other Contracting Party in writing through diplomatic channels
with its desire to terminate this agreement prior to six months from the date of
requested termination. The provisions of this agreement shall remain effective for
another six months after its termination, in respect of documentary credit which
concluded for trade contracts in the light of their application, and which didn’t
applied till the date of their expiry.
Done and signed in Amman on the 21 of Rajab, 1422 H.J, corresponding to 8, October
2001 of two duplicated original copies in Arabic language of same legal authenticity,
each party shall maintain one copy.
For the Government of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan
Minister of Trade and Industry
Wasef Azzar
For the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic
Minister of Economy and External Trade
Dr. Moh’d Al-Emady