Agreement between the Republic of Latvia and Ukraine on trade in agricultural goods
 
The Republic of Latvia and Ukraine (hereinafter referred to as the "Parties"),
taking into account the Preamble and Article 4 of the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Latvia and Ukraine (hereinafter referred to as "Free Trade Agreement"), signed on November 21, 1995,
agreed on the following:
Article 1
Goals
By liberalizing trade in agricultural goods, the parties will promote harmonious development of economic relations between the Republic of Latvia and Ukraine in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and the requirements of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Article 2
Scope of the contract
The provisions of this Agreement apply to agricultural goods originating from the Contracting Parties. The term "agricultural goods" for the purposes of this Agreement means goods classified in Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized System of Classification and Coding of Goods and Services.
Article 3
Import duties and charges having equivalent effect
1. No new import duties or charges with equivalent effect shall be introduced in the mutual trade of the Parties.
2. With the effective date of this Agreement, the Parties mutually cancel all payments with equivalent effect.
3. The Republic of Latvia cancels import customs duties on agricultural products of Ukrainian origin, except for goods provided for in Annex I of this Agreement "List of agricultural products of Ukrainian origin subject to import customs duties".
4. Ukraine cancels import customs duties on agricultural products originating in the Republic of Latvia, except for goods provided for in Annex II of this Agreement "List of agricultural products originating in the Republic of Latvia subject to import customs duties".
Article 4
Export duties and charges having equivalent effect
From the date of entry into force of this agreement, no export customs duties or payments with an equivalent effect will be applied in mutual trade between the Parties, except for the goods provided for in Annex III of this Agreement "List of agricultural products of Ukrainian origin subject to export customs duties".
Article 5
Quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and measures having equivalent effect
1. New quantitative import and export restrictions and measures with an equivalent effect will not be introduced in mutual trade between the Republic of Latvia and Ukraine.
2. With the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Republic of Latvia cancels all quantitative import and export restrictions and measures with an equivalent effect.
3. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Ukraine shall abolish all quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and measures having an equivalent effect.
Article 6
Rules of origin of goods
The rules of origin of goods for the implementation of this Agreement are set out in Protocol A of the Free Trade Agreement.
Article 7
Dumping
If one of the Contracting Parties finds that dumping is taking place in the trade relations regulated by this Agreement, in the sense that it is described in Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, then it may apply appropriate measures against this activity in accordance with the procedure that set forth in Article 8 of this Agreement.
Article 8
Procedure for applying security measures
1. The Party that has decided to take security measures shall immediately notify the other Party and provide it with all necessary information. Consultations of the Joint Committee shall begin immediately with a view to finding a mutually acceptable solution.
2. The Parties shall provide the Joint Committee with the requested assistance necessary to verify the specific case and, if necessary, cease the contested action. If the responding Party is unable to cease its objectionable action within the time limit set by the Joint Committee, or if the Joint Committee is unable to reach an agreement on the matter under discussion after consultations or within thirty days from the time of the appeal to the Joint Committee, the interested Party shall be entitled to apply appropriate measures to address difficulties encountered during said activity..
3. If the Party takes security measures, the other Contracting Party is immediately informed. Security measures are limited in terms of their scope and time of operation to the extent that it is necessary to improve the situation that caused the need for the above-mentioned measures, and they may not exceed the damages caused by the action causing disagreement. Priority is given to measures that would least interfere with the execution of this Agreement.
4. There are regular consultations on the implemented security measures, the aim of which is to replace or cancel the security measures as soon as possible.
5. If extraordinary circumstances require immediate action and preliminary investigation of the situation is not possible, the interested Party may immediately apply such temporary protection measures as are absolutely necessary to improve the situation in the mentioned cases. The Joint Committee shall be immediately informed of these measures and consultations between the two Parties shall be initiated as soon as possible.
Article 9
Joint Committee
The Joint Committee established under Article 2 of the Free Trade Agreement (the Joint Committee) is responsible for the administration of this Agreement.
Article 10
Scientific and technical cooperation
The parties, on the basis of mutual interest, will promote scientific and technical cooperation in agriculture and related fields. This cooperation may include the creation of joint ventures, the exchange of information and documentation, the exchange of experts, as well as the organization of seminars and working groups.
Article 11
Further development of the agreement
The parties declare their readiness to promote the harmonious development of trade in agricultural goods. The parties agreed to review this Agreement for further liberalization when deemed necessary by mutual agreement within the Joint Committee.
Article 12
Veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary measures
1. The Parties shall apply their provisions in the veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary fields in a non-discriminatory manner and shall not introduce any new measures which would unnecessarily impede trade.
2. The implementation of veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be in accordance with international conventions in this field.
Article 13
Appendices
Annexes to this Agreement are an integral part thereof.
Article 14
Termination of Protocol B of the Free Trade Agreement
With the entry into force of this Agreement, Protocol B of the Free Trade Agreement shall cease to be effective.
Article 15
Entry into force and validity
This Agreement shall enter into force thirty (30) days after the Parties notify each other that all constitutional requirements necessary for this Agreement to enter into force have been met.
This contract is concluded for an indefinite period.
Article 16
Denunciation
Each of the Parties has the right to denounce this agreement by submitting a written notification to the other Party. This Agreement shall expire six (6) months after the date on which the other Contracting Party has received this notification.
In witness whereof, the relevant authorized persons of the Government sign this Agreement.
Signed in Kyiv on February 26, 1998 in two original copies, both in Latvian, Ukrainian and English, all texts are equally authentic.
In case of disagreement, the English text will prevail.
 
On behalf of the Republic of Latvia on behalf of Ukraine
Guntars Krast Valery Pustovoitenko
Prime Minister Prime Minister
APPENDIX TEXT: 

Appendix I
Refers to clause 3 of Article 3
List of agricultural products of Ukrainian origin subject to import duties
1. At the time of entry into force of the agreement, the most-favoured-nation rate must be applied to each product included in Annex I.
2. If, after the entry into force of the Agreement, the most-favoured-nation rate is reduced on an egra omnes basis, it will replace the customs duty (tariff) rates mentioned in Annex I, Clause 1, starting from the date of application of these reductions.
Appendix II
Refers to clause 4 of Article 3
List of agricultural products originating in the Republic of Latvia subject to import duties
 
1. At the time of entry into force of the agreement, the most-favoured-nation rate must be applied to each product included in Annex II.
2. If, after the entry into force of the Agreement, the most-favoured-nation rate is reduced on an egra omnes basis, it will replace the customs duty (tariff) rates mentioned in point 1 of Annex II, starting from the date of application of these reductions.
Appendix III
Refers to Article 4
"Export duties and charges having equivalent effect"
List of agricultural products of Ukrainian origin subject to export customs duties
