[Cursory Translation]
HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION AND
MACAO SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION
CLOSER ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENT
Preamble
To promote the joint economic prosperity and
development of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and
the Macao Special Administrative Region (hereinafter referred to as
the “two sides"), and to facilitate the further development of
economic links between the two sides and the Mainland and other
countries and regions, the two sides decide to sign the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region and Macao Special Administrative
Region Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (hereinafter
referred to as the “CEPA”).
CHAPTER 1
INITIAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Objectives
To achieve liberalisation of trade between the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (hereinafter referred to as “Hong 
2
Kong”) and the Macao Special Administrative Region (hereinafter
referred to as “Macao”), strengthen trade and investment
cooperation between the two sides and promote joint development of
the two sides through the implementation of the following measures:
(i) reducing or eliminating tariff and non-tariff barriers on
substantially all the trade in goods between the two
sides;
(ii) reducing or eliminating all discriminatory measures on
substantially all the trade in services between the two
sides;
(iii) promoting and protecting investment;
(iv) promoting trade and investment facilitation;
(v) promoting economic and technical cooperation.
Article 2
Principles
The conclusion, implementation and amendment of the
CEPA shall adhere to the following principles:
(i) to be consistent with the rules of the World Trade
Organisation (hereinafter referred to as the “WTO”);
(ii) to accord with the needs of both sides to adjust and
upgrade their industries and enterprises and to
promote steady and sustained development;
(iii) to achieve reciprocity and mutual benefits,
complementarity with each other’s advantages and 
3
joint prosperity;
(iv) to take progressive action, dealing with the easier
subjects before the more difficult ones.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
Article 3
Definitions
In the CEPA:
(i) Mainland refers to the entire customs territory of the
People’s Republic of China;
(ii) measure includes any law, regulation, procedure,
requirement or practice;
(iii) originating/originated means being qualified under
the rules of origin set out in Article 7 (Rules of Origin)
of Chapter 3 (Trade in Goods);
(iv) customs procedures means the measures applied by
the Customs Administrations to goods that are subject
to customs control;
(v) existing means in effect on the date of entry into force
of the CEPA;
(vi) days means calendar days.
4
CHAPTER 3
TRADE IN GOODS
Article 4
National Treatment
One side shall accord to the goods of the other side
treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like
products in accordance with Article III of the WTO General
Agreement on Tariff and Trade 1994 (hereafter referred to as “GATT
1994”), including its interpretative notes. To this end, Article III of
GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and
made part of the CEPA, mutatis mutandis.
Article 5
Tariffs
One side shall apply zero tariff to all imported goods
originated from the other side.
Article 6
Non-tariff Measures and Tariff Rate Quota
1. Neither side shall apply non-tariff measures inconsistent
with the WTO rules to goods imported and originated from the other 
5
side.
2. One side shall not apply tariff rate quota to goods imported
and originated from the other side.
Article 7
Rules of Origin
1. The rules of origin specified by one side shall be applied to
the goods imported by the other side from the former side under the
CEPA.
2. One side may seek assistance from the other side to verify
whether the goods imported from the latter side comply with the
applicable rules of origin. The two sides shall notify each other and
deal with the cases through consultation if the verifications
conducted by one side confirm that the goods do not comply with the
requirements for CEPA treatment.
CHAPTER 4
TRADE REMEDIES
Article 8
Anti-dumping Measures
6
Neither side shall apply anti-dumping measures to goods
imported and originated from the other side.
Article 9
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
The two sides reiterate their observance of the WTO
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and Article
XVI of GATT 1994, and undertake not to apply countervailing
measures to goods imported and originated from each other.
Article 10
Safeguards
If the implementation of the CEPA causes sharp
increase in the import of a product originating from the other side
which has caused or threatened to cause serious injury to the
affected side’s domestic industry that produces like or directly
competitive products, the affected side may, after giving written
notice, temporarily suspend the concessions on the import of the
concerned product from the other side, and shall, at the request of
the other side, promptly commence consultations under Article 30
(Institutional Arrangements) of Chapter 12 (Other Provisions) of the
CEPA in order to reach an agreement.
7
CHAPTER 5
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION
Article 11
Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation
Recognising the importance of close and long-term
cooperation between the two Customs Administrations and of the
implementation of customs clearance facilitation to their economic
and social development, the two sides decide to strengthen
communication and cooperation in customs clearance facilitation.
The specific content of cooperation shall be formulated and
implemented in accordance with Chapter 11 (Economic and
Technical Cooperation).
CHAPTER 6
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE
Article 12
Technical Barriers to Trade
The two sides reiterate their observance of the WTO
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
Article 13
8
Technical Cooperation
The two sides decide to intensify their joint efforts in
communication and cooperation in the areas of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment procedures with a view to
enhancing mutual understanding of the regulatory systems,
improving technical competence and facilitating the launch of
capacity building activities. The specific content of cooperation
shall be formulated and implemented in accordance with Chapter 11
(Economic and Technical Cooperation).
CHAPTER 7
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
Article 14
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
The two sides reiterate their observance of the WTO
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures.
.
Article 15
Technical Cooperation
Recognising the importance of protecting the health and 
9
safety of people in the course of trade in goods and movement of
persons, the two sides decide to strengthen communication and
cooperation in the sanitary and phytosanitary areas including
commodity inspection and quarantine, food safety, health and
quarantine of people, and certification, accreditation and
standardisation. The specific content of cooperation shall be
formulated and implemented in accordance with Chapter 11
(Economic and Technical Cooperation).
CHAPTER 8
TRADE IN SERVICES
Article 16
Scope and Definition
1. All measures in Annex 1 and Annex 2 to the CEPA apply
to trade in services between Hong Kong and Macao.
2. Trade in services referred to in the CEPA means:
(i) the supply of a service from the area of one side into
the area of the other side;
(ii) the supply of a service in the area of one side to the
service consumer of the other side;
(iii) the supply of a service by a service supplier of one
side, through commercial presence in the area of the 
10
other side;
(iv) the supply of a service by a service supplier of one
side, through presence of natural persons of one side
in the area of the other side.
Sub-paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iv) above shall collectively be
referred to as cross-border services.
3. Unless otherwise specified in the CEPA, service supplier
as used in the CEPA refers to any person that supplies a service. In
this context:
(i) person means either a natural person or a juridical
person;
(ii) natural person:
(a) in the case of Hong Kong, means a permanent
resident of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region of the People’s Republic of China;
(b) in the case of Macao, means a permanent resident
of the Macao Special Administrative Region of the
People’s Republic of China;
(iii) juridical person means any legal entity duly
constituted or organised under the applicable laws of
Hong Kong or Macao, whether for profit or otherwise,
and whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned,
including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint
venture, sole proprietorship or association (business
association), and engaged in substantive business 
11
operations in any side.
4. For the purposes of this Chapter:
(i) measure means any measure by one side, whether in
the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision,
administrative action or any other form.
In fulfilling its obligations and commitments under the
CEPA, each side shall take such reasonable measures
as may be available to it to ensure observance of such
obligations and commitments by governments and
authorities as well as non-governmental bodies within
its area.
(ii) services includes any service in any sector except
services supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority.
(iii) a service supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority means any service which is supplied neither
on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or
more service suppliers.
(iv) commercial presence means any type of business or
professional establishment, including through:
(a) the constitution, acquisition or operation of a
juridical person, or
(b) the constitution or operation of a branch or a
representative office,
within the area of one side for the purpose of supplying 
12
a service.
(v) government procurement means procuring the use
of goods or services or procuring goods or services or
both, by the government by contractual means in the
form of purchase, lease, etc., and not with a view to
commercial sale or resale or for use in the production
or supply of the goods or services for commercial sale
or resale.
5. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(i) government procurement; or
(ii) subsidies or donations accorded by one side, including
government-supported loan, guarantee and insurance.
However, should the laws and regulations of one side provide
otherwise for sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii), such laws and
regulations shall prevail.
Article 17
National Treatment
1. Subject to the observance of any conditions and
qualifications set out in Annex 1 and Annex 2 to the CEPA, one side
shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other side, in
respect of all measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no
less favourable than that it accords to its own like services and 
13
service suppliers.1
2. Either side may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by
according to services and service suppliers of the other side, either
formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to that it
accords to its own like services and service suppliers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be
considered to be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of
competition in favour of services or service suppliers of one side
compared to like services or service suppliers of the other side.
Article 18
Specific Commitments
1. The two sides will, through consultations, formulate and
implement further liberalisation of trade in services for the other
side’s services and service suppliers. The relevant specific
commitments will be listed in Annex 1 and Annex 2 to the CEPA.
2. At the request of either side, the two sides may, through
consultations, further raise the level of liberalisation of trade in
services between them.
3. Any measures to raise the level of liberalisation of trade in

1
Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require either side to
compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of
the relevant services or service suppliers of the other side.
14
services pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article shall be included in
Annex 1 and Annex 2 to the CEPA for implementation.
Article 19
Transparency
The two sides reiterate their observance of Article III of the
WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services (hereafter referred to
as “GATS”), and undertake to publish promptly all relevant measures
of general application which pertain to or affect the operation of this
Chapter.
Article 20
Domestic Regulation
1. The two sides reiterate their observance of Article VI of
GATS, and shall ensure that in sectors where specific commitments
are undertaken, all measures of general application affecting trade in
services are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial
manner.
2. One side shall, as far as practicable, maintain or institute
promptly judicial, arbitral or administrative tribunals or procedures
which provide, at the request of an affected service supplier, for the
prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate remedies for,
administrative decisions affecting trade in services. Where such 
15
procedures are not independent of the agency entrusted with the
administrative decision concerned, that side shall ensure that the
procedures in fact provide for an objective and impartial review.
3. Where authorisation is required for the supply of a service
on which a specific commitment has been made by one side, the
competent authorities of that side shall:
(i) in the case of an incomplete application, at the request
of the applicant, identify all the additional information
that is required to complete the application and provide
the opportunity to remedy deficiencies within a
reasonable timeframe;
(ii) within a reasonable period of time after the submission
of an application considered complete under its
domestic laws and regulations, inform the applicant of
the decision concerning the application;
(iii) at the request of the applicant, provide without undue
delay information concerning the status of the
application; and
(iv) if an application is terminated or denied, to the
maximum extent possible, inform promptly the
applicant in writing the reasons for such action. The
applicant may, in accordance with the respective
domestic laws and regulations, resubmit a new
application at its discretion.
16
4. In sectors in which specific commitments are undertaken,
one side shall ensure that measures relating to qualification
requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing
requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in
services, and meet the following requirements:
(i) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as
competence and the ability to supply the service;
(ii) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the
quality of the service; and
(iii) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves
a restriction on the supply of the service.
5. In determining whether one side is in conformity with the
obligation under paragraph 4 of this Article, account shall be taken of
international standards of relevant international organisations 2
applied by that side.
6. In the event that the negotiation results pursuant to Article
VI.4 of GATS enter into force, the two sides shall jointly review the
relevant results of the negotiations so as to decide whether to
incorporate them into this Article.
7. In sectors where specific commitments regarding
professional services are undertaken, one side shall provide for
adequate procedures to verify the competence of professionals of

2 The term “relevant international organisations” refers to international bodies whose membership is
open to the relevant bodies of both sides under the CEPA.
17
the other side.
8. No provisions of this Article shall apply to measures
adopted or maintained, which are consistent with any conditions and
qualifications set forth in Annex 1 and Annex 2 to the CEPA.
Article 21
Prudential Principle on Financial Services
1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the CEPA, one
side shall not be prevented from taking or maintaining measures
relating to financial services for prudential reasons. These
prudential reasons include the protection of investors, depositors,
policy holders or persons to whom a fiduciary obligation is owed by a
financial service supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability of the
financial system3
.
2. No provisions of the CEPA shall apply to
non-discriminatory measures of general application in implementing
monetary or related credit policies or exchange rate policies4
.
3. The term “financial service” shall bear the same meaning
of financial service as defined in paragraph 5(a) of the Annex on

3 The term “prudential reasons” shall be interpreted as including the security, stability, integrity and
financial responsibility of a single financial institution or a financial system, as well as protecting the
security of payment and clearing system and the stability of finance and operation.
4 To avoid ambiguity, measures of general application in implementing monetary or related credit
policies or exchange rate policies do not include measures which expressly declare invalid or modify
a contract term stipulating the denomination in a currency or exchange rate of a currency.
18
Financial Services to GATS (hereafter referred to as “Annex on
Financial Services”) and the term "financial service supplier"
contained in that paragraph also includes public entity as defined in
paragraph 5(c) of the Annex on Financial Services.
4. To avoid ambiguity, the CEPA shall not be construed as
preventing one side from adopting measures that are applicable to a
financial institution, or from enforcing measures in a financial
institution, relating to the service suppliers of the other side or
covered services necessary to ensure compliance with laws or
regulations that are consistent with the provisions of the CEPA,
including measures relating to the prevention of false and fraudulent
practices or measures to deal with the effects of default on financial
services contracts, provided that the manner in which such
measures are applied would not constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination to countries (or regions) where like
conditions prevail or a disguised restriction on the investment of the
financial institution.
5. Each side reserves the right to implement restrictive
measures for any sectors not clearly covered in existing regulations.
Article 22
Mutual Recognition of Professional Qualifications
The two sides shall encourage mutual recognition of
19
professional qualifications and promote the exchange of professional
talents between each other.
Article 23
Safeguard Measures
1. Each side reserves the right to establish or maintain any
restrictive measures relating to services in the event that the
implementation of this Chapter causes substantial impact on its trade
and relevant sectors.
2. One side should, on a best endeavour basis, notify the
other side fully and in a timely manner, measures intended to be
taken pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, and resolution shall be
sought through consultation.
Article 24
Requirement on Information
One side may request information relating to services or
service suppliers from the service suppliers of the other side only for
information or statistical purposes. The former side shall protect
confidential commercial information from leakage which may
adversely affect the competitive position of the service supplier.
This paragraph shall not be construed as preventing either side from
acquiring or disclosing information relating to the laws on the 
20
application of fairness and integrity.
CHAPTER 9
INVESTMENT
Article 25
Investment Agreement

The two sides decide to commence discussions on an
investment agreement to promote and protect investment.
CHAPTER 10
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Article 26
Commitments in Intellectual Property
The two sides reiterate their observance of the WTO
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
and provisions relating to intellectual property in other agreements
that are applicable to them.
Article 27
Cooperation in the Area of Intellectual Property
21
The two sides decide to intensify their joint efforts to
strengthen cooperation in the area of intellectual property. The
specific content of cooperation shall be formulated and implemented
in accordance with Chapter 11 (Economic and Technical
Cooperation).
CHAPTER 11
ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION
Article 28
Economic and Technical Cooperation

1. The two sides decide that, for the purposes of enhancing
the mutual benefits under the CEPA, promoting the implementation
and liberalisation of the CEPA, as well as facilitating trade and
investment between the two sides, economic and technical
cooperation will be enhanced in accordance with their respective
laws and regulations, policy objectives and allocation of resources.
2. The two sides decide to promote trade and investment
facilitation through greater transparency, standard conformity and
enhanced information exchange.
3. The two sides will formulate a Work Programme to set out 
22
the areas and the specific content of cooperation to be implemented
in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
4. At the request of either side, the two sides may expand
and amend the Work Programme formulated in accordance with
paragraph 3 of this Article through consultation.
CHAPTER 12
OTHER PROVISIONS
Article 29
Exceptions
The provisions in the CEPA shall not affect the ability of
either side to maintain or adopt exception measures consistent with
the rules of the WTO.
Article 30
Institutional Arrangements
1. The two sides shall set up a Joint Steering Committee
(hereinafter referred to as "Steering Committee"), which will
comprise senior representatives or designated officials of the two
sides.
2. Liaison Offices shall be set up under the Steering 
23
Committee. Working groups may be set up as the need arises.
The Liaison Offices shall be set up in the respective authorities
designated by the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
Government and the Macao Special Administrative Region
Government.
3. The functions of the Steering Committee include:
(i) supervising the implementation of the CEPA;
(ii) interpreting the provisions of the CEPA;
(iii) resolving disputes that may arise during the
implementation of the CEPA;
(iv) drafting additions and amendments to the content of
the CEPA;
(v) providing steer on the work of the working groups;
(vi) dealing with any other business relating to the
implementation of the CEPA.
4. The Steering Committee shall meet at times mutually
agreed upon by both sides, and may convene special meetings
within 30 days upon request by either side.
5. The two sides shall resolve any problems arising from the
interpretation or implementation of the CEPA through consultation in
the spirit of friendship and cooperation. The Steering Committee
shall make its decisions by consensus.
Article 31
Miscellaneous
24
1. Except as otherwise provided in the CEPA, any action
taken under it shall not affect or nullify the rights and obligations of
either side under other existing agreements to which it is a
contracting party.
2. The two sides shall endeavour to refrain from increasing
restrictive measures affecting the implementation of the CEPA.
Article 32
Agreements and Annexes
The Agreements of and Annexes to the CEPA form an
integral part of the CEPA.
Article 33
Amendments
The provisions of the CEPA or its Agreements and
Annexes may be amended in writing when the need arises. Any
amendment shall come into effect after it has been signed by the
duly authorised representatives of the two sides.
Article 34
Coming Into Effect and Implementation
25
1. The CEPA shall come into effect on the day of signature
by the representatives of the two sides.
2. From 1 January 2018, the two sides shall implement the
commitments in liberalisation of trade in goods and services under
the CEPA.
The CEPA is signed in duplicate in the Chinese language.
The CEPA is signed on 27 October 2017 in Hong Kong.
(Signature) (Signature)
Financial Secretary
Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region of the
People’s Republic of China
Secretary for Economy and Finance
Macao Special
Administrative Region of the
People’s Republic of China