FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN MOLDOVA AND SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO


_______________
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
MOLDOVA AND THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS OF SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO*
PREAMBLE
The Government of the Republic of Moldova and the Council of the Ministers of Serbia and
Montenegro (hereinafter referred to as “the Contracting Parties”),
Reaffirming their desire to actively participate in the process of economic integration in
Europe;
Admitting that Contracting Parties are willing to consolidate relations and to establish strong
and durable relationships of cooperation and economic integration;
Reaffirming their commitment to pluralist democracy based on observance of the rules, rights
and basic human liberties of the state governed by the rule of law;
Firmly convinced that this Agreement will promote intensification of commercial mutually
advantageous exchange leading to creation of a wide zone of free trade, and contributing to the
process of European integration,
Resolved for this purpose to progressively eliminate the barriers in mutual trade in general, in
conformity with the Agreement establishing World Trade Organization ( hereinafter referred to as “
WTO “),
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Objectives
1. The Contracting Parties shall establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of
this Agreement and in conformity with the definition, set out in Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 of
the WTO.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to promote, through the expansion of mutual trade, of harmonious development of
economic relations between the Contracting Parties, improvement of living standards
and conditions of work, raising productivity and enhancing financial stability;
(b) to provide fair conditions for carrying out loyal competition for trade between the
Contracting Parties;
(c) to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods, including also
the agricultural products;
 *
 The associated Annexes have been submitted to the Secretariat for consultation by interested
Members (office 1174). 
Page 2
(d) to create conditions for further encouragement of investments, particularly for the
development of joint investments in both countries;
(e) to contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade.
CHAPTER I: INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
Article 2
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products originating in the Contracting
Parties.
2. The term “industrial products” means for the purpose of this Agreement the products falling
within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the
exception of the products listed in Annex 1 to this Agreement.
Article 3
Basic Duties
1. For commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Customs Tariffs of the
Contracting Parties shall be applied to the classification of goods for imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions set out in this Agreement
are applied shall be the MFN duty on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. If after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an
erga omnes basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff agreement concluded as a result of
the WTO, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article
as from that date when such reductions are applied.
4. The reduced duties, calculated in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be
rounded off to the second decimal place.
5. The Contracting Parties shall mutually exchange their basic duties.
Article 4
Customs Duties On Import And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. The Contracting Parties shall abolish all the customs duties on import and all charges having
equivalent effect on date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
2. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties on imports or
charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased in
trade between the Contracting Parties. 
Page 3
Article 5
Customs Duties On Export And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new custom duties on exports, charges having equivalent effect to customs duties, and
other export duties of a fiscal nature shall be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties.
2. The Contracting Parties shall abolish all customs duties on exports or charges having
equivalent effect to custom duties, and other export duties of a fiscal nature on the date of the entry
into force of this Agreement.
Article 6
Quantitative Restrictions On Imports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. No quantitative restrictions on imports or measures having equivalent effect shall be
maintained or introduced between the Contracting Parties on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 7
Quantitative Restrictions On Exports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. No quantitative restrictions on exports or measures having equivalent effect shall be
maintained or introduced between the Contracting Parties as from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except for products listed in Annex 2.
CHAPTER II: AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
Article 8
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products originating in the
Contracting Parties.
2. The term "agricultural products" means for the purpose of this Agreement the products falling
within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and the
products listed in Annex 1 to this Agreement.
Article 9
Exchange Of Concessions
1. The Contracting Parties shall grant each other the concessions in Protocol 1 to this Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as “Protocol 1”) as laid down in that Protocol and in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. 
Page 4
2. Taking account of:
− the role of agriculture in their economies,
− the development of trade in agricultural products between the Contracting Parties,
− the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products,
− the rules of their agricultural policies,
− the results of the multilateral trade negotiations under the WTO,
the Contracting Parties shall examine within the framework of the Joint Commission the possibilities
of granting each other further concessions in trade in agricultural products.
Article 10
Agricultural Policy
1. Without prejudice to the provisions under Article 10 of this Agreement, the provisions of the
Chapter II of this Agreement shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective agricultural
policies of the Contracting Parties or the taking of any measures under such policies, including the
implementation of the provisions of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.
2. The Contracting Parties shall notify to the Joint Commission changes in their respective
agricultural policies pursued or measures which may affect the conditions of trade in agricultural
products between them. On the request of either Contracting Party, prompt consultations shall be held
within the Joint Commission, to examine the situation.
Article 11
Specific Safeguards
 Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, in particular Article 26 of this
Agreement, given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, if imports of products
originating in one Contracting Party, which are subject of concessions, granted under this Agreement,
cause serious disturbances to the market of the other Contracting Party, the Contracting Party
concerned shall enter into prompt consultations to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution,
the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures it deems necessary.
Article 12
Sanitary And Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Contracting Parties shall apply their national regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and
sanitary matters, in particular in the exchange of information on infectious diseases of domestic
animals, quarantine diseases, plant pests and weed, in a way that complies to the WTO Agreement on
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
2. The Contracting Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and sanitary
matters in a non-discriminatory way and shall not introduce new measures that may have the effect of
unduly obstructing trade. 
Page 5
3. The Contracting Parties undertake the obligations to exchange information on the level of the
sanitary and phytosanitary protection of animals, plants and products.
4. The sanitary and phytosanitary measures and functioning of veterinary services shall comply
with the Code of the International Epizootic Office and other international conventions in this area to
which the Contracting Parties are part of.
CHAPTER III: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 13
Elimination Of Technical Barriers To Trade
1. The rights and obligations of the Contracting Parties relating to standards or technical
regulations and related measures shall be governed in accordance with the WTO Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate and exchange information in the field of
standardization, metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation with the aim of eliminating
technical barriers to trade.
3. Each Contracting Party, upon a request of the other Contracting Party, shall provide
information on particular individual cases of standards, technical norms or related measures.
4. The Contracting Parties shall aim to reduce technical barriers to trade. To this end the
Contracting Parties will enter, where appropriate, into negotiations for the conclusion of the
Agreements for the mutual recognition in the field of conformity assessment, for the products subject
to mutual trade between the Parties.
Article 14
Internal Taxation
1. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature
establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products originating in the
Contracting Parties.
2. Products exported to the territory of one of the Contracting Party may not benefit from
repayment of internal taxation in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxation imposed on them.
Article 15
Rules Of Origin And Co-Operation In Customs Administration
1. The Contracting Parties agree to apply the harmonized European preferential rules of origin in
the mutual trade including all existing and further amendments thereto. In case the European rules of
origin are amended, the Joint Commission shall make a decision on amending rules of origin.
2. Protocol 2 to this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “Protocol 2”) lays down the rules of
origin and related methods of administrative co-operation.
3. The Contracting Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews by the
Joint Commission and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the provisions of
Protocol 2 and Articles 3 to 7, 9, 10, 14, 26, 27 and 28 of this Agreement are effectively and 
Page 6
harmoniously applied, and to reduce, as far as possible, the formalities imposed on trade, and to
achieve mutually satisfactory solutions to any difficulties arising from the operation of those
provisions.
4. The Contracting Parties shall conclude separate Agreement for co-operation between their
Customs Administration, as soon as possible.
Article 16
General Exceptions
1. The provisions of this Agreement shall not prevent from applying prohibitions or restrictions
on import, export, or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public
security; the protection of health and human life, animals or plants as well as environment protection;
protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historical or archaeological value; the protection of
intellectual property; regulations relating to gold or silver, or the conservation of exhaustible natural
resources, if such measures are effectively applied in relation with domestic consumption or
production restrictions.
2. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
discrimination or disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting Parties.
Article 17
Security Exceptions
 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking any appropriate
measures which it considers necessary:
(a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies:
(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided
that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of
products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in
other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
(ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
(iii) in time of war or other serious international tension constituting the threat of
war. 
Page 7
Article 18
State Monopoly
1. The Contracting Parties shall adjust progressively any State monopoly of a commercial
character so as to ensure that no discrimination regarding the conditions, under which goods are
procured and marketed, exists between natural and legal persons of the Contracting Parties. The
Contracting Parties shall inform each other about the measures adopted to implement this objective.
2. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any body through which the competent
authorities of the Contracting Parties, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly supervise,
determine or appreciably influence imports or exports between the Contracting Parties. These
provisions shall likewise apply to monopolies delegated by the State to other bodies.
Article 19
Payments
1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to trade in goods between the Contracting
Parties and the transfer of such payments to the territory of the Contracting Party where the creditor
resides shall be free from any restrictions.
2. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the
grant, repayment or acceptance of short and medium term credits to trade in goods in which person
residing in one of the Contracting Parties participates.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, any measure regarding current payments
related to flow of goods shall conform to the conditions stipulated in Article VIII of the Articles of the
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Article 20
Rules Of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement insofar as they
can affect trade between the Contracting Parties:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices concerning undertakings which have as their objective or effect
the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the
Contracting Parties, as a whole or in substantial part thereof.
2. If one Contracting Party considers that a certain practice is incompatible with the provisions
of paragraph 1, and if such a practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interests of
this Contracting Party or material injury to its domestic industry, it may take appropriate measures,
upon consultations within the Joint Commission or after 30 days after a request for such consultations
is made. 
Page 8
Article 21
State Aid
1. Any aid granted by one Contracting Party or through State resources in any form whatsoever,
distorting or threatening to distort competition by favoring certain undertakings or the production of
certain goods shall be incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement, insofar as it may
affect trade between the Contracting Parties.
2. The Joint Commission, within tree years since the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement, shall set out the basic criteria to verify any practices contrary to this Article, as well as
rules for their implementation.
3. The Contracting Parties shall ensure transparency of state aid measures, inter alia also
through annual reporting to the Joint Commission on the whole volume of the state aid and its
distribution and will provide, on the other Contracting Party’s request, information on the schemes in
specific cases.
4. If one Contracting Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with the provisions of
this Article, it may take appropriate measures against this practice, which shall not be in excess of the
injury caused, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 23 of
this Agreement. Such measures may be taken only in accordance with the procedures and conditions
set up by the WTO and any other negotiated instrument applicable between Contracting Parties.
Article 22
Public Procurement
 The Contracting Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement
markets as an objective of this Agreement.
 The Contracting Parties shall progressively develop regulations on public procurement for the
purpose of ensuring mutual access to bidding based contracting on their public procurement markets.
 The Joint Commission will examine the evolution of regulations in this area, aiming to meet
the objectives of this Article, and shall recommend concrete ways to implement its provisions.
 During the time of examination indicated in Paragraph 3, the Joint Commission may take into
consideration, in particular, within the framework of international relations development, the
possibility of extending the coverage or/and degree of openness of the market mentioned in
paragraph 2.
Article 23
Procedure For The Application Of Safeguard Measures
 Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in the
following paragraphs of the present Article, the Contracting Parties shall endeavor to solve any
differences between them through direct consultations.
 Without prejudice to paragraph 6 of the present Article, each Contracting Party, which
considers resorting to safeguard measures, shall promptly notify the other Contracting Party and shall
supply all relevant information. Consultations between the Contracting Parties shall take place
without delay with a view to finding a solution. 
Page 9
3. (a) As regards Article 21, the Contracting Parties shall give the Joint Commission all
assistance required in order to examine the case. If the Contracting Party fails to stop
the practice objected to, within the period fixed by the Joint Commission, or if the
Joint Commission fails to reach an agreement after consultations, or after 30 days
following the referral for such consultations, the Contracting Party concerned may
adopt the appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the disputed
practice.
(b) As regards Articles 25, 26 and 27, the Joint Commission shall examine the case or
situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to the difficulties notified
by the Contracting Party concerned. In absence of such a decision during 30 days of
the matter being referred to the Joint Commission, the Contracting Party concerned
may adopt the necessary measures in order to remedy the situation.
(c) As regards Article 29 the Contracting Party concerned shall supply to the Joint
Commission with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the
situation with a view to seeking a mutually acceptable solution. If the Joint
Commission fails to reach or if a period of three months has elapsed from the date of
notification, the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures.
4. The safeguard measures taken shall be immediately notified to the other Contracting Party.
They will be restricted with regard to their extent and to their duration to what is strictly necessary in
order to rectify the situation-giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury
caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures as will
least disturb the functioning of the Agreement.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of regular consultations within the Joint
Commission with a view of their re-applying, substitution or abolition as soon as possible.
6. When exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 25, 26 and 27 apply
forthwith the precautionary and provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the respective
situation. The measures shall be notified without delay and consultations between the Contracting
Parties shall take place as soon as possible within the Joint Commission.
Article 24
Intellectual Property Protection
1. The Contracting Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non-discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, including measures for the enforcement of such rights
against infringement, counterfeiting and piracy.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement, the protection of intellectual property rights includes
mainly the protection of copyright, computer programs, databases and related rights, trademarks,
geographic indications, industrial projects, patents, integrated circuits and drawings, as well as
undisclosed information on know-how.
3. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate in intellectual property rights protection matters and,
at the request of any Contracting Party, consultations on expert level regarding these problems shall
be held, mainly in areas dealing with the existing and future international treaties on harmonization,
administration and enforcement of intellectual property rights and international specialized
organizations such as the WTO and World Intellectual Property Organization, as well as the
relationships of the Contracting Parties with any other third country on the of intellectual property
matter. 
Page 10
Article 25
Dumping
 If one of the Contracting Parties finds that dumping, in the meaning of Article VI of GATT
1994, is taking place in the trade relations governed by this Agreement, the concerned Contracting
Party may take appropriate measures against this practice under the conditions and in accordance with
the procedure laid down in Article 23 of this Agreement, as well as in conformity with WTO
Agreement on implementation of the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT
1994.
Article 26
General Safeguards
 Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under conditions as to
cause, or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injuries to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the
territory of the importing Contracting Party, or
(b) serious disturbances in any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could
bring serious deterioration in the economic situation of a certain region,
the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 23 of this Agreement.
Article 27
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration, which derogate from the provisions of Article 4 of
this Agreement, may be taken in the form of increased customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important
social problems.
3. Export customs duties applied by one of the Contracting Parties for goods originating in other
Contracting Party shall not exceed 25% ad valorem and shall contain a preference element in terms of
the rate of customs duty for goods originating in other Contracting Party. The total value of imported
goods subject to such measures cannot exceed 15% of the total amount of imports of industrial goods
from the other Contracting Party during the last year for which statistic data is valid.
4. These measures shall apply for a period that will not exceed three years, otherwise the
authorization of the Joint Commission is needed.
5. No measure can be applied to goods if more than two years passed since the removal of all
customs duties and quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect for such goods.
6. The interested Contracting Party shall inform the other Contracting Party of any exceptional
measure it intends to take and, at the request of the other Contracting Party, consultations shall be held
within the Joint Commission regarding such measures and sectors to which they apply, even before
they are put into force. When taking such measures, the Contracting Party concerned shall provide the
Joint Commission a schedule for the elimination of customs duties introduced under this Article. 
Page 11
Article 28
Re-Export And Serious Shortage
 Where the compliance with the provisions of this Agreement leads to:
(a) re-export towards a third country, against which the exporting Contracting Party
maintains for that product quantitative export restrictions, export duties, or measures
or charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or a threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting
Contracting Party,
and where the situation referred to above gives rise or is likely to give rise to major difficulties for the
exporting Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may take appropriate measures under the
conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 23 of this Agreement. The
measures shall be non-discriminatory and be eliminated when conditions justify no longer their
maintenance.
Article 29
Fulfillment Of Obligations
1. The Contracting Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the fulfillment of their
obligations under the provisions of this Agreement.
2. If either Contracting Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation
under this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the
conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 23 of this Agreement.
Article 30
Balance-Of- Payments Difficulties
1. Where a Contracting Party is in serious balance-of-payments difficulties, or under imminent
threat thereof, the Contracting Party concerned may adopt, in accordance with the conditions
established by WTO, trade restrictive measures, which shall be of limited duration and may not go
beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance-of-payments situation. The measures shall be
progressively attenuated, as the balance-of-payments conditions improve, and they shall be eliminated
when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The Contracting Party in concerned shall inform
the other Contracting Party and the Joint Commission forthwith their introduction and, whenever
practicable, of a time schedule for their removal.
2. The Contracting Parties shall endeavor to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures base on
balance-of-payments difficulties. 
Page 12
Article 31
The Joint Commission
1. The Contracting Parties agree to establish a Joint Commission composed of their
representatives.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administrated by the Joint
Commission.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall
exchange information and, at the request of any Contracting Party, shall hold consultations within the
Joint Commission. The Joint Commission shall keep under review the possibility of further removal
of the obstacles to trade between the Contracting Parties.
4. The Joint Commission may take decisions in the cases provide for in this Agreement. On
other matters the Joint Commission may take recommendations.
Article 32
Procedures Of The Joint Commission
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Commission shall meet whenever
necessary but at least once a year. Either Contracting Party may request a meeting to be held.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement, the Joint Commission shall adopt its rules of procedure.
3. The Joint Commission may decide to set up such sub-committees and working parties as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
Article 33
Trade Relations Governed By Other Agreements
1. The provisions of this Agreement apply to all trade relationships between the Contracting
Parties.
2. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, freetrade zones, economic unions or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that these do not
negatively affect the trade regime between the Contracting Parties and in particular the provisions
concerning rules of origin provided for by this Agreement. 
Page 13
Article 34
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where either Contracting Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the
economies of the Contracting Parties to develop the relations established by this Agreement by
extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other
Contracting Party. The Contracting Parties may instruct the Joint Commission to examine this request
and, where appropriate, to make recommendations to them, particularly with a view to opening
negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article will be
subject to ratification of approval by the Contracting Parties to this Agreement in accordance with
their internal legal procedures.
Article 35
Annexes And Protocols
 Annexes and Protocols of this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. The Joint
Commission may decide to amend Annexes and Protocols.
Article 36
Amendments
 Amendments to this Agreement, including Annexes and Protocol, may be proposed by either
Contracting Party and shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the last notification, through
diplomatic channels, confirming that all internal legal procedures required by either Contracting Party
for their entry into force have been fulfilled.
Article 37
Duration And Denunciation
1. This Agreement in concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Either Contracting Party may denounce this Agreement by a written notification to the other
Contracting Party. The Agreement shall terminate on the first day of the seventh month following the
date when other Contracting Party received the denunciation notice.
3. In the event of any Contracting Party to this Agreement becoming a member of European
Union that Contracting Party will withdraw from this Agreement at the latest the day before
membership takes effect. 
Page 14
Article 38
Entry Into Force
 This Agreement shall entry into force on the first day of the second month following the date
of the receipt of the last written notification by which the Contracting Parties inform each other
through diplomatic channels that all necessary requirements foreseen by their internal legislation for
the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.

 DONE in Rome, on 13 of November 2003 in two original copies, each in Moldavian, Serbian
and English languages, each being equally authentic. In case of different interpretation of provisions
of this Agreement, the English text shall prevail.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF FOR COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA OF SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
__________

 