FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN ROMANIA AND THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
PREAMBLE
Romania and the Republic of Moldova, hereinafter called the parties,
Recalling their intention to participate actively in the process of economic integration in
Europe,
Considering the importance of the traditional, historical and spiritual links existing
between Romania and the Republic of Moldova and the common values they share, and
recognizing that Romania and the Republic of Moldova wish to strengthen these links and
to establish close and lasting cooperation and economic integration relations,
Reaffirming their commitment to pluralistic democracy based on the rule of law, of
human rights and fundamental human freedoms,
Firmly convinced that this Agreement will promote the increasing of bilateral mutually
advantageous trade exchanges, will foster to the creation of enlarged free-trade area,
thus constituting an important contribution to the European integration process,
Resolved to this end to eliminate progressively the obstacles in their bilateral trade, in
accordance with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT),
Considering that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting the
States Parties to this Agreement from their obligations under other international
agreements,
Have decided:
Article 1
Objectives
1. Romania and the Republic of Moldova shall establish a free-trade area, in accordance
with the provisions of the present Agreement.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to promote, through the expansion of mutual trade, the harmonious development of
the economic relations between Romania and the Republic of Moldova, the improvement
of living and employment standards, increasing of productivity and financial stability;
(b) to provide fair conditions of competition for trade between the States Parties to this
Agreement;
(c) to contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade.
Article 2
Scope
The Agreement shall apply to products originating in the States Parties to this
Agreement.
Article 3
Customs duties on imports and charges having equivalent effect
1. No new customs duty on exports or charge having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between Romania and the Republic of Moldova.
2. Upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Romania and the Republic of
Moldova shall abolish all customs duties on imports for products originating in Romania,
and respectively, in the Republic of Moldova.
3. On the same date, Romania applies an import charge of 0.5 per cent ad valorem to all
its imports, and the Republic of Moldova an import charge of 0.25 per cent.
Article 4
Customs duties of a fiscal nature
The provisions of Article 3 shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
Article 5
Customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect
1. No new customs duty on exports or charge having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between Parties.
2. On the date of entry into force of the Agreement, Romania applies an export charge
of 0.5 per cent ad valorem to all its exports, and the Republic of Moldova an export
charge of 0.25 per cent.
Article 6
Quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect
No quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Parties.
Article 7
Quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect
1. No quantitative restriction on exports or measures having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Parties.
2. Quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished on
the date of entry into force of the Agreement, except those provided for in Annex I, for
Romania and, those provided for in Annex II, for the Republic of Moldova.
Article 8
Information procedure on draft technical regulations
The Parties to this Agreement shall notify each other, at the earliest practicable stage,
the draft technical regulations and draft amendments thereto which they intend t o
issue.
Article 9
Rules of origin and co-operation in customs administration
1. Protocol A lays down the rules of origin and methods of administrative co-operation.
2. The Parties to this Agreement shall take appropriate measures, including regular
reviews by the Joint Committee and arrangements for administrative co-operation, t o
ensure that the provisions of the Protocol A and of the Agreement are effectively and
harmoniously applied.
Article 1 0
Internal taxation
1. The Parties to this Agreement shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal
fiscal nature establishing, whether directly or indirect, discrimination between the
products originating in the States Parties.
2. Products exported to the territory of one of the States Parties to this Agreement
may not benefit from repayment of internal taxation in excess of the amount of direct or
indirect taxation imposed on them.
Article 1 1
Sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures
The Parties shall apply their veterinary, phyto-sanitary and sanitary measures in a nondiscriminatory manner and no new measure having trade restrictive effect will be
introduced.
Article 1 2
General exceptions
1. This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or
goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security;
the protection or health of humans, animals or plants and the environment; the
protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historical or archaeological value; the
protection of intellectual property; rules relating to gold or silver; or the conservation of
exhaustible natural resources, if such measures are effectively applied in relation with
domestic consumption or production restrictions.
2. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties to this Agreement.
Article 1 3
Security exceptions
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a State Party to this Agreement from taking
any measures which it considers necessary:
(a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies;
(c) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided that such
measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not
intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in other goods, materials
and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military
establishment;
(d) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices; or
(e) taken in time of war or other serious international tension constituting threat of war.
Article 1 4
State monopolies
The States Parties to this Agreement shall ensure that any state monopoly of a
commercial character be adjusted, so that the objectives of the Agreement are not to
be affected. At the end of the fifth year upon entry into force of the Agreement, there
will be no discrimination on the conditions under which goods are procured or sold
between the nationals of the two Parties to this Agreement. The Joint Committee will
examine the necessary measures to fulfil this objective.
Article 1 5
Payments
1. Payments in free currency relating to trade between the Parties and the transfer of
such payments to the territory of the State Party to this Agreement, where the creditor
resides, shall be free from any restrictions.
2. The Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the grant,
repayment or acceptance of short or medium term credits covering commercial
transactions in which a resident participates.
3. Until a full convertibility of the currency in the meaning of Article VIII of the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund is introduced, the Parties reserve the
right to apply exchange restrictions connected to the granting or tacking up of short
and medium term credits, provided that these restrictions are applied in a nondiscriminatory manner. They shall be applied in such a manner as to cause the least
possible disruption to this Agreement. The Parties shall promptly inform the Joint
Committee on the introduction of such measures and on any changes therein.
Article 1 6
Rules of competition between the undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement insofar
as they affect trade between the Parties:
(a) all agreements between the undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings
and concerted practices between the undertakings which have as their objective or
effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more economic undertakings of a dominant position in the
territories of the States Parties to this Agreement as a whole or in a substantial part
thereof.
2. If a State Party to this Agreement considers that a given practice is incompatible with
the provisions of paragraph 1 and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious
prejudice to the interest of that State Party or material injury to its domestic industry, i t
may take appropriate measures, upon consultation within the Joint Committee or 3 0
days after a request for such consultations is made.
Article 1 7
State aid
1. Any aid granted by a State Party to this Agreement or through State resources in any
form whatsoever, distorting or threatening to distort competition by favouring certain
undertakings or the production of certain goods shall be incompatible with the proper
functioning of this Agreement, insofar as it may affect trade between the Parties.
2. The Joint Committee shall set out the basic criteria to verify any practices contrary t o
paragraph 1, and the rules of their application.
3. The Parties shall ensure transparency of state aid measures; they will submit each
year a report to the Joint Committee on the whole volume of the state aid and its
distribution and will provide, on the other Party's request, information on the aid
schemes in specific cases.
4. If a State Party to this Agreement considers that a given practice is incompatible with
the provisions of paragraph 1, it may take appropriate measures against this practice,
which shall not be in excess of the injury caused, under the conditions and in accordance
with the procedures laid down in Article 25.
Article 1 8
Public procurement
1. The Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement markets
as an objective of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall progressively develop the rules governing the public procurement, in
order to ensure mutual access to contract award procedures, based on auctions on their
respective public procurement markets.
3. The Joint Committee shall examine the development of regulations in this field, in
order to fulfil the objective of this Article, and may recommend specific modalities t o
fulfil its provisions.
Article 1 9
Protection of intellectual property
1. The States Parties to this Agreement shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and
non-discriminatory protection of intellectual property rights, including measures for the
enforcement of such rights against infringement, counterfeiting and piracy.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement, the protection of intellectual property rights
includes mainly the protection of copyright, computer programs, data bases and related
rights, trademarks, geographical indications, industrial projects, patents, integrated
circuits and drawings, as well as unpublished know-how information.
3. The Parties shall co-operate in intellectual property rights protection matters and, at
the request of the other Party, consultations at expert level regarding these problems
shall be held, mainly in areas dealing with the existing and future international treaties on
harmonization, administration and enforcement of intellectual property rights and
international specialized organizations' activities.
Article 2 0
Dumping
If one of the Parties to this Agreement finds that dumping is taking place in its trade,
the State Party concerned may take appropriate measures against this practice under
the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 25.
Article 2 1
General safeguard actions
Where a product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such
conditions as to cause, or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injury to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the
territory of the importing state, or
(b) serious disturbance in any sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring
about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region,
the concerned State Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 25.
Article 2 2
Structural adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of a limited duration which derogate from the provisions of
Article 3, may be taken in the form of customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce
important social problems.
3. The interested Party shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures i t
intends to take and, at the request of the other Party, consultations shall be held within
the Joint Committee regarding such measures and the sectors to which they apply, even
before they are put into force. When taking such measures, the Party concerned shall
provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the customs duties
introduced under this Article.
Article 2 3
Re-export and serious shortage
Where the compliance with the provisions of this Agreement leads to:
(a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting State Party to this
Agreement maintains for that product quantitative export restrictions, export duties or
measures or charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting State
Party to this Agreement;
and where the situation referred to above gives rise or is likely to give rise to major
difficulties for the exporting State Party, that Party may take appropriate measures
under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 25.
Article 2 4
Fulfilment of obligations
1. The States Parties to this Agreement shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
fulfilment of their obligations under the Agreement.
2. If one State Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under
this Agreement, the State Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under
the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 25.
Article 2 5
Procedure for the application of safeguard measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in
the following paragraphs of the present Article, the States Parties to this Agreement
shall endeavour to solve any differences between them through direct consultations.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 6 of the present Article, a State Party to this
Agreement, which considers resorting to safeguard measures, shall promptly notify the
other State Party and supply all relevant information. Consultations between the State
Parties shall take place without delay with a view to finding a mutually acceptable
solution.
3. (a) As regards Article 17, the States Parties shall give the Joint Committee all the
assistance required in order to examine the case. If the State Party fails to put an end t o
the practice objected to, within the period fixed by the Joint Committee, or if the Joint
Committee fails to reach an agreement after consultations, or after 30 days following
the referral for such consultations, the State Party concerned may adopt the appropriate
measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the practice in question.
(b) As regards Articles 20, 2 1 and 22, the Joint Committee shall examine the case or
the situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to the difficulties notified
by the State Party concerned. In the absence of such a decision within 30 days of the
matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the State Party concerned may adopt the
measures necessary in order to remedy the situation.
(c) As regards Article 24, the State Party concerned shall supply the Joint Committee
with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation with a
view to seeking a mutually acceptable solution. If the Joint Committee fails to reach
such a solution or if a period of 30 days has elapsed from the date of notification, the
State Party concerned may take appropriate measures.
4. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the other Party to this
Agreement and to the Joint Committee. They will be restricted with regard to their
extent and to their duration to what is strictly necessary in order to rectify the situation
giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury caused by the
practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures as will least
disturb the functioning of the Agreement.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be the object of regular consultation within the
Joint Committee with a view to their relaxation, substitution or abolition, as soon a
possible.
6. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the State Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 20, 21 and 22 apply
forthwith the precautionary and provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the
respective situation.
The measures shall be notified without delay and consultations between the States
Parties to this Agreement shall take place as soon as possible within the Joint
Committee.
Article 2 6
Balance-of-payments difficulties
1. Where a Party of this Agreement is in serious balance-of-payments difficulties, or
under imminent threat thereof, the Party concerned may adopt, in accordance with the
conditions established in this Agreement, trade restrictive measures, which shall be of
limited duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance-ofpayments situation.
The measures shall be progressively relaxed as balance-of-payments conditions improve
and they shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The
State Party concerned shall inform the other State Party to this Agreement and the
Joint Committee forthwith their introduction and, whenever practicable, of a time
schedule for their removal.
2. The State Parties to this Agreement shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of
restrictive measures based on balance-of-payments difficulties.
Article 2 7
Evolutionary clause
1. Where a State Party to this Agreement considers that, in the interest of their
economies, it would be useful to develop and deepen the relations established by the
Agreement, by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned
request to the other State Party to this Agreement. The States Parties may instruct the
Joint Committee to examine their request and, where appropriate, to make
recommendations to them, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be subject t o
ratification or approval by the States Parties to this Agreement, in accordance with their
own procedures.
Article 2 8
The Joint Committee
1. The Parties agree to establish a Joint Committee composed of their representatives.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administrated by the
Joint Committee.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of the Agreement, the States Parties
shall exchange information and, at the request of any State Party, shall hold
consultations within the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep under review
the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Parties.
4. The Joint Committee may take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement.
On other matters the Joint Committee may take recommendations.
Article 2 9
Procedures of the Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall meet
whenever necessary but at least once a year. Each State Party to this Agreement may
request that a meeting be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall act by common agreement.
3. For the purpose of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of
procedure.
4. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working parties
as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
Article 3 0
Trade relations governed by other Agreements
1. This Agreement applies to trade relations between Romania and the Republic of
Moldova.
2. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs
unions, free-trade areas, economic unions or arrangements for frontier trade.
Article 3 1
Annexes and Protocols
The Annexes and the Protocols to this Agreement form an entire part of it. The Joint
Committee may decide to modify the Annexes and Protocols of this Agreement, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 29.
Article 3 2
Territorial application
This Agreement shall apply to the territories of Romania and the Republic of Moldova.
Article 3 3
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement other than those referred to in Article 31, which are
approved by the Joint Committee, shall be submitted to the State Parties for
acceptance and shall enter into force at the date of communication of their acceptance.
Article 3 4
Withdrawal and expiration
Each State Party to this Agreement may withdraw therefrom by means of a written
notification to the other Party to the Agreement.
The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the date on which the notification is
received.
Article 3 5
Entry into force
This Agreement shall enter into force at the date of the last notification through which
the other Party notifies i ts ratification.
The Parties will do their utmost in order to fulfil the ratification procedures, within a
maximum of six months from the date of signature of the present Agreement.
Article 3 6
Depositary
Done at Bucharest, this 15th day of February 1994, in two authentic copies in the
Romanian language, both copies being equally valid.

