Free Trade Agreement
between the Government of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay
and the Government of the United Mexican States

PREAMBLE

The governments of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay and the United Mexican States, determined to:

REAFFIRM the special bonds of friendship and cooperation between their nations;

STRENGTHEN regional economic integration, which constitutes one of the essential instruments for Latin American countries to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples;

DEVELOP their respective rights and obligations derived from the agreements of the World Trade Organization;

ESTABLISH a legal framework that fosters the necessary conditions for the growth and diversification of trade flows, in a manner that is compatible with existing potentialities;

OFFER economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade and investment, in order to encourage their active participation in economic and trade relations between the two countries;

CREATE a more extensive and secure market for goods and services produced in their territories;

ENCOURAGE innovation and creativity and encourage trade in goods and services that are protected by intellectual property rights;

ENSURE a predictable commercial framework for the planning of productive and investment activities;

THEY HAVE AGREED:

CHAPTER I

INITIAL PROVISIONS

Article 1-01 : Establishment of the free trade zone.
The Parties establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 (GATT 1994) and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services.

Article 1-02 : Objectives.
1. The objectives of this Agreement, developed specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:

a) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;

b) eliminate trade barriers and facilitate the circulation of goods and services between the Parties;

c) promote conditions of fair competition in trade between the Parties;

d) substantially increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

e) protect and enforce, adequately and effectively, intellectual property rights in the territory of each Party;

f) establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement; and

g) create effective procedures for the application and fulfillment of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of controversies.

2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.

Article 1-03 : Relationship with other international treaties and agreements.
1. The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them under the WTO Agreement and other treaties and agreements to which they are party.

2. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 1-04 : Observance of the Treaty.
Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional provisions, compliance with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory at the federal or central, state or departmental, and municipal level, respectively, except in cases where this Agreement provides otherwise. A federal or central, state or departmental, or municipal government includes any non-governmental body in the exercise of any regulatory, administrative or other power delegated to it by the federal or central, state or departmental, or municipal government.

Article 1-05 : Succession of treaties.
Any reference to any other international treaty or agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms to a successor treaty or agreement to which the Parties are party.

Article 1-06 : Oil.
Oil trade is excepted from the provisions contained in this Treaty and will be governed by the respective regulations in force in both Parties.

Article 1-07 : Automotive Sector.
The trade of automotive goods included in ACE 55 and its additional protocols will be governed exclusively by the provisions of said instruments.
CHAPTER II

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Article 2-01 : General Definitions.
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, it shall be understood as:

TRIPS Agreement : the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights which is part of the WTO Agreement;

WTO Agreement: the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, dated April 15, 1994;

ALADI : the Latin American Integration Association;

customs duty : any import tax, duty or tribute and any charge of any kind applied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except:

a) any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III.2 of the GATT 1994, with respect to like goods, direct competitors or substitutes of the Party, or with respect to goods from which it has been manufactured or produced all or part of the imported good;

b) any countervailing duty;

c) any duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered; and

d) any premium offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariffs-quota or tariff preference quotas;

good of a Party : a national product as understood in the GATT 1994, or that good that the Parties agree upon, and includes an originating good of that Party. A good of a Party may incorporate materials from other countries;

originating good : it refers to a good that complies with the rules of origin established in chapter IV (Regime of origin);

Customs Valuation Code : the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, including its interpretative notes, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Commission : the Administrative Commission established in accordance with article 17-01;

days : calendar or calendar days;

company : an entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and whether privately or governmentally owned, including foundations, partnerships, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, or other associations;

State enterprise : an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party;

enterprise of a Party : an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party;

states : includes the municipal governments of those states, unless otherwise specified;

existing : in force on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATS : the General Agreement on Trade in Services, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

GATT 1994 : the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

measure : any law, regulation, procedure, provision or practice, among others;

national : A natural person who has the nationality of a Party under its law. The term also includes persons who, in accordance with the legislation of that Party, have the status of permanent residents in the territory of that Party;

Party : any State for which this Agreement has entered into force;

heading : a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the four-digit level;

person : a natural person, legal person, or a company;

person of a Party : a natural or legal person or a company of a Party;

Reduction Program : the one established in Article 3-03 (Tariff Elimination);

Uniform Regulations : those established pursuant to Article 5-13 (Uniform Regulations);

Secretariat : the Secretariat established in accordance with Article 17-02 (Secretariat);

Harmonized System : the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System in force, including its general rules and its section, chapter and subheading legal notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective tax laws to foreign trade;

subheading : a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the six-digit level;

territory : the territory of each Party as defined in Annex 2-01; and

Treaty of Montevideo 1980 : the Agreement establishing the Latin American Integration Association.

Addendum 2-01

Country-specific definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, it shall be understood as:

territory :

a) with respect to Mexico:

Yo. the states of the Federation and the Federal District,

ii. the islands, including the reefs and cays in the adjacent seas,

iii. the islands of Guadalupe and Revillagigedo, located in the Pacific Ocean,

iv. the continental platform and the submarine bases of the islands, cays and reefs,

v. the waters of the territorial seas, to the extent and terms established by international law, and internal maritime waters,

saw. the space located on the national territory, with the extension and modalities established by international law itself, and

vii. any area beyond the territorial seas of Mexico within which Mexico may exercise rights over the seabed and subsoil and over the natural resources they contain, in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the sea, as well as with its internal legislation; and

b) With respect to Uruguay: the waters, the land, maritime and air space under its sovereignty, the exclusive economic zone, the common fishing zone established by article 73 of the Treaty of the Río de la Plata and its Maritime Front and the continental platform over which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international law and its domestic law.

CHAPTER III

NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS OF GOODS

Section A - Definitions and scope of application

Article 3-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

tariff – quota : the mechanism by which the application of a certain tariff rate is established for imports of a particular product up to a certain amount (amount within the quota), and a different rate for imports of that product that exceed such amount ;

goods imported for sporting purposes : sports equipment for use in competitions, sporting events or training in the territory of the Party to which it is imported;

agricultural good : a good classified in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System:
Section B - National Treatment

Article 3-02 : National treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 relating to national treatment mean, with respect to a state or department, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that state or department accords to any similar, direct competitive, or substitute goods, as the case may be.

Section C - Tariffs

Article 3-03 : Tariff elimination.
1. Except as provided in Annexes 3-03(3) and 3-03(4) and ACE-55 1 , the Parties shall eliminate all customs duties on originating goods on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new duty, on an originating good.2 .

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall reduce or eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in accordance with the Reduction Schedule, incorporated in Annex 3-03(3).

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, a Party may adopt or maintain customs duties in accordance with its rights and obligations under the GATT 1994, on originating goods included in Annex 3-03(4) , preserving the preferences recorded therein, until such time as otherwise agreed between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.

5. The Parties will carry out consultations, at the request of any of them, to examine the possibility of accelerating the elimination of customs duties provided for in Annex 3-03(3), or incorporating into the Reduction Program of a Party, goods included in the Exhibit 3-03(4). When the Parties approve an agreement on the accelerated elimination of the customs duty on a good or on the inclusion of a good in the Reduction Program, that agreement shall prevail over any customs duty or reduction period indicated in accordance with their schedules for that good.

6. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 are not intended to prevent a Party from maintaining or increasing the other Party's customs duty as may be permitted under a dispute settlement provision of the WTO Agreement.

7. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the preferences negotiated or granted between the Parties in the PAR in accordance with the Montevideo Treaty 1980 are without effect.

Article 3-04 : Customs Valuation .
In the application of customs valuation, the Parties shall be governed by the provisions of the Agreement on the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO. For this purpose, the Agreement Relative to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994, is incorporated into this Treaty and is an integral part thereof.

Article 3-05 : Temporary importation of goods.
1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary importation free of customs duties to:

to. professional equipment necessary for the exercise of the activity, trade or profession of a business person;

b. press equipment or for broadcasting radio or television signals and cinematographic equipment;

c. goods imported for sporting purposes or intended for exhibition or demonstration; and

d. commercial samples and advertising films;
that are introduced into the territory of the other Party, regardless of whether they are originating goods and whether similar, direct competitive, or substitutable goods are available in the territory of said Party.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the temporary importation free of customs duty of a good of the type indicated in paragraph 1 a), b) or c), may not be subject to conditions other than the following:

to. that the good is imported by a national or resident of the other Party who requests temporary entry;

b. that the property is used exclusively by the visiting person, or under his personal supervision, in the performance of his activity, trade or profession;

c. that the property is not subject to sale or lease while it remains in its territory;

d. that the good is accompanied by a bond that does not exceed 110 percent of the charges that would be owed in its case for the definitive importation, or of another form of guarantee, refundable at the time of departure of the good. Bond will not be required for customs duties on a good if it is original;

and. that the good is susceptible to identification when leaving;

F. that the good leaves together with that person or within a period set by the competent authority, which reasonably corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation; and

g. that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use.

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the temporary importation free of customs duty of a good of the type indicated in paragraph 1 d. , may not be subject to conditions other than the following:

to. that the good is imported only for the purpose of lifting orders for goods from the other Party or from another country that is not a Party, or that the services are supplied from the territory of the other Party or from another country that is not a Party;

b. that the property is not subject to sale or lease, and is only used for demonstration or exhibition while it remains in its territory;

c. that the good is capable of identification upon departure;

d. that the good leaves within a period that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation; and

and. that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use.

4. Notwithstanding the sanctions that may correspond, when a good that is imported temporarily free of customs duties in accordance with paragraph 1, does not comply with any of the conditions that a Party imposes in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, that Party may apply customs duties and any other charge owed for the final import of the same.

Article 3-06 : Free importation of customs duties for some commercial samples and printed advertising materials .
Each Party will authorize the free import of samples without commercial value from the territory of the other Party.

Article 3-07 : Goods reimported or reexported after having been repaired or altered.
1. Neither Party may apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that is reimported into its territory, after having been exported or having left the territory of the other Party to be repaired or altered, regardless of whether such repairs or alterations could be made in its territory.

2. Neither Party may apply customs duties to goods that, regardless of their origin, are temporarily imported from the territory of the other Party to be repaired or altered.

Section D - Non-tariff measures

Article 3-08 : Import and export restrictions .
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the import of any good of the other Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except as provided for in Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.

2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, in all circumstances in which any other type of restriction is prohibited, export price requirements and, except as permitted for the execution of resolutions and commitments regarding antidumping duties and countervailing measures, import price requirements.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 3-10.

Article 3-09 : Elimination of performance requirements .
1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may not grant incentives subject to compliance with performance requirements.

2. For these purposes, a performance requirement is understood as any measure that conditions the perception of some benefit to the export result or to the use of national goods to the detriment of imported goods.3 .

Article 3-10 : Export taxes .
Except as provided in Annex 3-10, neither Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, levy or charge on the export of goods to the territory of the other Party, unless it is adopted or maintained on said good, when it is intended for consumption. internal.

Article 3-11 : International obligations .
A Party, before taking a measure under an intergovernmental agreement on goods, under Article XX(h) of the GATT 1994, that may affect trade in commodities between the Parties, shall consult with the other Party to avoid nullification. or impairment of a concession granted by that Party pursuant to Article 3-03.

Article 3-12 : Export subsidies on non-agricultural goods .
Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall not apply refunds or export subsidies to the goods of a Party under the terms of Article 3 of Part II of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO.

Article 3-13 : Export subsidies on agricultural goods .
1. The Parties share the objective of achieving the multilateral elimination of export subsidies on agricultural goods. In this sense, they will cooperate in the effort to reach an agreement within the framework of the WTO Agreement.

2. Neither Party may maintain or introduce export subsidies on agricultural goods in their reciprocal trade after the entry into force of this Agreement. Likewise, as of this date, the Parties renounce the rights that the GATT of 1994 confers on them to use export subsidies and the rights regarding the use of these subsidies that could result from multilateral agricultural trade negotiations within the framework of the Agreement on the WTO, in their reciprocal trade.

3. When a Party considers that a country that is not a Party is exporting to the territory of the other Party an agricultural good that enjoys export subsidies, the importing Party shall, at the written request of the other Party, consult with the latter to agree on specific measures that the importing Party may adopt in order to offset the effect of any subsidized imports. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, if the importing Party adopts the measures indicated in accordance with this paragraph, the other Party will refrain or immediately cease to apply any subsidy to the export of that good to the territory of the importing Party.

Article 3-14 : Internal supports .
With regard to internal support for agricultural goods, the Parties will be subject to the provisions of the Agreement on Agriculture, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO.

Section E - Consultations

Article 3-15 : Committee on Trade in Goods .
1. The Parties establish a Committee on Trade in Goods that will be made up of representatives of the Parties.

2. The Committee will be integrated upon the entry into force of the treaty, and will meet at any time at the request of any of the Parties.

3. The Committee will monitor and promote cooperation between the Parties for the application and administration of this chapter, and will serve as a forum for consultation for the Parties on matters related to it.

Article 3-16 : Provision of information and consultations .
1. At the request of the other Party, a Party will provide information and prompt responses to questions regarding any current or proposed measure that may be related to the application of this Chapter.

2. If during the execution of this Agreement, a Party considers that an existing measure of the other Party affects the effective application of this Chapter, that Party may bring the matter before the Committee.

3. Within a period of no more than 30 days from the date of submission of the request to the Committee, the Committee may resolve to request technical reports from the competent authorities and take the necessary actions that contribute to resolving the matter.

4. When the Committee has met in accordance with the provisions of Article 3-15 and an agreement has not been reached within the indicated term, or it is considered that a matter exceeds the scope of competence of the Committee, any Party may request in writing that the Commission meets, according to the provisions of Article 17-01 (Administrative Commission).

5. The Parties undertake, within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of this Agreement, to identify in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them according to their respective rates, the measures, Restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of goods for reasons of national security, public health, preservation of flora or fauna, the environment, plant and animal health, standards, labels, international commitments, public order requirements or any other regulation. The Parties will update said information and communicate it to the Committee, whenever necessary.
CHAPTER IV

ORIGIN REGIME

Article 4–01 : Definitions and terms.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

Agreement on Customs Valuation : the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, including its interpretative notes, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

good : any merchandise, product, article or matter;

fungible goods : goods that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical and cannot be distinguished by simple visual examination;

identical or similar goods: "identical goods" and "similar goods" respectively, as defined in the Customs Valuation Agreement;

goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties :

to. minerals extracted in the territory of one or both Parties;

b. vegetables harvested in the territory of one or both Parties;

c. live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or both Parties;

d. goods obtained from hunting or fishing in the territory of one or both Parties;

and. fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained from the sea by vessels registered or registered by a Party and flying the flag of that Party;

F. goods produced on board factory ships from the goods identified in subparagraph e), provided that said factory ships are registered or registered by any Party and carry the flag of that Party;

g. property obtained by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;

h. waste and scrap derived from:

i) production in the territory of one or both Parties, or

ii) used goods, collected in the territory of one or both Parties, provided that such goods serve only for the recovery of raw materials; either

Yo. goods produced in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from the goods mentioned in subparagraphs a) to h) or their derivatives, at any stage of production;

shipping containers and packaging materials : goods that are used to protect a good during transportation, other than retail packaging and materials;

net cost: total cost less the costs of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales services, shipping and repackaging, and royalties;

total cost : the sum of the following elements:

to. the costs or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;

b. the costs of direct labor used in the production of the good; and

c. An amount for direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the good, reasonably assigned to it, except for the following concepts:

i) the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to the good,

ii) the costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the producer's company, which constitutes a discontinued operation,

iii) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of accounting principles,

iv) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good,

v) costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure,

vi) the profits earned by the producer of the good, regardless of whether they were retained by the producer or paid to others as dividends, and the taxes paid on those profits, including capital gains taxes, and

vii) the interest costs that have been agreed between related parties and that exceed those interests that are paid at market interest rates;

shipping and repackaging costs: the costs incurred in repackaging and transporting a good outside the territory where the producer or exporter of the good is located;

Sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs: The following costs related to sales promotion, marketing and after-sale service:

to. sales promotion and marketing; advertising in broadcast media; advertising and market research; promotional and demonstration materials; exhibited goods; sales promotion conferences, trade shows and conventions; banners; marketing exhibitions; free samples; sales, marketing and after-sales service publications such as merchandise brochures, catalogues, technical publications, price lists, service manuals and sales support information; establishment and protection of logos and trademarks; sponsorships; restocking charges for wholesale and retail sales; and representation expenses;

b. sales and marketing incentives; discounts to wholesalers, retailers and consumers;

c. for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service personnel: wages and salaries; sales commissions; bonuses; medical, insurance and pension benefits; travel, lodging and subsistence expenses; and membership and professional fees;

d. hiring and training of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel, and training of customer employees after the sale, when such costs are separately identified in the producer's financial statements and cost accounts for promotion sales, marketing and after-sales service of goods;

and. insurance premiums for civil liability derived from the property;

F. office supplies for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales services, when in the financial statements and cost accounts of the producer such costs are identified separately for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service of goods;

g. telephone, mail, and other means of communication, when such costs are separately identified in the producer's financial statements and cost accounts for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service of goods;

h. rents and depreciation of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service offices, as well as distribution centers;

Yo. property insurance premiums, taxes, utility costs, and office and distribution center repair and maintenance costs, when such costs are separately identified in the producer's financial statements and cost accounts for promotion purposes sales, marketing and after-sales service of goods; and

j. payments from the producer to others for repairs covered by a warranty;

direct manufacturing costs and expenses: the costs and expenses incurred in a period, directly related to the good, other than direct material costs or value and direct labor costs;

factory overhead costs and expenses – the costs and expenses incurred in a period, other than direct manufacturing costs and expenses, direct labor costs, and direct material costs or value;

containers and packaging materials for retail sale : containers and materials in which a good is packaged for retail sale;

FOB : free on board, regardless of the means of transport, at the port or place of shipment abroad;

place where the producer is located : in relation to a good, the production plant of that good;

material : a good used in the production of another good;

self-made material – a material produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;

indirect material – a good used in the production, testing, or inspection of a good, but not physically incorporated into the good; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of a good, including:

to. fuel and power;

b. tools, dies and molds;

c. spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

d. lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;

and. gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;

F. equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;

g. catalysts and solvents; either

h. any other good that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be a part of that production;

intermediate material : a self-manufactured material used in the production of a good, as long as it qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and designated as such in accordance with article 4-07;

originating material : a material that qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;

fungible materials : materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical and cannot be distinguished by simple visual examination;

related person : a person who is related to another person, as follows:

to. one of them holds positions of responsibility or direction in a company owned by the other;

b. are legally recognized as business associates;

c. are in an employer-employee relationship;

d. one of them that has, directly or indirectly, ownership, control or possession of 25 percent or more of the outstanding shares or titles and with voting rights of both;

and. one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;

F. both persons are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;

g. together directly or indirectly control a third person; either

h. are from the same family (children, siblings, grandparents or spouses)

generally accepted accounting principles : the recognized consensus to the substantial support authorized in the territory of a Party, regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements. These standards can be broad guidelines of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;

production : the growing, raising, extracting, harvesting, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or assembling of a good;

producer : a person who grows, raises, mines, harvests, fishes, hunts, manufactures, processes, or assembles a good;

royalties : payments of any kind, including payments for technical assistance or similar arrangements, made for the use or right to use any copyright, artistic, literary or scientific work, patents, trademarks, designs, models, plans, formulas or secret processes, except payments for technical support or similar agreements that may relate to specific services such as:

to. staff training, regardless of where it takes place; and

b. plant engineering, plant assembly, mold fixing, computer program design, and similar computer services or other services, provided they are performed in the territory of one or both Parties;

General Rule 2 a) of the Harmonized System : rule 2 a) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, or any rule that replaces it. At the time of signing this Treaty, the text of the rule is as follows:

“Any reference to an article in a given heading includes the article even incomplete or unfinished, provided that it presents the essential characteristics of the complete or finished article. It also reaches the complete or finished article, or considered as such by virtue of the preceding provisions, when it is presented disassembled or not yet assembled.”

General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System : rule 3 of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, or any rule that replaces it. At the time of signing this Treaty, the text of the rule is as follows:

"When a merchandise could be classified, in principle, in two or more items by application of Rule 2 b) or in any other case, the classification will be made as follows:

to. the item with a more specific description will have priority over items with a more generic scope. However, when two or more items each refer to only a part of the materials constituting a mixed product or a composite article or only to a part of the articles, in the case of goods presented in conditioned sets or assortments for retail sale, such headings should be considered equally specific to that product or article, even if one of them more precisely or completely describes it;

b. Mixed products, articles made up of different materials or made up of the union of different articles and merchandise presented in sets or assortments put up for retail sale, whose classification cannot be carried out by applying Rule 3 a), will be classified according to the matter or with the article that gives them their essential character, if it were possible to determine it;

c. When Rules 3 a) and 3 b) do not allow classification, the merchandise will be classified in the last item in order of numbering among those that can reasonably be taken into account.”

General Rule 5 b) of the Harmonized System : rule 5 b) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, or any rule that replaces it. At the time of signing this Treaty, the text of the rule is as follows:

"Except for the provisions of Rule 5 a) above, containers containing merchandise will be classified with them when they are of the types normally used for that class of merchandise. However, this provision is not mandatory when the containers are reasonably likely to be used repeatedly.”;

used : used or consumed in the production of goods;

transaction value of a good : for origin determination purposes, the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusted accordingly accordance with the principles of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Article 8 thereof, without considering that the good is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the producer of the good; and

transaction value of a material: for the purposes of origin determination, the price actually paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusted in accordance with the principles of the paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Article 8 thereof, without considering that the material is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the supplier of the material and the buyer referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the producer of the good.

Article 4-02 : Instruments of application and interpretation.
1. For purposes of this chapter:

to. the tariff classification basis is the Harmonized System;

b. the determination of the transaction value of a good or a material will be made in accordance with the principles of the Agreement on Customs Valuation; and

c. all costs referred to in this chapter shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.

2. For the purposes of this chapter, when applying the Customs Valuation Agreement to determine the origin of a good:

to. the principles of the Agreement on Customs Valuation will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications required by the circumstances, as they would be applied to international ones; and

b. the provisions of this chapter shall prevail over those of the Agreement on Customs Valuation in that in which they are incompatible.

Article 4-03 : Original goods.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a good shall originate in the territory of one or both Parties when:

to. is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties, as defined in Article 4-01;

b. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

c. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in Annex 4-03 and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;

d. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification and other requirements, and the good meets a regional value content, as specified in Annex 4-03, and with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;

and. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties and complies with a regional content value, as specified in Annex 4-03, calculated in accordance with the provisions of article 4-04 and complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter; either

F. except for goods included in heading 4201 to 4203 or in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the good is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, but one or more of the non-originating materials used in the production of the good do not comply with a change in tariff classification because:

i) the good has been imported into the territory of a Party without assembly or disassembly, but has been classified as an assembled good in accordance with rule 2(a) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, or

ii) the heading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and specifically describes them and that heading is not divided into subheadings or the subheading is the same for both the good and its parts and specifically describes them;

provided that the regional value content of the good, determined in accordance with article 4-04, is not less than 50 percent when the transaction value method is used or 40 percent when the net cost method is used, and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter unless the applicable rule of Annex 4-03 under which the good is classified specifies a different regional value content requirement, in which case that requirement shall apply.

2. For the purposes of this chapter, the production of a good from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in Annex 4-03, must be made entirely in the territory of a or both Parties, and any regional value content of a good must be fully satisfied in the territory of one or both Parties.

Article 4-04 : Regional value content.
1. Except as provided in paragraphs 5 and 6, each Party shall provide that the regional value content of a good be calculated in accordance with the transaction value method provided in paragraph 2, or in the case as provided in paragraph paragraph 5, using the net cost method provided in paragraph 4.

2. To calculate the regional content value of a good based on the transaction value method, the following formula will be applied:

   VT - VMN
VCR = __________________ X 100
VT

where:

RVC: regional value content expressed as a percentage;

VT: transaction value of an asset adjusted on an FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 3; and

VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the determined good in accordance with article 4-05.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, when the producer of the good does not export it directly, the transaction value will be adjusted up to the point in which the buyer receives the good within the territory where the producer is located.

4. To calculate the regional content value of a good based on the net cost method, the following formula will be applied:

   CN - VMN
VCR = __________________ X 100
CN

where:

RVC: regional value content expressed as a percentage;

CN: net cost of the good; and

VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the determined good in accordance with article 4-05.

5. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer calculates the regional value content of a good exclusively based on the net cost method provided in paragraph 4 when:

to. there is no transaction value because the property is not the object of a sale;

b. the sale or price depends on some condition or consideration whose value cannot be determined in relation to the good;

c. reverts directly or indirectly to the seller any part of the proceeds of the resale or of any subsequent assignment or use of the good by the buyer, unless due adjustment can be made in accordance with Article 8 of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

d. the buyer and seller are related persons and the relationship between them influences the price, except as provided in paragraph 2 of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

and. the good is sold by the producer to a related person and the volume of sales, in units of quantity of identical or similar goods, sold to related persons, during a period of six months immediately preceding the month in which the producer sold that good , exceeds 85 percent of the total sales of the producer of those goods during that period;

F. the exporter or producer chooses to accumulate the regional value content of the good in accordance with article 4-08; either

g. the good is designated as an intermediate material under section 4-07 and is subject to a regional value content requirement.

6. Each Party shall provide that the regional value content of a good shall be calculated, at the option of the exporter or producer of the good, in accordance with the transaction value method provided in paragraph 2, or with the net cost method provided in paragraph 4, in cases where the transaction value of the asset cannot be determined due to restrictions on the transfer or use of the asset by the buyer, except for those that:

to. imposed or required by the law or the authorities of the Party in which the buyer of the good is located;

b. limit the geographic territory where the good can be resold; either

c. do not substantially affect the value of the property.

7. When the exporter or producer of a good calculates its regional value content based on the transaction value method provided in paragraph 2 and a Party subsequently notifies the exporter or producer, as a result of a verification pursuant to Chapter V (Customs Procedures for the Management of the Origin of Goods), that the transaction value of the good or the value of any materials used in the production of the good require adjustment or are not admissible under paragraph 5,the exporter or producer may then calculate the regional value content of the good on the basis of the net cost method provided in paragraph 4.

8. A producer may average the regional value content of one or all of the goods included in the same subheading, produced at the same plant or at different plants within the territory of a Party, either on the basis of all the goods produced by the producer or only the goods that are exported to the other Party:

to. in its exercise or fiscal period; either

b. in any monthly, bimonthly, quarterly, quarterly or semi-annual period.

Article 4-05 : Value of materials.
1. The value of a material:

to. will be the transaction value of the material; either

b. in case there is no transaction value or the transaction value of the material cannot be determined according to the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, it will be calculated according to the principles of Articles 2 to 7 of that Agreement .

2. When they are not considered in paragraph 1 a) or b), the value of a material will include:

to. freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the port of importation in the territory of the Party where the producer of the good is located, except as provided in paragraph 3; and

b. the costs of scrap and spoil resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less any recovery of these costs, provided that the recovery does not exceed 30 per cent of the value of the material, determined in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. When the producer of the good acquires a non-originating material within the territory of the Party where it is located, the value of the non-originating material will not include: freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in the transportation of the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located.

4. For purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with Article 4-04, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used by:

to. another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either

b. the producer of the good in the production of an originating material of own manufacture and that is designated by the producer as an intermediate material in accordance with article 4-07.

Article 4-06 : De minimis .
1. A good shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good that do not meet the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4-03 does not exceed 8 percent of the transaction value of the good. adjusted on the basis indicated in Article 4-04(2) or (3), as the case may be, or in the cases referred to in Article 4-04(5), if the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 8 percent of the total cost.

2. When the good mentioned in paragraph 1 is also subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of those non-originating materials shall be taken into account for the calculation of the regional value content of the good and the good must satisfy the other applicable requirements of this chapter.

3. A good that is subject to a regional value content requirement set out in Annex 4-03 will not have to satisfy it if the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 8 percent of the adjusted transaction value of the good on the basis indicated in Article 4-04(2) or (3), as the case may be, or in the cases referred to in Article 4-04(5), if the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 8 percent. percent of the total cost.

4. Paragraph 1 does not apply to:

to. goods included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System; neither

b. a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 01 through 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading than the good for which origin is being determined in accordance with this article.

Article 4-07 : Intermediate materials.
1. For purposes of calculating the regional content value, in accordance with article 4-04, the producer of a good may designate as an intermediate material, any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good, provided that this material is a original good as established in article 4-03.

2. When the intermediate material is subject to a regional value content, it will be calculated in accordance with the provisions of article 4-04(4).

3. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of the good, the value of the intermediate material will be the total cost that can be reasonably assigned to that intermediate material in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Regulations of this chapter.

4. If a material designated as an intermediate material is subject to a regional value content, no other self-produced material subject to a regional value content used in the production of that intermediate material may, in turn, be designated by the producer. as intermediate material.

5. Except when two or more producers accumulate their production in accordance with article 4-08, the restriction established in paragraph 4 shall not apply to an intermediate material used by another producer in the production of a material that is subsequently acquired and used in the production. production of a good by the producer mentioned in paragraph 4.

Article 4-08 : Accumulation.
1. For the purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, the producer of a good may accumulate its production with that of one or more producers in the territory of one or both Parties, who produce materials that are incorporated into the good, in such a way that the production of such materials is considered as carried out by that producer, provided that the good complies with the provisions of article 4-03.

2. In cases where the asset in which it is accumulating is subject to a regional value content requirement, its calculation must be made using the net cost method.

Article 4-09 : Consumable goods and materials.
1. For the purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined in inventory are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined, through one of the control methods of inventories established in the Uniform Regulations.

2. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory, and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of the other Party, the origin of the good may be determined based on one of the inventory control methods established in the Uniform Regulations.

3. Once one of the inventory control methods established in the Uniform Regulations is selected, it must be used throughout the fiscal year or period.

Article 4-10 : Games or assortments.
1. The sets or assortments of goods that are classified according to the provisions of rule 3 of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, as well as the goods whose description according to the nomenclature of the Harmonized System is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in the set or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of the goods in this chapter.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed 8 percent of the transaction value of the set. or assortment adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 4-04, in the cases referred to in article 4-04(5), if the value of all non-originating goods referred to above does not exceed 8 percent of the total cost of the kit or assortment.

3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in Annex 4-03.

Article 4-11 : Indirect materials.
Indirect materials will be considered as originating without taking into account the place of their production and the value of these materials will be their costs that are reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.

Article 4-12 : Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools.
1. The accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools delivered with the good as part of the usual accessories, spare parts and tools of the good will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change. tariff classification established in Annex 4-03, provided that:

to. the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the good, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately in the invoice itself; and

b. the quantity and value of said accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the good.

2. The provisions of numeral 1 will be applicable provided that the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the good, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately on the invoice itself.

3. When the good is subject to a regional value content, the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools will be considered as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, when calculating the regional value content of the good.

4. For the purposes established in paragraph 2, when the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools correspond to self-manufactured materials, the producer may choose to designate such materials as intermediate materials according to article 4-07.

Article 4-13 : Containers and packaging materials for retail sale.
1. When the containers and packaging materials in which a good is presented for retail sale are classified in the Harmonized System with the good they contain, in accordance with General Rule 5 b) of the Harmonized System, they will not be taken into account. account to determine if all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4-03.

2. When the good is subject to a regional value content, they will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good.

3. For the purposes established in paragraph 2, when the packaging materials and containers correspond to self-manufactured materials, the producer may designate these materials as intermediate materials according to article 4-07.

Article 4-14 : Shipping containers and packing materials.
The shipping containers and packing materials in which a good is packed or conditioned exclusively for its transport shall not be taken into account for purposes of establishing whether:

to. non-originating materials used in the production of the good undergo the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4-03; and

b. if the good satisfies a regional content requirement.

Article 4-15 : Operations and practices that do not confer origin.
1. A good will not be considered as originating, solely for:

to. the simple filtrations and dilutions in water or in another substance that do not materially alter the characteristics of the good;

b. simple operations intended to ensure the conservation of the good during its transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, freezing, removal of damaged parts, drying or addition of substances;

c. dusting, screening, classification, selection, washing or cutting;

d. packaging, repackaging, packaging or repackaging or packaging for retail sale;

and. the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;

F. cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings;

g. the simple assembly of parts and components, when they are presented disassembled or not yet assembled, that are classified as a good in accordance with rule 2(a) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System. The foregoing shall not apply to goods that had already been assembled and subsequently disassembled for the convenience of packaging, handling, or transportation;

h. fractioning into batches or volumes, husking or shelling; and

Yo. the accumulation of two or more of the operations indicated in literals a) to h) of this article.

2. Any activity or practice of price fixing, in respect of which it can be demonstrated, based on sufficient evidence, that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter, does not confer origin to a good.

3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in Annex 4-03.

Article 4-16 : Processes carried out outside the territories of the Parties.
A good that has been produced in accordance with the requirements of article 4-03, will lose its originating condition if it undergoes a subsequent process or is the object of any other operation outside the territories of the Parties in which the production has been carried out. pursuant to Article 4-03, other than unloading, reloading, or any other movement necessary to keep it in good condition or to transport it to the territory of the other Party.

Article 4-17 : Expedition, transport and transit of goods.
In order for originating goods to benefit from preferential treatment, they must have been shipped directly from the exporting Party to the importing Party. For this purpose, direct dispatch is considered:

to. goods transported without passing through the territory of a country that is not a Party to this Agreement;

b. goods in transit through one or more countries that are not Parties to this Agreement, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the supervision of the competent customs authority, provided that:

i) transit is justified for geographical reasons or considerations related to transportation requirements;

ii) are not intended for trade, use or employment in the State of transit; and

iii) they do not undergo, during their transport or storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or handling, to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

Article 4-18 : Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures.
1. The Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures will have the following functions:

to. cooperate in the application of this chapter, taking into account the provisions of chapter V (Customs Procedures for the Management of the Origin of Goods);

b. at the request of any of the Parties, consider proposals for modifications to the specific rules of origin of Annex 4-03, duly substantiated, that obey changes in production processes or other matters related to the determination of the origin of a good;

c. determine, where appropriate, the incidence of interest costs incurred by a producer of a Party in the production of a good, in order to avoid misuse of those costs in determining the origin of that good;

d. try to reach agreements on:

i) Tariff classification and customs valuation issues related to origin determination resolutions, referred to in Article 5-08 (Procedures to verify origin);

ii) the common procedures and criteria for the request, approval, modification, revocation and application of advance rulings, referred to in Article 5-10 (Advance Rulings);

iii) the modifications to the certificate or declaration of origin referred to in Article 5-02 (Declaration and certification of origin);

iv) the interpretation, application and uniform administration of this chapter, of chapter V (Customs Procedures for the Management of the Origin of Goods), and of the Uniform Regulations; and

v) any other customs matter arising from this Agreement;

and. propose modifications or additions to this chapter, to chapter V (Customs Procedures for the Management of the Origin of Goods), to the Uniform Regulations, and to matters within its competence; and

F. examine proposals for administrative or operational changes in customs matters that may affect the flow of trade between the territories of the Parties.

2. None of the provisions of Chapter V (Customs Procedures for the Management of the Origin of Goods) nor the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall be interpreted in the sense of preventing a Party from issuing an origin determination resolution or an advance resolution. or the adoption of any other measure as deemed necessary, due to the fact that the decision on the matter submitted to this Committee is pending.

CHAPTER V

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE ORIGIN OF GOODS

Article 5-01 : Definitions and terms.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

customs authority means the "customs authority" of a Party, as provided in Annex 5-01 (Customs Authority);

competent authority : the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party, is responsible for the validation of certificates of origin, being able to delegate said function to other public bodies or private entities. In the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy, or its successor; and in the case of Uruguay, the General Directorate of Commerce, Foreign Trade Area of ​​the Ministry of Economy and Finance, or its successor;

identical goods : "identical goods" as defined in the Customs Valuation Agreement; valid certificate of origin: the certificate of origin that has been filled out, signed and validated in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and the instructions for filling in the certificate of origin that the Parties agree upon; exporter: an "exporter", located in the territory of a Party, from which the good is exported, who in accordance with this chapter, is obliged to keep in the territory of that Party the records referred to in article 5-06(a );

commercial importation : importation of a good into the territory of one of the Parties for the purpose of selling it or using it for commercial, industrial or similar purposes;

importer : an "importer", located in the territory of a Party, to which the good is imported, who, pursuant to this chapter, is obliged to keep in the territory of that Party the records referred to in article 5-06(b );

producer : a "producer", as defined in Article 4-01 (Definitions and terms), located in the territory of a Party, who is required to maintain in the territory of that Party the records referred to in Article 5- 06(a);

origin determination resolution : a resolution issued as a result of an origin verification that establishes whether a good qualifies as originating, in accordance with chapter IV (Origin Regime);

preferential tariff treatment : the application of the tariff rate corresponding to an originating good, according to the Tariff Reduction Program; and

value : the value of a good or material for purposes of calculating customs duties or for purposes of applying Chapter IV (Origin Regime).

2. Except for what is defined in this article, the definitions established in Chapter IV (Origin Regime) are incorporated into this chapter.

Article 5-02 : Declaration and certification of origin.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will prepare a single format for the certificate of origin, which may be modified by prior agreement between them. In the same way, they will establish the set of minimum data that the declaration of origin must contain, which may be modified by agreement between the Parties.

2. The certificate of origin referred to in paragraph 1, will serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating. The certificate will be valid for up to 2 (two) years, from the date of its validation by the competent authority.

3. Each Party shall provide that its exporters complete and sign the certificate of origin in respect of the export of a good for which an importer may claim preferential tariff treatment. The certificate of origin will require validation by the competent authority of the exporting Party.

4. Each Party will provide that for the issuance of a certificate of origin, a declaration of origin must be presented with the necessary background that demonstrates, in documentary form, that the good complies with the provisions of Chapter IV (Regime of Origin).

5. The competent authority of the exporting Party:

to. it will determine the administrative mechanisms for the validation of the certificate of origin filled out and signed by the exporter;

b. provide, at the request of the importing Party, information regarding the origin of imported goods with preferential tariff treatment; and

c. shall notify the other Party of the list of persons authorized to validate the certificates of origin with their corresponding seals, signatures and facsimile. Modifications to said relationship must be communicated in the same terms.

6. The competent authority of the exporting Party will be responsible for filing the copies of the certificates of origin that are validated, keeping the files for a minimum period of 5 (five) years, from the date of their issuance. Said file must also include all the background information that served as the basis for the validation of the certificate of origin. The competent authority of the exporting Party will keep a permanent record of the validated certificates of origin, which must contain, as a minimum, the certificate number, the applicant for the certificate, and the date of its issuance.

7. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin completed and signed by the exporter in the territory of the other Party and validated by the competent authority of the exporting Party covers:

to. the export of one or more goods; either

b. several imports of identical goods to be carried out within a specific period established by the exporter in the certificate, which shall not exceed 12 months.

Article 5-03 : Obligations regarding imports.
1. Each Party shall require the importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party, that:

to. declare in writing, in the import document provided for in its legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin, that the good qualifies as originating;

b. have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time of making that declaration;

c. provide a copy of the certificate of origin when requested by your customs authority; and

d. present, until the customs authority initiates an investigation process, a corrected declaration and pays the corresponding customs duties, when you have reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which your import declaration is based contains incorrect information. When the importer complies with the preceding obligations, he will not be penalized.

2. Each Party shall provide that, when an importer in its territory does not comply with any of the requirements established in this chapter, the requested preferential tariff treatment for the good imported from the territory of the other Party shall be denied.

3. Each Party shall provide that, when preferential tariff treatment has not been requested for a good imported into its territory that it has qualified as originating, the importer of the good, within a period of 180 days from the date of importation, may request the refund of customs duties paid in excess for not having granted preferential tariff treatment to the good, provided that the request is accompanied by:

to. a written statement stating that the good qualified as originating at the time of importation;

b. a copy of the certificate of origin; and

c. any other documentation related to the importation of the good, as required by that Party.

Article 5-04 : Obligations regarding exports.
1. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer, who has completed and signed a certificate of origin, deliver a copy of said certificate to its customs authority when requested.

2. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin and has reason to believe that said certificate or declaration contains incorrect information, notify, without delay and in writing, any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate or declaration of origin to all persons to whom the certificate or declaration of origin has been delivered, as the case may be, as well as to its competent authority. In these cases, the exporter or the producer may not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certification or declaration, respectively.

3. Each Party shall provide that the false certification or declaration of origin made by its exporter or producer, in the sense that a good to be exported to the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating, has the same legal consequences, with the modifications required by circumstances, than those that would apply to your importer who makes false declarations or manifestations in contravention of their customs laws and regulations. In addition, it may apply such measures, as the circumstances warrant, when the exporter or producer does not comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.

4. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall notify the customs authority of the importing Party in writing of the notification referred to in paragraph 2.

Article 5-05 : Exceptions.

Provided that it is not part of two or more imports that are made or intended to be made for the purpose of evading compliance with the certification requirements of Articles 5-02 and 5-03, the Parties shall not require the certificate of origin. in the following cases:

to. the commercial importation of a good whose customs value does not exceed 1,000 US dollars or its equivalent in national currency or a greater amount that the Party establishes, but may require that the invoice contain or be accompanied by a declaration of the importer or exporter of that the good qualifies as originating;

b. the importation for non-commercial purposes of a good whose customs value does not exceed 1,000 US dollars or its equivalent in national currency or a greater amount that the Party establishes; neither

c. the importation of a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement to present the certificate of origin.

Article 5-06 : Accounting records.

Each Party shall provide that:

to. its exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate or declaration of origin retains, for a minimum period of five years after the date of validation of the certificate or signature of the declaration, all records and documents relating to the origin of the good , including those referring to:

i) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the good that is exported from its territory,

ii) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials, including indirect materials, used in the production of the good that is exported from its territory, and

iii) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory; and

b. an importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good that is imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party, keeps for a minimum period of five years, counted from the date of importation, the certificate of origin and all other import related documentation required by the importing Party.

Article 5-07 : Operations invoiced by third party operators .
Originating goods will maintain this character, even when invoiced by third-party operators, provided they comply with the provisions of this chapter and chapter IV (Origin Regime).

Article 5-08 : Procedures to verify the origin .
1. The importing Party may request information regarding the origin of a good from the exporting Party, through its customs authority. For this purpose, the competent authority of the exporting Party must provide the requested information, within a period not exceeding 120 days, counted from the date of receipt of the respective request. In cases in which the requested information was not provided within said term, the customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment.

2. To determine if a good that is imported into the territory of one Party from the territory of the other Party with preferential tariff treatment qualifies as originating, each Party may, through its customs authority, verify the origin of the good by:

to. written questionnaires addressed to exporters or producers in the territory of the other Party;

b. verification visits to an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, with the purpose of examining the records and documents that prove compliance with the rules of origin in accordance with Article 5-06a), and inspecting the facilities used in the production of the good and, where appropriate, those used in the production of materials; either

c. Other procedures that the Parties agree.

The provisions of this paragraph shall be done without prejudice to the review powers of the importing Party over its own importers, exporters or producers.

3. When the exporter or producer receives a questionnaire in accordance with paragraph 2, literal a), it will respond and return that questionnaire within a period of thirty days. During this term, the exporter or producer will obtain an extension, which will not exceed 30 days, provided that it is requested in writing from the importing Party that is carrying out the verification. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the customs authority of the importing Party may grant an extension of more than 30 days if deemed necessary. This request shall not entail the denial of preferential tariff treatment.

4. In the event that the exporter or producer does not return the questionnaire referred to in paragraph 2, literal a) within the period established in paragraph 3, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment and the good subject to verification of origin will be considered as a non-originating good and the certificate of origin that covers it will be considered invalid.

5. Before carrying out a verification visit in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2, literal b), the importing Party shall be obliged, through its customs authority, to notify in writing its intention to carry out the visit. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer to be visited, to the competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit will take place and, if requested by the latter, to the embassy of this Party in the territory of the Party importer. The customs authority of the importing Party shall obtain the written consent of the exporter or the producer whom it intends to visit.

6. The notification referred to in paragraph 5 will contain:

to. the identification of the customs authority that makes the notification;

b. the name of the exporter or producer to be visited;

c. the date and place of the proposed verification visit;

d. the object and scope of the proposed verification visit, making specific mention of the good or goods, as well as the certificates of origin subject to verification;

and. the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; and

F. the legal basis for the verification visit.

7. Any change in the number, name or position of the officials referred to in letter e) of paragraph 6, shall be communicated in writing to the exporter or producer and to the competent authority of the exporting Party before carrying out the verification visit. Any modification of the information referred to in subparagraphs a), b), c) and f) of paragraph 6, will be notified in the terms of paragraph 5.

8. If within 30 days after notification of the verification visit proposed under paragraph 5 is received, the exporter or producer does not consent in writing to the verification visit, the importing Party may deny treatment. preferential tariff to the good or goods that would have been the object of the verification visit and the good subject to verification of origin will be considered as a non-originating good and the certificate of origin that covers it will be considered invalid.

9. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority receives a notification pursuant to paragraph 5, it may, within 15 days of the date of receipt of the notification, postpone the proposed verification visit for a period not exceeding 60 days from the date the notification was received, or for a longer term agreed by the Parties, notifying the exporter or producer in writing, as appropriate.

10. A Party may not deny preferential tariff treatment based solely on the postponement of the verification visit, as provided in paragraph 9.

11. Each Party shall allow the exporter or producer, whose good or goods are the subject of a verification visit, to designate two observers to be present during the visit, provided they intervene solely in that capacity. If observers are not designated by the exporter or the producer, this omission will not result in the postponement of the visit.

12. For the purposes of verifying compliance with the regional content value requirements, the calculation of the de minimis , or any other measure contained in chapter IV (Regime of origin) through the customs authority, it will proceed in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that apply in the territory of the Party from which the good has been exported.

13. The customs authority of the importing Party will draw up a record of the visit that will contain the facts verified by it. Said act may be signed in accordance by the producer or exporter and the observers that have been designated. The exporter or producer may record his disagreements with the proceedings at the bottom of the minutes. The refusal to sign the record by the exporter, the producer or the observers does not invalidate it, and such refusal must be recorded in the record, if applicable.

14. Upon completion of the verification, the customs authority will provide a written resolution to the exporter or producer whose good or goods have been subject to verification, in which it is determined whether or not the good or goods qualify as originating, which will include the conclusions factual and legal basis for the determination.

15. When the verification carried out by a Party establishes that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, the importing Party may suspend preferential tariff treatment to the identical goods that that person exports or produces, until the same proves that it complies with the provisions of Chapter IV (Origin Regime).

16. Each Party shall provide that, when its customs authority determines that a good imported into its territory does not qualify as originating, according to the tariff classification or the value applied by the Party to one or more materials used in the production of the good, and this differs from the tariff classification or the value applied to the materials by the Party from whose territory the good was exported, the resolution of the importing Party shall not take effect until it notifies it in writing, to the importer of the good, as well as to the person that has completed and signed the certificate of origin that protects it and the competent authority of the exporting Party.

17. The importing Party shall not apply a ruling made under paragraph 16 to an import made before the date the ruling takes effect, provided that:

to. the customs authority into whose territory the good has been imported has issued an advance ruling pursuant to article 5-10, or any other ruling on the tariff classification or value of materials, on which a person is entitled to rely; and

b. the aforementioned resolutions are prior to the notification of the beginning of the verification of origin.

18. When a Party denies preferential tariff treatment to a good pursuant to a decision made in accordance with paragraph 16, that Party shall postpone the effective date of the denial for a period not to exceed ninety days, provided that the importer of the good or the exporter or producer who has completed and signed the certificate or declaration of origin that covers it, accredits having relied in good faith, to his own detriment, on the tariff classification or the value applied to the materials by the customs authority of the exporting party.

Article 5-09 : Confidentiality.
1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with the provisions of its legislation, the confidentiality of the information of such nature obtained pursuant to this chapter and shall protect it from any disclosure that could harm the person who provides it.

2. The confidential information obtained in accordance with this chapter may only be made known to the authorities responsible for the administration and application of the determination of origin resolutions and customs or tax matters, as appropriate.

Article 5-10 : Advance resolutions.
1. Each Party shall provide that, through its customs authority, advance written resolutions be granted expeditiously, prior to the importation of a good into its territory. Advance resolutions will be issued by the customs authority of the territory of the importing Party to its importer or to the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by them, in relation to:

to. if a good qualifies as originating, in accordance with Chapter IV (Origin Regime);

b. if the non-originating materials used in the production of a good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification indicated in Annex 4-03 (Specific Rules of Origin);

c. if the good complies with the regional content value established in Chapter IV (Origin Regime);

d. if the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Agreement, for the calculation of the transaction value of the good or of the materials used in the production of a good, with respect to the which an advance resolution is requested, is appropriate to determine if the good complies with the regional content value in accordance with Chapter IV (Origin Regime);

and. whether the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, for the reasonable allocation of costs, in accordance with the Uniform Regulations for the calculation of the net cost of a good or the value of an intermediate material, is adequate to determine if the good complies with the regional content value according to the referred chapter;

F. if a good that re-enters its territory after being exported from its territory to the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration qualifies for duty-free treatment under Article 3-09 (Goods Reimported or Reexported After have been repaired or altered); and

g. Other matters that the Parties agree.

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance rulings, including:

to. the information that is reasonably required to process the request;

b. The power of your customs authority to request additional information at any time from the person requesting the advance ruling during the application evaluation process;

c. the obligation of the customs authority to issue the advance resolution once it has obtained all the necessary information from the person requesting it; and

d. the obligation of the customs authority to issue the advance resolution in a complete, well-founded and motivated manner.

3. Each Party shall apply advance rulings to imports into its territory, from the date of issuance of the ruling, or from a later date indicated therein, unless the advance ruling is modified or revoked in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.

4. Each Party shall grant to any person who requests an early ruling, the same treatment, the same interpretation and application of the provisions of Chapter IV (Regime of Origin) referring to the determination of origin, that it has granted to any other person to the that has issued an advance ruling, when the facts and circumstances are identical in all substantial aspects.

5. The advance resolution may be modified or revoked in the following cases:

to. when the advance ruling was based on an error:

i) in fact,

ii) in the tariff classification of the goods or materials subject to the resolution,

iii) in the application of the regional value content in accordance with Chapter IV (Regime of Origin), or

iv) in the application of the rules to determine whether a good, which re-enters its territory after it has been exported from its territory to the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration purposes, qualifies for duty-free treatment customs pursuant to Article 3-07 (Goods reimported or reexported after they have been repaired or altered);

b. when the resolution is not in accordance with an interpretation that the Parties have agreed with respect to chapter III (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods) or chapter IV (Regime of Origin);

c. when the circumstances or facts that support it change;

d. in order to comply with a modification to chapter III ((National Treatment and Access of Goods to the Market), to chapter IV (Regime of Origin), to this chapter, or to the Uniform Regulations; or

and. in order to comply with an administrative or judicial decision or to adjust to a change in the legislation of the Party that issued the advance ruling.

6. Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance ruling takes effect on the date it is issued or on a later date established therein, and may not be applied to imports of a good made before those dates, unless unless the person to whom it has been issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.

7. Each Party shall provide that, when examining the regional value content of a good for which an advance ruling has been issued, its customs authority shall assess whether:

to. the exporter or producer complies with the terms and conditions of the advance ruling;

b. the exporter's or producer's operations are consistent with the circumstances and substantial facts that support that resolution; and

c. the supporting data and calculations used in applying the criterion or method for calculating value or allocating cost are correct in all material respects.

8. Each Party shall provide that, when its customs authority determines that any of the requirements established in paragraph 7 has not been met, said authority may modify or revoke the advance ruling, as appropriate.

9. Each Party shall provide that, when its customs authority decides that the advance ruling has been based on incorrect information, the person to whom it was issued shall not be penalized, if he demonstrates that he acted with reasonable care and in good faith when stating the facts and circumstances that led to the early resolution, without prejudice to the payment of the corresponding customs duties.

10. Each Party shall provide that, when an advance ruling is issued to a person who has falsely stated or omitted material facts or circumstances on which the advance ruling is based, or has not acted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the advance ruling, the The customs authority that issues the advance resolution can apply the measures that the circumstances warrant.

11. The Parties will provide that the holder of an advance ruling may use it only while the facts or circumstances that served as the basis for its issuance are maintained. In this case, the holder of the resolution may submit the information necessary for the authority that issued it to proceed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.

12. An asset that is subject to a verification of origin or to any instance of review or challenge in the territory of any of the Parties will not be subject to an advance resolution.

Article 5-11 : Penalties.
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain customs, administrative, civil or criminal sanctions for violations of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this chapter.

2. Nothing in Articles 5-03(1)(d), 5-03(2), 5-04(2), or 5-08(10) shall be construed to prevent a Party from applying measures as the circumstances warrant.

Article 5-12 : Review and challenge.
1. Each Party shall grant the same rights to review and challenge resolutions for determination of origin and advance rulings provided for its importers, exporters or producers of the other Party that:

to. fill out and sign a certificate or declaration of origin that covers a good that has been the subject of an origin determination resolution in accordance with article 5-08(14) ; either

b. have received an advance ruling in accordance with article 5-10.

2. The rights referred to in paragraph 1 include access to, at least, an instance of administrative review, independent of the official or agency responsible for the resolution or advance ruling subject to review, and access to a instance of judicial review or of the administrative contention of the resolution or decision taken in the last instance of administrative review, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 5-13 : Uniform Regulations.
1. The Parties shall establish and implement, through their respective laws and regulations, as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and at any later time, by express agreement, Uniform Regulations regarding the interpretation, application, and administration of Chapter III. (National Treatment and Access of Goods to the Market), of chapter IV (Regime of Origin), of this chapter and of other matters agreed upon by the Parties.

2. Each Party shall put into practice any modification or addition to the Uniform Regulations, no later than 180 days after the respective agreement between the Parties, or in any other period agreed by them.

Article 5-14 : Cooperation.
1. Each Party shall notify the other of the following measures, resolutions or determinations including, to the extent feasible, those that are in the process of being applied:

to. an origin determination resolution issued as a result of an origin verification visit carried out in accordance with article 5-08, once the review and challenge instances referred to in article 5-12 have been exhausted;

b. a resolution determining origin that the Party considers contrary to a resolution issued by the customs authority of the other Party on the tariff classification or value of a good, or of the materials used in the manufacture of a good, or the reasonable allocation of costs when calculating the net cost of a good subject to a determination of origin;

c. a measure that establishes or significantly modifies an administrative policy and that could affect origin determination decisions in the future; and

d. an advance resolution or its modification, in accordance with article 5-10.

2. The Parties will cooperate:

to. in the application of their respective customs laws or regulations for the application of this Agreement, as well as any customs mutual assistance agreement or other customs agreement to which they are party;

b. to the extent possible and for the purpose of facilitating trade between their territories, in customs matters such as those related to the collection and exchange of statistics on the import and export of goods, the harmonization of the documentation used in trade, the uniformity of information elements, the acceptance of an international data syntax and the exchange of information;

c. to the extent possible, in the filing and sending of documentation related to customs;

d. to the extent possible, in the verification of the origin of a good, for which purpose, the competent authority of the importing Party may request the customs authority of the other Party that the latter carry out in its territory certain operations or proceedings leading to said purpose, issuing the respective report; and

and. to seek some mechanism for the purpose of discovering and preventing the illicit transshipment of goods from a country that is not a Party.

Addendum 5-01

Customs authority

For the purposes of this chapter, “customs authority” shall mean the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party, is responsible for the administration of its customs laws and regulations:

to. in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit and the Tax Administration Service, or their successors; and

b. in the case of Uruguay, the National Customs Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, or its successor.

CHAPTER VI

SAFEGUARDS

Article 6-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

threat of serious harm : the clear imminence of serious harm. The determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury will be based on facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility;

competent authority means the "competent authority" of a Party, as provided in Annex 6-01 (Competent Authority); merchandise or product

directly competitive : that which is not identical or similar to the one being compared, has the same distribution channels, is marketed in the same market and is purchased by a similar group of consumers;

similar merchandise or product : the identical one, which is the one that is the same in all aspects as the product in question, or the one that, even when it is not the same in all its aspects, has similar characteristics and composition, which allows it to comply the same functions and be commercially interchangeable with the merchandise or product with which it is compared;

serious injury : a significant general impairment of the situation of a certain domestic industry;

transition period : it will include the reduction period applicable to each merchandise, according to the provisions of the Reduction Program;

safeguard measure : a global or bilateral safeguard measure established under this Chapter; and

domestic industry : the group of producers of the like or directly competitive good or product operating within the territory of a Party or those whose collective output of the like or directly competitive product constitutes a significant proportion of the total domestic production of those products In one part. This significant proportion may not be less than 50%.

Article 6-02 : General Provisions.
The Parties may apply to imports of merchandise made under the Reduction Program, a safeguard regime, the application of which will be based on clear, strict criteria and with a defined temporality. The Parties may adopt safeguard measures of a bilateral or global nature.

Article 6-03 : Global Safeguards. The Parties retain their rights and obligations to apply global safeguard measures in accordance with Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards that is part of the WTO Agreement, except those referring to compensation or retaliation and exclusion of a measure, insofar as are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.

Article 6-04 : Criteria for the adoption of a global safeguard measure.
1. When a Party decides to adopt a global safeguard measure, it may only apply it to the goods of the other Party when it determines that imports of said goods, considered individually, represent a substantial part of total imports and contribute significantly to injury. serious or threatened serious injury to the importing Party. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the following criteria shall be taken into account:

to. Imports of merchandise from the other Party will be considered to be substantial if, during the 3 (three) years immediately prior to the initiation of the investigation, they are included within the imports of the 5 (five) main supplying countries of that merchandise. in the importing Party.

b. Imports of goods from the other Party shall not be considered to contribute significantly to serious injury or the threat of serious injury, if their growth rate during the period in which the increase occurred is substantially less than the rate of growth of total imports from all sources, during the same period.

2. The Party that applies the global safeguard measure, and has initially excluded a good of the other Party from it, shall have the right to include it later when the competent investigating authority determines that a significant increase in imports of said good substantially reduces the effectiveness of the measure. In this regard, it will be considered to implement a higher import quota than the one referred to in paragraph 3 of this article, provided that it does not substantially reduce the effectiveness of the measure.

3. The preference applicable at the time of the adoption of the global safeguard measure will be maintained for a quota of imports, which will be the average of imports made in the 3 (three) years immediately prior to the period in which the existence of the measure was determined. serious harm or threat of serious harm.

Article 6-05 : Bilateral Safeguards.
1. Each Party may apply, on an exceptional basis and under the conditions established in this chapter during the transition period, bilateral safeguard measures on the importation of goods that benefit from this Agreement, meaning the total or partial suspension of the compliance with commitments regarding tariff preferences.

2. The bilateral safeguard measures that are applied in accordance with this article will consist of the suspension or reduction of the tariff preference. The preference applicable at the time of the adoption of the bilateral safeguard measure will be maintained for a quota of imports, which will be the average of the imports made in the 3 (three) years immediately prior to the period in which the existence of serious injury was determined. or threat of serious harm.

3. At the end of the period of application of the bilateral safeguard measure, the preference negotiated in this Treaty for the merchandise subject to it will be restored.

4. The bilateral safeguard measures will have a maximum initial duration of 1 (one) year, including the period in which the provisional measures would have been in force. They may be extended for one more year when it is determined, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, that they are still necessary to repair the serious injury or threat of serious injury and that there is evidence that the domestic industry is in the process of readjustment.

5. The total period of application of a bilateral safeguard measure shall not exceed 2 (two) years. The Parties shall not apply, more than once, a bilateral safeguard measure against any particular good originating from another Party, unless the Commission expressly authorizes it.

Article 6-06 : Provisional Bilateral Safeguard.
1. In critical circumstances, in which any delay would entail damage that is difficult to repair, the Parties may adopt a provisional bilateral safeguard measure based on a preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence that the increase in imports subject to preference has caused or threatens to cause serious harm.

2. Immediately after the provisional bilateral safeguard measure has been adopted, it shall be notified and consulted, in accordance with the provisions of Article 6-17 and 6-18.

3. The duration of the provisional bilateral safeguard measure shall not exceed 200 days and shall take the same form provided for definitive measures, in accordance with the provisions of Article 6-05(2). If, in the course of the investigation, it is determined that the increase in imports subject to preferences have not caused or threatened to cause serious injury, the amount received for provisional measures will be promptly reimbursed, with the corresponding tax interest, or the guarantees that have been presented for said concept.

Article 6-07 : Procedures related to the application of global or bilateral safeguard measures.
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain fair, transparent, and effective procedures for the application of safeguard measures, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The Parties shall ensure the uniform, impartial, and reasonable application of their laws, regulations, resolutions, and determinations that govern all procedures for the adoption of safeguard measures pursuant to this Chapter.

Article 6-08 : Investigation.
1. The Parties shall only apply a safeguard measure under this Chapter if it has been determined, as a result of an investigation, that imports of a similar or directly competitive good originating from the other Party have increased by such quantity, in absolute terms and relative, and are carried out under conditions that cause or threaten to cause serious harm.

2. The Parties shall only apply safeguard measures to the extent necessary to prevent or repair serious injury and facilitate adjustment. The increase in the tariff that is determined in no case may exceed the lesser of the most favored nation tariff for that good at the time the measure is adopted, and the most favored nation tariff corresponding to that good the day before the entry into force of this Agreement.

3. In an investigation, pursuant to this Chapter, to determine whether the increase in imports subject to preference has caused or threatens to cause serious injury, the Parties shall evaluate all relevant factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that have a bearing on the situation of that branch of national production, in particular the following:

to. the relationship between the imports subject to preference in question and those not subject to preference from any origin, as well as between the increases in such imports;

b. the part of the national market absorbed by imports on the rise; and

c. changes in the level of sales, production, productivity, capacity utilization, profit or loss, and employment.

Article 6-09 : Determination of serious damage or threat of serious damage.
The determination of the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury will be based on objective evidence that demonstrates the existence of a causal relationship between the increase in imports generated by the preference to which the merchandise in question is subject and serious harm or threat of serious harm. When there are factors other than the increase in imports subject to preference, which at the same time cause or threaten to cause injury to the like or directly competitive merchandise in question, this injury or threat of injury shall not be attributed to the increase in imports subject to preference .

Article 6-10 : Access to information.
1. The Parties shall guarantee interested parties in an investigation quick and complete access to the actions of other interested parties that are incorporated into the file of the ongoing investigation. For these purposes, each Party may resort to one of the following mechanisms:

to. The parties interested in the investigation must send to the other interested parties copies of each of the reports, documents and public evidence or of the non-confidential summaries on the same day that they are presented to the investigating authority.

b. The competent authority will implement mechanisms that allow the interested parties to become aware of the existence of said actions within 2 (two) business days following their presentation and will have agile and brief mechanisms that allow access to them when the interested parties notified so require.

2. Pursuant to the provisions of each Party's legislation, timely access shall be provided to the information contained in the administrative file of an investigation under the terms of this Chapter. Access will not be given to information whose disclosure could result in substantial and irreversible patrimonial or financial damage to the owner of said information, as well as to government information indicated by laws and other public order provisions and that contained in internal communications of the investigating authority, of the investigating authority with other government entities or from government to government that are of a confidential nature.

Article 6-11 : Confidential information.
1. For the purposes of investigations, confidential information will be considered, if it is submitted by the interested parties, because its disclosure or dissemination to the public may cause damage to their competitive position, the following information:

to. the production processes of the merchandise in question;

b. production costs and identity of components;

c. distribution costs;

d. the terms and conditions of sale, except those offered to the public;

and. sales prices per transaction and per product, except for price components such as product sales and distribution dates, as well as transportation if based on public itineraries;

F. the description of the type of individual customers, distributors or suppliers; and

g. any other information specific to the company in question.

2. All information that, by its nature, is confidential, or that is provided confidentially, will be treated as such by the competent authorities, with prior justification in this regard. Such information shall not be disclosed without the authorization of the Party that submitted it. Parties providing confidential information should be asked to provide non-confidential summaries of the information or, if they indicate that such information cannot be summarized, to provide the reasons why a summary cannot be provided. However, if the competent authorities conclude that a request for information that is considered confidential is not justified,

Article 6-12 : Transparency.
1. In order to make investigative procedures transparent and ensure a broad and full opportunity for interested parties to defend their interests, the Parties shall endeavor to amend their safeguards legislation as much as possible in order to have the following mechanisms:

to. a mechanism that grants timely access to the representatives of the interested parties during the procedure to all the information contained in the administrative file, including confidential information, provided that the requirements established by domestic legislation are met;

b. a confidentiality commitment to which the representatives of the interested parties will be subject, in which the use of the information for personal benefit and its dissemination among persons who are not authorized to know it are strictly prohibited; and

c. specific sanctions for infringements against the commitments adopted by the representatives of the interested parties.

2. The investigating authority shall give industrial users of the product under investigation, and representative consumer organizations in cases where the product is normally sold at retail, the opportunity to provide any information that is relevant to the investigation.

Article 6-13 : Public hearings.
During the course of each proceeding, the competent investigating authority:

to. without prejudice to the provisions of the legislation of each Party, after giving reasonable notice, it will hold a public hearing for all interested parties to appear, in person or through a representative, for the purpose of presenting evidence and being heard in relation to with the serious damage or threat thereof and its adequate remedy; and

b. will provide opportunity for all interested parties to appear at the hearing, present arguments and question each other.

Article 6-14 : Publication.
The importing Party shall publish the resolutions issued as a result of an investigation in the matter of safeguards in its official dissemination body and shall notify the exporting Party in writing the day after the publication and shall offer to carry out consultations.

Article 6-15 : Review of the decision of the competent authority.
The decisions of the competent authorities issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be subject to judicial or administrative review, as provided by the legislation of each Party.

Article 6-16 : Compensation.
1. The Party that intends to apply a safeguard measure shall grant the other Party mutually agreed compensation, in the form of concessions that have trade effects equivalent to the impact of the safeguard measure. For this purpose, prior to the imposition of the measure, consultations will be held.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, if the Parties do not reach a satisfactory solution in the consultations to determine the compensation, the Party that intends to adopt the measure shall be authorized to do so and the affected Party may impose measures that have equivalent to those of the adopted measure, within a maximum period of 60 days from the application of the safeguard measure.

3. The commitments modified by the exporting Party must be reinstated at the end of the application of the safeguard measure, in accordance with the preference negotiated in this Treaty and it will remain as if the benefits had not been suspended.

Article 6-17 : Notification.
1. The Parties shall notify each other:

to. The intention to initiate an investigation, in accordance with articles 6-03 or 6-05. For this purpose, duly documented information will be provided on the main characteristics of the application, such as:

i) the name of the applicant(s) and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of the domestic industry;

ii) a clear and complete description of the merchandise involved, including its tariff classification and current tariff treatment;

iii) the import data that constitutes the basis that such merchandise is being imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute or relative terms;

iv) the data that the applicant took into consideration to prove the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage; and

v) the period for holding consultations prior to the start shall not be less than 10 (ten) days.

b. The initiation of the investigation procedure according to articles 6-03 or 6-05. To this end, information will be provided within a maximum period of 10 (ten) days from the publication in the official dissemination body of the initiation of the investigation procedure, including the main characteristics of the facts under investigation, such as:

i) the name of the applicant(s) and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of the domestic industry;

ii) a clear and complete description of the merchandise subject to the proceeding, including its tariff classification, and the current tariff treatment;

iii) the import data that constitutes the basis that such merchandise is being imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute or relative terms;

iv) the data taken into consideration to prove the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage;

v) the term for holding procedural consultations; and

vi) the term in which the interested parties may present evidence and present their arguments, in writing, so that they can be taken into consideration during the investigation.

c. The application of a provisional safeguard measure in accordance with the provisions of Article 6-06(1). Said application will be reported within a maximum period of 5 (five) days after the adoption of the measure, with an express indication of the main characteristics of the facts, including the evidence that generated the need for the provisional safeguard, with a precise indication of the goods subject to the same, including their tariff classification, the period in which the interested parties may present evidence and present their allegations in writing, so that they can be taken into consideration during the investigation,

d. The intention to apply or extend a safeguard measure. Said intention will provide information about:

i) evidence of serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by the increase in imports subject to preference;

ii) the precise description of the merchandise in question (including its tariff classification);

iii) the description of the proposed or adopted safeguard measure;

iv) the date of its entry into force and its duration;

v) the criteria and objective information that demonstrates that the assumptions established in this chapter are met for the application of a safeguard measure to the other Party, when applicable;

vi) the period for holding consultations to determine compensation; and

vii) in the case of extension of a safeguard measure, evidence will also be provided that the domestic industry in question is in the process of adjustment.
2. The notifications referred to in this article shall be made through the competent authorities of the Parties. During any stage of the procedure, the notified Party may ask the other Party for any additional information it deems necessary, observing the rules regarding confidential information.

Article 6-18 : Consultations.
1. The initiation of an investigation in accordance with this chapter may only be carried out once the consultations prior to the initiation referred to in subparagraph v) of letter a) of article 6-17 have been carried out, which will have mutual knowledge as their main objective. of the facts, the exchange of opinions and eventually the clarification of the problem raised.

2. The consultations of the procedure referred to in subparagraph v) of literal b) of article 6-17 will have as their main objective the exchange of information and conciliation that allow a solution to be reached.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article and Article 6-19, the Parties may apply a provisional measure in accordance with Article 6-06 (1), without having held consultations prior to initiation or to determine the compensation, provided that it is offered to hold them within 10 days following the imposition of the measure.

Article 6-19 : Extension.
The application or extension of a safeguard measure in accordance with this chapter may only be carried out once the consultations have been carried out to determine the compensation referred to in subparagraph vi) of letter d) of article 6-17 of this chapter, which their main objective will be to reach an understanding to maintain a level of concessions substantially equivalent to those existing under this Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, safeguard measures may be applied when the consultations cannot be carried out due to the impediment of the Party that has been duly notified.

Addendum 6-01

Competent Authority

For purposes of this chapter, the term "competent authority" shall mean:

to. in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy, or its successor; and

b. in the case of Uruguay, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, or its successor.

CHAPTER VII

UNFAIR INTERNATIONAL TRADE PRACTICES

Article 7-01 : Definitions.          
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:   

Antidumping Agreement : Agreement on the Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;    

ASMC : Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures that is part of the Agreement on the WTO;
competent authority: the "competent authority" of a Party, as provided in Annex 7-01 (Competent Authority);  

countervailing duty: antidumping duties and countervailing duties, as the case may be;

official broadcasting bodies: “official broadcasting bodies” of a Party, as provided in Annex 7-01.1 (Official Broadcasting Bodies); 

interested party : the producers, importers and exporters of the good subject to investigation, the government of the exporting Party, as well as the moral or legal persons that have a direct interest in the investigation in question;

final resolution : determination through which it is decided on the origin or not of the imposition of definitive countervailing duties;

initiation resolution : determination that formally declares the initiation of the investigation; and

preliminary resolution : determination by which it is decided whether or not to continue the investigation with the imposition or not of preliminary countervailing duties.

Article 7-02 : General provisions. The Parties reject all unfair international trade practices and recognize that they are punishable when they cause or threaten to cause significant damage to a domestic industry existing in the territory of a Party or if they significantly delay the creation of a domestic industry. Likewise, they recognize the need to eliminate export subsidies not allowed by the WTO and other internal policies that cause distortions in merchandise trade between the Parties.

Article 7-03 : Determination of the existence of dumping or subsidies. The importing Party, in accordance with its legislation, this Agreement, the Antidumping Agreement, and the ASMC, may establish and apply countervailing duties in the event of situations in which, through an objective examination based on positive evidence:

to. the existence of imports is determined:

i) in dumped conditions ; either

ii) goods that have received export subsidies, including subsidies other than those granted to exports, which adversely influence normal competition conditions; and

b. the existence of damage or threat of damage to the domestic industry of identical or similar goods in the importing Party is proven, or the significant delay in the creation of that industry, as a consequence of those imports of identical or similar goods, coming from from elsewhere.

Article 7-04 : Export subsidies.
Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party may maintain or introduce subsidies for the export of goods to the territory of the other Party as indicated in Article 3 of the ASMC.

Article 7-05 : National legislation.
The Parties will apply their legislation on unfair international trade practices in accordance with the procedures established in the normative instruments cited in Article 7-03 and will carry out investigations through their respective competent authorities.

Article 7-06 : Procedure .
When a Party has received a duly documented request, and before initiating, ex officio or at the request of a party, an investigation for dumping or subsidies for imports from the other Party, it shall proceed as soon as possible to make the notification prescribed in Article 5.5 of the Antidumping Agreement. In the case of subsidies, it will offer to hold consultations prior to the start of the investigation.

Article 7-07 : Publication.
1. The Parties will publish in their official media outlets all the resolutions issued by the competent investigating authority on an investigation and will notify the other Party, in writing and directly, promptly and within reasonable terms that guarantee the principles of legality. and due process.

2. Each Party shall publish the following resolutions in its respective official dissemination body:

to. the initiation, preliminary resolution when countervailing duties are imposed and final resolution of the investigation procedure; b) the one that declares the administrative investigation concluded:

i) due to commitments with the exporting Party or with the exporters, as the case may be;

ii) due to commitments derived from the holding of conciliation hearings; either

iii) for any other reason.

c. those that reject the initiation of the investigation; and

d. those by which the withdrawals of the complainants are accepted.

Article 7-08 : Notifications and Deadlines.
1. Each Party shall communicate the resolutions referred to in this chapter directly to its importers and exporters of the other Party of which it is aware, to the government of the exporting Party, and to the diplomatic mission of the exporting Party accredited in the territory of the Party conducting the investigation. Likewise, specific actions will be carried out to identify and locate the interested parties in the procedure in order to guarantee the exercise of the right of defense.

2. Parallel and simultaneously to the aforementioned official communications, the enforcement authority shall send the resolutions directly to all interested foreign parties and to the enforcement authority of the other Party, within 2 (two) days following the day on which they were issued. make them public. The deadlines established in the investigations will be counted from the official communications.

3. The notification of the initiation resolution will contain, at least, the following information:

to. the terms and place for the presentation of arguments, evidence and other documents;

b. the description of the investigated product and its tariff classification;

c. the period under investigation;

d. the name or company name and addresses of the foreign exporters of whom it is known and, where appropriate, of the foreign governments; and

and. the name, address, email, telephone number and fax of the office where information can be obtained, queries made and the file derived from the investigation reviewed.

4. With the notification, the exporters will be sent a copy of the respective resolution, the public version of the request to initiate an investigation and its annexes, and the questionnaires that will be used by the competent investigating authority or, where appropriate, the minimum information required by it, as well as the description of the way in which it should be presented.

5. The Party will grant interested parties of which it is aware, a response period of not less than 25 business days, counted from the beginning of the investigation, in order for them to appear to state what is convenient for them, and will grant interested parties a period of 25 business days for the same purposes counted from the preliminary resolution taking effect.

6. The competent authority may grant or reject a request for an extension of the term to provide information, provided that it has been submitted in writing 5 (five) days before the expiration of the established term, for which the following must be taken into account: :

to. the time available to conduct the investigation and make any necessary determinations, including the timeframes established in national laws, regulations, and programs governing the conduct of the investigation in question, and whether the information can be considered at a later stage Of the investigation;

b. the extension(s) of the term granted during the investigation;

c. the ability of the party from whom information is collected to respond to the information questionnaire, in light of the nature and scope of the information required, including the resources, personnel, and technological capabilities available to the party;

d. the exceptional burdens that the requested party will have to bear in order to search, identify and/or compile the requested information;

and. the fact that the party requesting the extension has provided a partial response to the questionnaire, or has previously provided information required in the same investigation, even if the absence of a partial response is not by itself an adequate reason to reject a request;

F. unforeseen circumstances that affect the party's ability to provide the required information within the established period; and

g. the fact that other parties have been granted time extensions for similar reasons at the same stage of the investigation.

7. The decision to grant or reject a request for an extension of the period to provide information must be made promptly and, in the event that the request is rejected, the party making the request will be informed of the reason for the rejection.

8. These same elements will be assessed to grant or reject extensions requested by any interested party for the presentation of arguments, information and additional or complementary evidence.

9. The authorities, once the established deadlines have expired and, where appropriate, the extensions granted, will only admit information and evidence that is presented as supervening and this circumstance is proven, provided that they are presented before the closing of the investigation or of the conclusion of the investigation. The authorities may require interested parties to comply with less demanding requirements than those previously established, as long as they are applied equally to all interested parties.

Article 7-09 : Content of the resolutions.
The initial, preliminary and final resolutions will contain, at least, the following:

to. the applicant's name;

b. the description of the imported good subject to the procedure and its tariff classification;

c. the elements and evidence used to determine the existence of dumping or subsidy, damage or threat of damage, and their causal relationship;

d. the factual and legal considerations that led the authority to initiate an investigation or to impose a countervailing duty; and

and. the legal arguments, data, facts or circumstances that support and motivate the resolution in question.

Article 7-10 : Review of compensatory duties.
Annually at the request of the party and at any time ex officio, the definitive countervailing duties may be reviewed by the competent authority in the event of a change of circumstances in the market of the importing Party and the export market.

Article 7-11 : Validity of the measures.
Definitive countervailing duties will be abolished when, after 5 (five) years from the date of their imposition, none of the interested parties has requested their review nor has the competent authority initiated it ex officio.

Article 7-12 : Technical information meetings.
1. The competent authority of the importing Party, upon request of the interested parties, will hold technical information meetings in order to publicize the methodology used by the competent authority to determine the dumping margins and the calculations of the subsidies, as well as such as the damage and causality arguments of the preliminary and final resolutions.

2. The request referred to in paragraph 1 must be submitted within 5 (five) business days following the publication of the respective resolution in the official dissemination body. The competent authority will hold the meeting within a period of 15 working days from the presentation of the request.

Article 7-13 : Hearings.
The investigating authority, upon written request by any of the interested parties, must hold meetings, hearings and other procedures so that they have a full opportunity to defend their interests or agree on a mutually satisfactory solution.

Article 7-14 : Public hearings.
1. The competent authority will hold a public hearing in which the interested parties may appear and question their counterparts regarding the information or means of proof that have been presented during the investigation. In the same way, the competent authority may formulate questions and request clarifications regarding the information, evidence and arguments presented during the investigation procedure that it deems appropriate.

2. The competent authority will notify the holding of the public hearing 15 working days in advance.

3. The competent authority will give the interested parties the opportunity to present arguments within a period of at least 8 (eight) days after the public hearing. The allegations will consist of the written presentation of conclusions regarding the information and arguments provided in the investigation.

Article 7-15 : Access to information.
1. The Parties shall guarantee interested parties in an investigation quick and complete access to the actions of other interested parties that are incorporated into the file of the ongoing investigation. For these purposes, each Party may resort to one of the following mechanisms:

to. The interested parties in the investigation must send to the other interested parties copies of each of the reports, documents and means of public evidence or of the non-confidential summaries on the same day that they are presented to the investigating authority; and

b. The competent authority will implement mechanisms that allow the interested parties to become aware of the existence of said actions within 2 (two) business days of their presentation and will have agile and brief mechanisms that allow access to them when the interested parties are notified. they so require.

2. Pursuant to the provisions of each Party's legislation, timely access shall be provided to the information contained in the administrative file of an investigation under the terms of this Chapter. Access will not be given to information whose disclosure could result in substantial and irreversible patrimonial or financial damage to the owner of said information, as well as to government information indicated by laws and other public order provisions and that contained in internal communications of the investigating authority, of the investigating authority with other government entities or from government to government that are of a confidential nature.

Article 7-16 : Confidential information.
1. For the purposes of investigations, confidential information will be considered, if it is submitted by the interested parties, because its disclosure or dissemination to the public may cause damage to their competitive position, the following information:

to. the production processes of the merchandise in question;

b. production costs and identity of components;

c. distribution costs;

d. the terms and conditions of sale, except those offered to the public;

and. sales prices per transaction and per product, except for price components such as product sales and distribution dates, as well as transportation if based on public itineraries;

F. the description of the type of individual customers, distributors or suppliers;

g. where applicable, the exact amount of the dumping margin on individual sales;

h. the amounts of the adjustments for terms and conditions of sale, volume or quantities, variable costs and tax charges proposed by the interested party; and

Yo. any other information specific to the company in question.

2. The competent authority will establish or maintain procedures for the handling of confidential information provided during the procedure, and will require the interested parties to provide such information, the delivery of non-confidential written summaries of the same or, where appropriate, the reasons that prevent them from doing so. If interested parties do not submit the above summaries, the competent authority may disregard that information, unless it can be convincingly demonstrated to them, from an appropriate source, that the information is correct.

Article 7-17 : Transparency.
In order to provide transparency to the investigation procedures and guarantee a wide and full opportunity for the interested parties to defend their interests, the Parties shall endeavor to reform, as far as possible, their domestic legislation on unfair trade practices in order to have the following mechanisms:

to. a mechanism that grants timely access to the representatives of the interested parties during the procedure to all the information contained in the administrative file, including confidential information, provided that the requirements established by domestic legislation are met;

b. a confidentiality commitment to which the representatives of the interested parties will be subject, in which the use of the information for personal benefit and its dissemination among persons who are not authorized to know it are strictly prohibited; and

c. specific sanctions for infringements against the commitments adopted by the representatives of the interested parties.

Article 7-18 : Establishment of compensatory quotas.
No Party shall impose a preliminary compensatory quota until after 90 business days have elapsed from the date of publication of the initial resolution in its respective official dissemination body.

Article 7-19 : New exporter procedure.
1. If a product is subject to definitive countervailing duties in the territory of an importing Party, exporters or producers of the exporting country that have not exported that product to the importing Party during the period under investigation and demonstrate that they are not related to any of exporters or producers who are subject to countervailing duties for reasons other than refusing to cooperate, may request the investigating authority to conduct a new exporter examination to determine an individual margin of dumping or the amount of the grant.

2. The new exporter procedure must be initiated at the request of a party and must be concluded within a maximum period of 6 (six) months from the publication of the public notice of initiation. No countervailing duties will be levied on imports from these exporters or producers during the review. However, the competent authority may suspend the customs valuation and/or request guarantees to ensure that, if that examination leads to an affirmative determination of dumping or the amount of subsidy and that the exporter benefited from the same, compensatory quotas may be collected with retroactive effect from the date of initiation of the examination.

3. The investigating authority will only issue an initiation and a final determination. The examination will only include the analysis of the corresponding individual dumping margin , or of the amount of the subsidy and that the exporter benefited from it. The applicant for the procedure must demonstrate that the volume of exports to the territory of the importing Party during the review period is representative. The information presented by the new exporter or producer may be subject to verification by the investigating authority.

Article 7-20 : Imports from third countries.
1. If a Party considers that the other Party imports from third markets under conditions of dumping or subsidies that affect its exports, it may request consultations, through the Commission, in order to find out the real conditions of entry of those goods, so that the consulting Party can evaluate the advisability of requesting the initiation of an antidumping or countervailing duty investigation against the third country.

2. The consulted Party will give adequate consideration and response within a period of no more than 15 business days. The consultations will take place in the place agreed by the Parties and both their development and conclusions will be brought to the attention of the Commission.

Article 7-21 : Clarification procedure.
Once a compensatory, preliminary or final quota has been imposed, the interested parties may request the authority that has issued the act, to resolve whether a certain asset is subject to the imposed measure, or to clarify any aspect of the resolution provided.

Article 7-22 : Reimbursement or Reimbursement.
If in the final resolution a reduction or revocation of a compensatory quota is determined or as a result of the final decision of an arbitration panel or a national court, issued in accordance with Chapter XVIII (Dispute Settlement), it is declared that the application of a countervailing duty by a Party is incompatible with the provisions on the matter, the importing Party shall cease to apply or adjust the countervailing duty in question to the respective goods of the complaining Party. In the event that the application of the compensatory quota ceases or its adjustment proceeds, the difference or the total amount received for said concept will be promptly reimbursed, as the case may be,

Annex 7-01 Competent Authority

For the purposes of this chapter, the term "competent investigating authority" shall mean:

to. in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy, or its successor; and

b. in the case of Uruguay, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, or its successor.

Annex 7-01.1 Official dissemination bodies

For the purposes of this chapter, “official broadcasting bodies” shall mean:

to. In the case of Mexico, Official Gazette of the Federation; and

b. In the case of Uruguay, Official Gazette of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay.

CHAPTER VIII

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 8-01 : General provisions.
1. The objective of this chapter is to facilitate the trade of agricultural goods, fish, fishing products and forest products originating from the Parties, for which provisions are established based on the principles and disciplines of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary Measures and Phytosanitary of the World Trade Organization.

2. For the purposes of this chapter, the “SPS Agreement” shall mean the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which forms part of the WTO Agreement.

3. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to comply with their rights and obligations derived from the SPS Agreement and the provisions of said Agreement regarding the adoption and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures that regulate or may directly and indirectly affect trade in animals, plants, their products and byproducts.

Article 8-02 : Rights and obligations of the Parties.
1. The Parties shall adopt, maintain or apply their sanitary and phytosanitary measures only to the extent necessary to achieve their appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection, taking into account their technical and economic feasibility.

2. The Parties may apply or maintain sanitary or phytosanitary measures that offer a higher level of protection than would be achieved by a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided there is scientific justification for doing so.

3. Sanitary or phytosanitary measures shall not constitute a disguised restriction on trade nor shall they have the object or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 8-03 : Equivalence.
1. Each Party shall accept as equivalent the sanitary or phytosanitary measures of the other Party, even when they differ from its own, provided that it is demonstrated that they achieve the appropriate level of protection of the importing Party.

2. The Parties will hold consultations for the recognition of equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, considering the standards, guidelines and recommendations established by the competent international organizations and the decisions adopted by the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO on the matter; for this, they will facilitate access to their territories, at the request of a Party, for inspections, tests and other pertinent procedures.

Article 8-04 : Risk assessment.
1. Sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be based on an evaluation appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks to the life and health of people and animals or to the preservation of plants, taking into account the standards, guidelines and recommendations relevant documents developed by the competent international organizations.

2. In establishing their appropriate level of protection, they shall take into account the objective of minimizing negative effects on trade and shall avoid making arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions in the levels they consider appropriate in different situations, if such distinctions result in discrimination or restriction. covert to trade.

3. The Parties agree on the following procedure to expedite the health risk assessment process:

to. the exporting Party will submit, through a technical file, to the importing Party, the information necessary to carry out the risk assessment;

b. the importing Party, within a term of no more than 2 (two) months, will analyze the technical file and proceed to issue the observations it deems pertinent or propose the date for the verification visit. In the first case, the exporting Party will respond to the observations of the importing Party by sending, if applicable, the updated technical file to the importing Party, who will propose, within a period of no more than one month, the date of the inspection visit. and verification;

c. The official technician(s) of the importing Party will carry out the technical inspection and verification visit, in coordination with the health authorities of the exporting Party. The importing Party, within a term of no more than 3 (three) months, will submit the corresponding report and opinion with the result of the risk assessment. Said term shall include the analysis and processing of the necessary complementary information that may have been required by the importing Party;

d. the financing of the inspection and verification visit will be the responsibility of the interested parties of the exporting Party;

and. the importing Party undertakes to modify its sanitary regulations and to establish the conditions that must be included in the corresponding sanitary certificates, in a period not exceeding 3 (three) months, from the issuance of the favorable opinion; and

F. This procedure may be modified by mutual agreement of the Parties within the Committee, established in article 8-10, and must be recorded in writing and indicating the entry into force of the modified procedure.

4. For the purposes of the phytosanitary risk assessment, the Parties agree that, once the exporting Party has provided the importing Party with the information necessary to carry out such assessment, both Parties shall agree on a time frame for completion. the same. Once the risk assessment is concluded, the importing Party shall establish, maintain or modify, as appropriate, its phytosanitary measures based on the results of said assessment, immediately notifying the exporting Party, without prejudice to the provisions of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.

Article 8-05 : Recognition of areas free of pests or diseases.
1. The Parties shall recognize pest- or disease-free areas, in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of the SPS Agreement.

2. The Parties shall establish agreements on specific requirements whose fulfillment allows a good produced in a pest or disease-free zone of the territory of the exporting Party, to be admitted to the territory of the importing Party if it achieves the level of protection required by it.

3. In animal health matters, the Parties agree on the following procedure to streamline the process of recognition of disease-free zones or regions, which will, in turn, facilitate bilateral trade in agricultural products:

to. The exporting Party will request in writing from the importing Party the recognition of a zone or region free of diseases, sending the technical file that verifies compliance with the requirements established in the applicable international standards in force at the time, which must include the official declaration of the free zone or region;

b. the importing Party, within a term of no more than 2 (two) months, will analyze the technical file and proceed to issue the observations it deems pertinent or propose the date for the verification visit of the proposed area or region. In the first case, the exporting Party will respond to the observations of the importing Party, sending, if applicable, the updated technical file to the importing Party, who will propose, within a period not exceeding one month, the date of the visit of inspection;

c. The official technician(s) of the importing Party will carry out the technical verification visit, in coordination with the animal health authorities of the exporting Party. The importing Party, within a term of no more than three months, will submit the corresponding report and opinion with the result of the evaluation. Within said period, the analysis and processing of the necessary complementary information, which would have been required by the importing party, will be included;

d. the financing of the verification visit will be the responsibility of the interested parties of the exporting Party;

and. The importing Party undertakes to modify its animal health regulations and to establish the conditions that must be included in the corresponding animal health certificates, within a period of no more than three months, from the issuance of the favorable opinion, to eliminate the restrictions inherent to the disease of those in which the recognized zone or region is free; and

F. This procedure may be modified by mutual agreement of the Parties within the Committee, established in article 8-10, and must be recorded in writing and indicating the entry into force of the modified procedure.

4. In phytosanitary matters, the Parties will recognize the free areas (zones), in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of this article and in the corresponding regulations in force at the time of the International Phytosanitary Protection Convention (IPPC). Likewise, they will recognize the places and free production sites in accordance with the provisions of the corresponding regulations in force at the time of the IPPC.

Article 8-06 : Inspections and sanitary verifications.
The Parties will allow the import of products and by-products of animal origin from processing plants and other facilities, once these are approved in accordance with their respective national legislation on sanitary matters, taking into account the pertinent standards, guidelines and recommendations that prepared by the competent international organizations.

Article 8-07 : Certification and phytosanitary verification.
1. Shipments of plants, plant products or other regulated items shall be accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate issued by the competent National Organization of the exporting Party, which will contain the phytosanitary requirements demanded by the importing Party and shall conform to the model specified in the IPPC. and the corresponding guidelines in force at the time of said Convention. These certificates will be valid for 45 days from the date of issue.

2. The importing Party shall notify the exporting Party of the cases of non-compliance in the phytosanitary certification and the emergency actions adopted in accordance with the corresponding provisions in force at the time of the IPPC.

Article 8-08 : Food safety.
Neither Party may attribute to the consumption of a certain natural or processed food imported from the other Party, the cause of a disease outbreak or other detrimental effect on human health in its territory, if it does not have reliable evidence that the contamination of said food occurred prior to its entry into its territory and when it was under the responsibility of the exporting Party.

Article 8-09 : Transparency.
1. The Parties shall notify each other of the adoption or application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.

2. Additionally, they will notify:

to. changes that occur in the field of animal health, such as the appearance of exotic diseases and those on list A of the International Office of Epizootics, immediately;

b. the appearance of an outbreak or dissemination of phytosanitary pests that may constitute an immediate or potential risk for trade between the Parties, immediately;

c. scientific findings of epidemiological importance and significant changes in relation to pests and diseases not included in subparagraphs a) and b) that may affect trade between the Parties, within a maximum period of 10 days;

d. food control emergency situations, in which a risk of serious adverse effects to human health associated with the consumption of certain foods is detected and clearly identified (even if the agents causing such effects could not be identified) , immediately, in accordance with the corresponding standard in force at the time of the Codex Alimentarius; and

and. the causes or reasons why a product from the exporting Party is rejected by the importing Party, within a period of 7 (seven) days and in accordance with the relevant international standards in force at the time.

Article 8-10 : Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
1. The Parties agree to establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (hereinafter, the Committee).

2. The Committee will be made up of the authorities with responsibilities in this matter. The Committee will meet at least once a year and may determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings will be held. The venues of the meetings will be alternated, corresponding to the Party hosting the Committee's presidency.

3. At the first meeting of the Committee, both Parties will notify their competent authorities in animal, phytosanitary and food safety matters.

4. The Committee will submit to the Commission the reports it deems pertinent or that are required by it.

5. The functions of the Committee will include:

to. monitor compliance and application of the provisions of this chapter;

b. serve as a consultation forum to address problems that may arise from the application of specific sanitary and phytosanitary measures by any of the Parties with the purpose of agreeing on immediate and mutually acceptable solutions;

c. consider and propose, if necessary, eventual modifications to the specific provisions applicable between the Parties contained in articles 8-04, 8-05, 8-06, 8-07, 8-08 and 8-09 and any question of nature sanitary or phytosanitary measures necessary to facilitate trade in agricultural goods between the Parties;

d. facilitate the recognition of equivalence of specific sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the Parties; and

and. consider, if necessary, the establishment of specific understandings on animal health, plant health and food safety that involve greater technical-operational detail.

6. In order to fulfill its functions, the Committee may form ad hoc working groups in those cases in which it deems it necessary.

Article 8-11 : Settlement of disputes.
Once the consultation procedure has been exhausted, in accordance with Article 8-10 (5)(b), any Party that considers the result of said consultations unsatisfactory may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism of this Agreement, whenever it understands that the other Party is not complying with any of the provisions established in this chapter.

CHAPTER IX

STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND
CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES

Article 9-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

TBT Agreement : the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

assessment of potential harms : the assessment of the possibility of adverse effects;

compatibility : bringing different standardization measures, approved by different standardization bodies, but with the same scope, to a level such that they are identical, equivalent, or have the effect of allowing goods or services to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose. same purpose;

standardization measures : a standard, technical regulation or a conformity assessment procedure;

standard : a document approved by a recognized institution, which provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or related processes and production methods or for related services or methods of operation, and the observance of which is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process or method of production or operation;

international standard : a measure relating to standardization, or other guideline or recommendation, adopted by an international standardization body and made available to the public;

legitimate objective : among others, the guarantee of safety or the protection of life or health, human, animal, plant or the environment, or the prevention of practices that may mislead consumers, including matters related to the identification of goods or services, considering, among other aspects, when appropriate, fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological, infrastructure or scientific justification type;

standardization bodies – a body whose standardization activities are recognized by the parties;

international standard-setting bodies: a standard-setting body open to participation by relevant bodies of at least all Members of the TBT Agreement, including the International Organization for Standardization, the International Electrotechnical Commission, the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the World Organization for Standardization Health, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Telecommunications Union, or any other organization that the Parties designate;

conformity assessment procedure : any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine that the relevant requirements of technical regulations or standards are met and include, among others, procedures for sampling, testing and inspection, evaluation, verification and assurance of conformity. compliance, registration, accreditation and approval, separately or in different combinations;

technical regulation – a document in which, for the purpose of achieving legitimate objectives, the characteristics of goods or their related processes and production methods are established, or the characteristics of services or their related methods of operation, including administrative provisions applicable, and whose observance is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process or method of production or operation; and services : any service within the scope of this treaty, which is subject to measures relating to standardization.

Article 9-02 : General provision.
In cases not provided for in the definitions of the preceding article, the definitions provided for in the TBT Agreement shall apply to this chapter.

Article 9-03 : Scope of application.
This chapter applies to measures related to the standardization of the Parties, as well as to measures that may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods or services between them.

Article 9-04 : Rights and obligations of the Parties.
1. The Parties will be governed by the rights and obligations contracted in the TBT Agreement. Likewise, they may adopt the necessary measures to ensure their legitimate objectives and to guarantee the application and compliance with the measures related to standardization, preventing said measures from constituting unjustified or unnecessary obstacles to trade.

2. In order to facilitate trade, the Commission will encourage the elimination of obstacles to it that may result from the application of technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, without reducing the level of prevention of practices that may mislead, nor the protection of human health and/or safety, life or animal or plant health, nor the environment or consumers.

3. To achieve this, the Parties will adopt, whenever possible, measures related to international standardization, in the terms established in the TBT Agreement.

4. When these rules, guidelines or recommendations do not constitute an effective or adequate means to achieve their legitimate objectives, such as fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature, or for scientifically justified reasons or because it is not obtained the level of protection that the party considers adequate, the Parties may not consider them as a basis for the development of their measures related to standardization.

Article 9-05 : Compatibility and equivalence.
1. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall endeavor, to the extent possible and through appropriate means, to promote the compatibility of the specific technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that exist in its territory, with the technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that apply to products identified in the territory of that Party.

2. Each Party shall favorably consider the possibility of accepting as equivalent the technical regulations of the other Party, even when they differ from its own, provided it is satisfied that such regulations adequately fulfill the legitimate objectives of its own technical regulations.

3. Each Party will give favorable consideration to the request of the other Party to negotiate, whenever possible, mutual recognition agreements for the results of conformity assessment procedures, adopting, to the extent possible, recognized international practices. in this matter.

Article 9-06 : Assessment of potential damage.
1. In pursuit of its legitimate objectives, each Party may carry out assessments of the potential damage that could be caused by any merchandise that is traded or by a service provider between the Parties regarding the protection of human health or safety, of animal or plant life or health, the environment and consumers.

2. In making such evaluation, each Party shall take into account, among other factors: the available scientific evidence or technical information; the intended end use; production processes or methods, provided that these influence the characteristics of the final goods; the processes or methods of operation, inspection, sampling or testing or environmental conditions, avoiding the existence of arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions between similar merchandise in the level of protection that it deems necessary.

3. Each Party will provide the other, when so requested, the pertinent documentation in relation to said evaluation processes, the factors that it took into consideration to carry out the evaluation and for the establishment of the levels of protection that it deems necessary.

Article 9-07 : Notification, publication and delivery of information.
1. When proposing the adoption or modification of any measure related to standardization, except those established in paragraph 2.10 of the TBT Agreement, each Party shall notify the other in writing of the proposed measure that does not have the character of law or regulation of law and shall grant a reasonable period of time that allows each Party to submit comments in writing and, upon request, will discuss and take into account the comments, as well as the results of the discussions.

2. For the purposes of this article, the competent authorities of the notification will be those indicated in Annex 9-07 to this article.

3. Each Party shall annually notify the other Party of its plans and programs of measures related to standardization. Each Party will maintain a list of its measures related to standardization, which, upon request, will be available to the other Party.

4. Where a Party allows non-government persons in its territory to be present during the process of developing its standardization measures, it shall also allow non-government persons from the other Party's territory to be present.

Article 9-08 : Technical cooperation. 1. At the request of one Party, the other:

to. will provide advice, information and technical assistance in mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen the measures related to standardization, as well as its activities, processes and systems on the matter;

b. provide you with information on its technical cooperation programs related to standardization measures in areas of particular interest; and

c. will consult you during the preparation of any technical standard, technical regulation and/or conformity assessment procedure or before its adoption or a change or its application.

2. Each Party shall encourage organizations with recognized standardization activities in its territory to cooperate in standardization activities with those of the other Party in its territory, as appropriate.

Article 9-09 : Limitations on the provision of information.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an obligation of a Party to provide any information the dissemination of which is contrary or detrimental to the legitimate commercial interests of certain companies.

Article 9-10 : Bilateral meetings.
1. At the request of a Party, the Parties shall hold, as soon as possible, after receiving the request, bilateral meetings to:

to. consider or consult a particular matter on measures related to standardization that may affect trade between the Parties;

b. define and facilitate the process of harmonization of its measures related to standardization;

c. facilitate the process of negotiating mutual recognition agreements;

d. discuss any other related matter.

2. For the purposes of this article, the authorities in charge of coordinating bilateral meetings will be those indicated in Annex 9-10. 3. When a Party has doubts about any measure related to the standardization of the other, said Party may go to the other, through its competent authorities, in order to obtain information, clarification and/or advice in this regard.

Annex 9-07 Competent authorities

For the purposes of article 9-07, the competent authorities will be:

a In the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy, through the General Directorate of Standards, or its successor; and

b. in the case of Uruguay, the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Mining, or its successor.

Annex 9-10 Authorities in charge of coordinating bilateral meetings.

For the purposes of article 9-10, the authorities in charge of coordinating bilateral meetings are:

to. in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy, through the Undersecretariat for International Trade Negotiations, or its successor; and

b. in the case of Uruguay, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or its successor.

CHAPTER X

CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 10-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

services : any service in any sector, included in the use classification of each Party, except services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority : any service not supplied on commercial terms or in competition with one or more service providers;

company : means an "enterprise" as defined in Article 2-01 (General Definitions), and the branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party : an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party, including branches located in the territory of a Party and carrying out economic activities in that territory;

cross-border trade in services or cross-border provision of a service : the provision of a service:

to. from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;

b. in the territory of a Party, by persons of that Party, to persons of another Party; either

c. by a national of a Party in the territory of another Party,

but does not include the provision of a service in the territory of a Party through an investment, as defined in Article 13-01 (Definitions), in that territory;

service provider of a Party : a person of the Party who intends to provide or provides a service;

quantitative restriction : a non-discriminatory measure that imposes limitations on:

to. the number of service providers, whether through a quota, monopoly or an economic necessity test or by any other quantitative means; either

b. the operations of any service provider, whether through a fee or an economic need test, or by any other quantitative means;

specialized air services : aerial mapping; aerial surveying; aerial photography; forest fire control; Firefighting; aerial advertising; gliders towing; skydiving services; aerial services for construction; air transport of logs; scenic flights; training flights; aerial inspection and surveillance and aerial spraying; and

professional services : subject to the legislation of each Party, the performance for consideration or free of charge of any act or the provision of any service specific to each profession and whose professional practice is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by people who practice a trade or the crew of merchant ships and aircraft.

Article 10-02 : Scope of application.
1. This Chapter refers to measures that a Party adopts or maintains that affect cross-border trade in services, including those related to:

to. the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a service;

b. the purchase, use or payment of a service;

c. access to services offered to the general public, and the use thereof, for the provision of a service;

d. the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; and

and. the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.

2. This chapter does not refer to:

to. financial services,

b. air services, including national and international air transport, scheduled and non-scheduled, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:

i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;

ii) specialized air services;

iii) the sale and marketing of air transport services; and

iv) computerized reservation services;

c. government purchases made by a State Party or enterprise; nor to

d. subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance. The Parties will take into account the results of the treatment of this issue within the Working Group on the Rules of the GATS of the WTO, within the framework of the Doha round.

3. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:

to. impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of another Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor to confer any right on that national, with respect to such access or employment; either

b. prevent a Party from providing services or carrying out functions such as the enforcement of laws and social rehabilitation services, pension or unemployment insurance or social security services, those related to social welfare, public education, public training, health and protection of childhood, when they perform in a manner that is not inconsistent with this chapter.

Article 10-03 : National treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant to the services and service providers of the other Party, with respect to all measures affecting the provision of services, treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its service providers. .

2. Treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1 means, with respect to a state or department, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded by that state or department, in like circumstances, to services or providers of services of the Party to which it belongs.

3. The provisions of paragraph 1 do not oblige the Parties to compensate intrinsic competitive disadvantages that result from the foreign nature of the relevant services or service providers.

Article 10-04 : Most favored nation treatment.
Each Party shall immediately and unconditionally grant to the services and service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to services and service providers of a non-Party country.

Article 10-05 : Local presence.
Neither Party shall require a service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office or any type of company, or to be resident in its territory as a condition for the cross-border provision of a service.

Article 10-06 : Reservations and exceptions.
1. Articles 10-03, 10-04 and 10-05 shall not apply to:

to. any existing non-conforming measures that are adopted or maintained by:

i) a Party at the national or federal, or state or departmental level, as appropriate, as set out in its schedule in Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions), or

ii) a municipal government; nor to

b. the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph a);

c. the reform of any non-conforming measure referred to in literal a), provided that said reform or renewal does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the reform, with articles 10-03, 10 -04 and 10-05.

2. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of its existing measures with respect to Articles 10-03, 10-04 and 10-05. The Parties will list their non-conforming measures in Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions), which must be completed by the Parties no later than a period of one year from the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 10-07 : Non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions.
1. Each Party shall indicate in its list of Annex II (Non-Discriminatory Quantitative Restrictions), within a period of one year from the entry into force of this Agreement, any quantitative restrictions that it maintains at the national or federal and state or departmental levels.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any quantitative restrictions, other than those at the local government level, that it adopts after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and shall indicate the restriction in its list in Annex II (Non-Legal Quantitative Restrictions). discriminatory).

3. The Parties shall endeavor periodically, but in any case at least every 2 (two) years, to negotiate the liberalization or removal of the quantitative restrictions indicated in their list in Annex II (Non-Discriminatory Quantitative Restrictions), in accordance with the established in paragraphs 1 and 2.

Article 10-08 : Future liberalization.
In order to achieve a level of progressive liberalization, the Commission may call negotiations tending to eliminate the remaining restrictions registered in accordance with article 10-06.

Article 10-09 : Procedures.
The Commission will establish procedures for:

to. for a Party to notify the other Parties and include in its relevant list:

i) quantitative restrictions, in accordance with article 10-07;

ii) amendments or renewals to measures referred to in Article 10-06 (1)(b); and

b. holding consultations on reservations, quantitative restrictions or commitments, tending to achieve greater liberalization.

Article 10-10 : National Regulation.
1. Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application that affect trade in services are administered in a reasonable, objective, and impartial manner.

2. Each Party shall have the right to regulate the supply of services in its territory, and to establish new regulations in this regard, in order to achieve the objectives of its national policy, including regulations on pro-competitive matters and consumer protection.

Article 10-11 : Granting of licenses and certificates.
1. When a license, registration, certificate or other type of authorization is required for the provision of a service, the competent authorities of the Party in question, within a reasonable period of time from the presentation of an application:

to. they will resolve on it, informing the interested party when the application is complete; either

b. they will inform the interested party, when the application is not complete, without unnecessary delays about the status of the application:

2. In order to ensure that any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the requirements and procedures for the granting of licenses or certifications to nationals of the other Party does not constitute an unnecessary barrier to trade, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that such measures:

to. are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as the capacity and aptitude to provide a service;

b. are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of a service; and

c. do not constitute a disguised restriction on the cross-border provision of a service.

3. When a Party recognizes, unilaterally or by agreement with another non-Party, education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of the other Party or of any non-Party:

to. nothing in Article 10-04 shall be construed to require that Party to recognize education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of the other Party; and

b. the Party shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunity to demonstrate that education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of that other Party shall also be recognized, or to enter into an arrangement or agreement having equivalent effect.

4. Each Party, within a period of 2 (two) years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, will eliminate all nationality or permanent residence requirements, indicated in its list of Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions), that it maintains for the granting of licenses or certificates to professional service providers of the other Party. Where a Party fails to comply with this obligation with respect to a particular sector, the other Party may, in the same sector and for as long as the non-compliant Party maintains its requirement, maintain, as the sole remedy, an equivalent requirement indicated in your list in Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions) or reinstate:

to. any such federal requirements that it has waived pursuant to this section; either

b. by notification to the non-compliant Party, any such state-level requirements that may have been in place on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

5. The Parties shall consult with each other periodically in order to examine the possibility of eliminating the remaining nationality or permanent residence requirements for the granting of licenses or certificates to the service providers of each Party.

6. Annex 10-11(6) applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party related to the licensing or certification of professional service providers.

Article 10-12 : Denial of benefits.
Upon notification and consultation in accordance with Articles 16-03 (Notification and provision of information), and 18-03 (Consultations), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service provider of the other Party, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out substantive business operations activities in the territory of either Party, and that is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party country.

ANNEXES

It was agreed to prepare the following Annexes:

Annex I	Reservations and Exceptions
 
Annex II	Non-Discriminatory Quantitative Restrictions
 
Annex III	Exemptions to the Most Favored Nation Clause
 
Annex IV	 Activities Reserved to the State
 
 

 

 

 

Annex 10-11(6)

Professional services

Aim.

1. The purpose of this annex is to establish the rules that the Parties will observe to harmonize, among themselves, the measures that will regulate the mutual recognition of titles or academic degrees for the provision of professional services, through the granting of authorization for professional practice.

Processing of applications for the granting of licenses and certificates.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities, within a reasonable time after the submission of an application for licenses or certificates by a national of the other Party:

to. if the application is complete, decide on it and notify the applicant of the resolution; either

b. if it is incomplete, inform the applicant, without undue delay, of the status of the application and any additional information required under your law.

Development of professional standards.

3. The Parties shall encourage the relevant bodies in their respective territories to develop mutually acceptable standards and criteria for the granting of licenses and certificates to professional service providers, as well as to submit to the Commission recommendations on their mutual recognition.

4. The standards and criteria referred to in paragraph 3 may be developed in relation to the following aspects:

to. education: accreditation of schools or academic programs;

b. examinations: qualification examinations for obtaining licenses, including alternative methods of evaluation, such as oral examinations and interviews;

c. experience: length and nature of experience required to obtain a license;

d. conduct and ethics: rules of professional conduct and the nature of disciplinary measures in case professional service providers contravene them;

and. professional development and recertification: continuing education and the corresponding requirements to maintain the professional certificate;

F. scope of action: extent and limits of authorized activities;

g. local knowledge: requirements on knowledge of such things as local laws and regulations, language, geography or climate; and

h. consumer protection: alternative requirements to residency, such as bonds, professional liability insurance, and customer reimbursement funds to ensure consumer protection.

5. Upon receipt of a recommendation referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission shall review it within a reasonable time to decide whether it is consistent with the provisions of this Agreement. Based on the review carried out by the Commission, each Party will encourage their respective competent authorities to put this recommendation into practice, in the corresponding cases, within a mutually agreed term.

Granting of temporary licences.

6. When the Parties agree, each of them shall encourage the relevant bodies in their respective territories to develop procedures for the issuance of temporary licenses to professional service providers of the other Party.

Revision.

7. The Commission will periodically review, at least once every 3 (three) years, the application of the provisions of this Annex.

CHAPTER XI

TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Article 11-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

intra -corporate communications: the telecommunications by which a company communicates:

to. internally, with its subsidiaries, branches and affiliates or these among themselves, as defined by each Party; either

b. in a non-commercial way and subject to the current legislation of each Party, with all the people of fundamental importance for the economic activity of the company, and who maintain a continuous contractual relationship with it;

but does not include telecommunications services provided to persons other than those described in this definition;

authorized equipment : terminal or other equipment that has been approved to connect to the public telecommunications network in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures of the Party where it is installed;

terminal equipment : any digital or analog device capable of processing, receiving, switching, signaling or transmitting signals through electromagnetic means and that is connected to the public telecommunications network, through radio or cable connections, at a terminal point;

standardization -related measures: “standardization-related measures” as defined in Article 9-01(Definitions);

conformity assessment procedure: "conformity assessment procedure" as defined in Article 9-01 (Definitions);

protocol – a set of rules and formats that govern the exchange of information between two peer entities, for the purposes of signal or data information transfer;

principal provider or dominant operator : a provider or operator that has the ability to significantly affect the conditions of participation (from the point of view of prices and supply) in a given market for telecommunications services as a result of control of the essential facilities or the use of its position in the market;

network end point : the final demarcation of the public telecommunications network at the user's premises;

private telecommunications network: the internal telecommunications network of a company or between individuals, to satisfy their own telecommunication needs, without marketing any service to third parties;

public telecommunications network: the telecommunications network used to commercially exploit telecommunications services intended to meet the needs of the general public, not including the users' telecommunications terminal equipment, or private telecommunications networks beyond of the end point of the network;

enhanced or value-added services: telecommunications services that employ computer processing systems that:

to. act on the format, content, code, protocol or similar aspects of the user's transmitted information1 ;

b. provide the customer with additional, different, or restructured information; either

c. involve user interaction with stored information;

telecommunications service : any telecommunications service that a Party explicitly or de facto requires to be offered to the general public, including telegraph, telephone, telex, and data transmission and that generally involves the real-time transmission of customer-supplied information between two or more points, with no “point-to-point” change in the form or content of the user information; and

telecommunication : all transmission, emission, reception of signs, signals, writings, images, sounds and information of any nature, by wire, radioelectricity, optical means or other electromagnetic systems.

Article 11-02 : Scope of application and extension of obligations.
1. Recognizing the dual role of telecommunications services, as a specific sector of economic activity and as a means of providing services for other economic activities, this chapter applies to:

to. the measures that a Party adopts or maintains, related to the access to and the continuous use of public networks or telecommunications services by persons of another Party, including their access and use when operating private networks to carry out intra-corporate communications;

b. the measures adopted or maintained by a Party on the provision of enhanced or value-added services by persons of another Party in the territory of the first or across its borders; and

c. measures related to standardization regarding the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment to public telecommunications networks.

2. Except to ensure that persons operating broadcast stations and cable systems have continuous access to and use of public networks and telecommunications services, this Chapter does not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to broadcasting or cable distribution of radio or television programming.

3. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:

to. compel any Party to authorize a person of another Party to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or provide telecommunications networks or services;

b. compel any Party or that it, in turn, require any person to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or provide public networks or telecommunications services that are not offered to the general public;

c. prevent any Party from prohibiting persons who operate private networks from using such networks to provide public networks or telecommunications services to third parties; neither

d. compel a Party to require any person involved in the broadcasting or cable distribution of radio or television programming to provide its cable or broadcasting infrastructure as a public telecommunications network.

Article 11-03 : Access to public networks and telecommunications services and their use.
1. Each Party shall guarantee that any person of the other Party has access to and can make use of any public network or telecommunications service, as well as private leased circuits, offered in its territory or cross-border on reasonable terms and conditions. and non-discriminatory, for the conduct of their business, as specified in paragraphs 2 to 7.

2. Subject to paragraphs 6 and 7, each Party shall ensure that persons of the other Party are permitted:

to. purchase or lease and connect the terminal equipment or other equipment that interfaces with the public telecommunications network;

b. interconnect private circuits, leased or owned, with public telecommunications networks in the territory of that Party or with circuits leased or owned by another person, under terms and conditions mutually accepted by said persons;

c. perform switching, signaling, and processing functions; and

d. use the operating protocols that they choose as long as it does not compromise the quality of service.

3. Without prejudice to what is established in its current legislation, each Party shall ensure that the setting of prices for telecommunications services is guided by the economic costs directly related to the provision of such services.

4. Each Party shall guarantee that persons of the other Party may use public networks or telecommunications services to transmit information in its territory or across its borders, including for intra-corporate communications, and for access to information contained in databases or stored in any other form that is readable by a machine in the territory of either Party.

5. Each Party may adopt any necessary measure to ensure the confidentiality and security of messages and the protection of the privacy of subscribers to public telecommunications networks or services.

6. Each Party shall ensure that no conditions are imposed on access to, or use of, public networks or telecommunications services other than those necessary to:

to. safeguard the responsibilities of the service, of the providers of public networks or telecommunications services, in particular their ability to make their networks or services available to the general public; either

b. protect the technical integrity of public networks or telecommunications services.

7. Provided that the conditions for access to public networks or telecommunications services and their use comply with the guidelines established in paragraph 6, said conditions may include:

to. restrictions on the resale or sharing of such services;

b. requirements to use certain technical interfaces, including interface protocols, for interconnection with the aforementioned networks or services;

c. restrictions on the interconnection of private circuits, leased or owned, with the aforementioned networks or services, or with circuits leased or owned by another person, when these are used to supply public networks or telecommunications services; and

d. procedures to grant licences, permits, registrations, authorizations or notifications that, if adopted or maintained, are transparent and whose processing of applications is resolved in accordance with the terms established in the legislation of each Party.

Article 11-04 : Conditions for the provision of enhanced or value-added services.
1. Each Party shall ensure that:

to. any procedure that it adopts or maintains to grant licenses, permits, registrations, authorizations or notifications regarding the provision of enhanced or value-added services is transparent and non-discriminatory and that the applications are processed in accordance with the terms established in the legislation of each Party ; and

b. The information required under such procedures is limited to that necessary to prove that the applicant has the financial solvency to start rendering the service, or that the applicant's services, terminal equipment or other equipment comply with the applicable technical standards or technical regulations. of the Party.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of its current legislation, no Party shall require a provider of enhanced or value-added services:

to. lend them to the general public;

b. justify your rates according to your costs;

c. record a fee;

d. interconnect your networks with any particular customer or network; either

and. satisfy any particular technical standard or regulation, for an interconnection other than the interconnection with a public telecommunications network.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph c) of paragraph 2, each Party may require the registration of a fee to:

to. a provider of enhanced or value-added services, in order to correct a practice of this provider that the Party, in accordance with its legislation, has considered, in a particular case, as anti-competitive; either

b. a main supplier or dominant operator, to which the provisions of article 11-06 apply.

Article 11-05 : Measures related to standardization.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its measures related to standardization that refer to the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment to public telecommunications networks, including those measures that refer to the use of test and measurement equipment for the evaluation procedure of conformity, are adopted or maintained only to the extent necessary to:

to. avoid technical damage to public telecommunications networks;

b. avoid technical interference with telecommunications services or their deterioration;

c. avoid electromagnetic interference and ensure compatibility with other uses of the electromagnetic spectrum;

d. prevent billing equipment from malfunctioning; either

and. guarantee the security of the user and their access to public networks or telecommunications services.

2. Each Party may establish the approval requirement for the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment that is not authorized to the public telecommunications network, provided that the approval criteria are compatible with the provisions of paragraph 1.

3. Each Party shall ensure that the end points of public telecommunications networks are defined on a reasonable and transparent basis.

4. No Party shall require additional authorization to the equipment that connects on the consumer side, once the equipment has been authorized, since this authorized equipment serves as protection to the network, meeting the criteria of paragraph 1.

5. Each Party:

to. it will ensure that its conformity assessment procedures are transparent and non-discriminatory and that the applications submitted for this purpose are processed in accordance with the deadlines established in its legislation;

b. will allow any technically qualified entity to perform the required test on the terminal equipment or other equipment to be connected to the public telecommunications network, in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures of the Party, subject to the right of the Party to review the accuracy and completeness of test results; and

c. shall ensure that the measures it adopts or maintains to authorize persons acting as agents of telecommunications equipment suppliers before the competent bodies for conformity assessment of the Party are not discriminatory.

6. No later than one year after the entry into force of this treaty, each Party shall adopt, among its conformity assessment procedures, the necessary provisions to accept the results of the tests they carry out, based on their established standards and procedures. , the laboratories that are located in the territory of the other Party.

7. The Parties shall establish, in accordance with Chapter IX (Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures), a Subcommittee on Measures Related to Telecommunications Standardization.

Article 11-06 : Anti-competitive practices.
1. When a Party maintains or establishes a principal provider or dominant operator to provide public networks and telecommunications services, and the latter competes, directly or through a subsidiary, in the provision of enhanced or value-added services or other related goods or services with telecommunications, the Party shall ensure that the main provider or dominant operator does not use its position to engage in anti-competitive practices in those markets, either directly or through dealings with its affiliates, in such a way as to affect disadvantageously to a person of the other Party.

2. Each Party shall endeavor to introduce or maintain effective measures to prevent the anticompetitive conduct referred to in paragraph 1, such as:

to. accounting requirements;

b. structural separation requirements;

c. rules to ensure that the monopoly, main provider or dominant operator grants its competitors access to and use of its telecommunications networks or services, on terms and conditions no less favorable than those granted to itself or its affiliates ; either

d. rules to ensure timely disclosure of technical changes to public telecommunications networks and their interfaces.

Article 11-07 : Relationship with international organizations and agreements.
1. The Parties will do their best to stimulate the role of organizations at the regional and subregional level and encourage them as forums to promote the development of telecommunications in the region.

2. The Parties, recognizing the importance of international standards for achieving global compatibility and interoperability of telecommunication networks or services, shall promote such standards through the work of relevant international organizations, such as the International Telecommunication Union and the International Organization of Normalization.

Article 11-08 : Technical cooperation and other consultations.
1. In order to stimulate the development of interoperable telecommunications services infrastructure, the Parties will cooperate in the exchange of technical information in the development of intergovernmental training programs, as well as in other related activities. In compliance with this obligation, the Parties will place special emphasis on existing coordination and exchange programs.

2. The Parties shall consult with each other to determine the possibility of further liberalizing trade in all telecommunications services.

Article 11-09 : Transparency.
In addition to the provisions of Chapter XVI (Transparency), each Party shall make available to the public the measures relating to access to and use of public networks or telecommunications services, including measures relating to:

to. fees and other terms and conditions of service;

b. specifications of the technical interfaces with said services and networks;

c. information on the bodies responsible for the preparation and adoption of measures related to standardization that affect said access and use;

d. conditions applicable to the connection of terminal equipment or of another kind, to the public telecommunications network; and

and. any notice, permit, registration, license or contract requirements.

Article 11-10 : Relationship with other chapters.
In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

CHAPTER XII

TEMPORARY ENTRY OF BUSINESS PERSONS

Article 12-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

temporary entry means the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;

business person means a national of a Party who is engaged in trade in goods or provision of services, or in investment activities;

temporary : includes the expression “temporary”; and

in force : the binding quality of the legal precepts of the Parties at the time of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 12-02 : General principles.
The provisions of this chapter reflect the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating temporary entry in accordance with the principle of reciprocity and establishing transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose. Likewise, it reflects the need to guarantee the security of the borders, and to protect the national labor force and permanent employment in their respective territories.

Article 12-03 : General obligations.
1. Each Party shall apply the measures relating to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with Article 12-02 and, in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or prejudice in trade in goods and services, or in the investment activities covered by this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall endeavor to develop and adopt common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the application of this Chapter.

Article 12-04 : Temporary entry authorization.
1. In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including those contained in Annex 12-04, each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of business persons who comply with the applicable immigration measures, and those related to public health and safety, as well as with those relating to national security.

2. Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees caused by the processing of requests for temporary entry of business persons to the approximate cost of the services rendered.

Article 12-05 : Provision of information.
1. In addition to the provisions of Article 16-02, (Publication), each Party:

to. provide the other Party with the materials that allow them to know the measures related to this chapter; and

b. no later than one year after the date of entry into force of the Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its territory and in that of the other Party, a consolidated document with material that explains the requirements for the temporary entry pursuant to this chapter, so that business persons of the other Party may become acquainted with them.

2. Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to the other Party, in accordance with its legislation, the information related to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this chapter, to business persons of the other Party who are has issued them immigration documentation. This collection will include specific information for each occupation, profession or activity.

Article 12-06 : Committee on temporary entry.
1. The Parties establish a Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons, made up of representatives of each of them, including immigration officials.

2. The Committee will meet at least once a year to review:

to. the application and administration of this chapter;

b. the elaboration of measures that further facilitate the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity; either

c. proposals for modifications or additions to this chapter.

Article 12-07 : Settlement of disputes.
1. The Parties may not initiate the procedures provided for in Chapter XVIII (Dispute Settlement), with respect to a refusal of temporary entry authorization in accordance with this chapter, nor with respect to any particular case included in Article 12-03 (1) , unless:

to. the matter refers to a recurring practice; and

b. the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him or her with respect to that particular matter.

2. The remedies mentioned in paragraph (1)(b) will be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution in one year, counted from the beginning of the administrative procedure, and the resolution has not been delayed due to imputable causes. to the affected business person.

Article 12-08 : Relationship with other chapters.
Except as provided in this chapter and in chapters I (Initial Provisions), XVI (Transparency), XVII (Dispute Settlement), and XX (Final Provisions), nothing in this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their measures. migratory

Addendum 12-04

Temporary entry of business people

Section A - Business Visitors

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry to a business person who intends to carry out any business activity mentioned in Appendix 12-04(A)(1), provided that, in addition to complying with current immigration measures applicable to the temporary input, display:

to. proof of nationality of a Party;

b. documentation that proves that you will undertake such activities and indicates the purpose of your entry; and

c. proof of the international character of the proposed business activity and that the person does not intend to enter the local labor market.

2. Each Party will stipulate that a business person can meet the requirements indicated in subparagraph c) of paragraph 1, when it demonstrates that:

to. the main source of remuneration for that activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; and

b. the main place of business and where most of the profits are obtained are outside this territory.

3. Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of a business person who intends to carry out an activity other than those indicated in Appendix 12-04(A)(1), on terms no less favorable than those provided for in the existing provisions of the measures indicated in Appendix 12-04(A)(2), provided that said business person also complies with current immigration measures, applicable to temporary entry.

4. Neither Party may:

to. require as a condition to authorize temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1 or 3, prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests, work permit, or other procedures of similar effect; either

b. impose or maintain any numerical restriction on temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1 or 3.

Section B - Traders and Investors

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to the business person who intends to:

to. carry out an exchange of substantive commercial activities of goods or services, mainly between the territory of the Party of which he is a national and the territory of the Party to which entry is requested; either

b. establish, develop, manage or provide key technical advice or services to manage an investment in which the person or his company has committed, or is in the process of committing, a significant amount of capital,

and that performs supervisory, executive functions or that entail essential skills, provided that the person also complies with current immigration measures, applicable to temporary entry.

2. Neither Party may:

to. require proof of labor certification, work permit or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither

b. impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.

Section C - Personnel transfers within a company

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to a business person employed by a legally constituted business operating in its territory who intends to perform managerial, executive, or specialized knowledge functions at that business or one of its branches. subsidiaries or affiliates, as long as it complies with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. The Party may require that the person has been employed by the company, continuously, for one year within the 3 (three) years immediately preceding the date of filing the application.

2. Neither Party may:

to. require proof of labor certification, work permit or other procedures of similar effect as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither

b. impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.
Section D - Professionals

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to a business person who intends to carry out activities at a professional level in the field of a profession listed in Appendix 12-04(D)(1) to section D of the Annex to article 3, when the person, in addition to complying with current immigration requirements, applicable to temporary entry, exhibits:

to. proof of nationality of a Party; and

b. documentation that proves that the person will undertake such activities and that indicates the purpose of their entry.

2. Neither Party may:

to. require prior approval procedures, petitions, proof of labor certification, work permit, or others of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1; neither

b. impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.  

Addendum 12-04(A)(1)

business visitors

I. Research and scientific activities

- Researchers, technicians, and scientists who carry out activities independently or for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

II. Teaching and academic activities

- People who, having special training, carry out teaching as a habitual activity or those who, without having a teaching title, give seminars, courses or conferences.

III. Cultivation, manufacturing and production

- Purchasing and production personnel, at a managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

IV. Consultancy

- People who are experts in a subject on which they provide professional advice, among others, in technical, scientific or social areas.

V. Marketing

- Market researchers and analysts who carry out research or analysis independently or for a company located in the territory of the other Party

- Trade fair and promotional staff who attend trade conventions.
SAW. Sales

- Representatives and sales agents who place orders or negotiate contracts for goods and services for a company located in the territory of the other Party, but who do not deliver the goods or provide the services.

- Buyers who make acquisitions for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

VII. Distribution

-Transportation operators that carry out operations to transport goods or passengers to the territory of one Party from the territory of the other Party, or carry out cargo and transport operations of goods or passengers from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other, without carry out unloading operations, to the territory of the other Party.

-Customs brokers who provide advisory services regarding facilitating the import or export of goods.1

VIII. After sales services

- Installation, repair, maintenance and supervision personnel who have the essential specialized technical knowledge to comply with the contractual obligation of the seller; and that provides services, or trains workers to provide such services, pursuant to a warranty or other service contract in connection with the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company located outside the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, during the validity of the guarantee or service contract.

IX. General services

- Professionals who carry out business activities at a professional level in the field of a profession indicated in Appendix 12-04(D)(1).

- Managerial and supervisory personnel involved in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

- Financial services personnel (insurance agents, bank personnel or investment brokers) that intervene in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

- Public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions.

- Tourism personnel (excursion and travel agents, tourist guides or travel operators) who attend or participate in conventions or conduct any excursion that has started in the territory of the other Party.

- Translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company located in the territory of the other Party.

Addendum 12-04(A)(2)

Current Immigration Measures

1. In the case of Mexico, the General Population Law, 1974, with its reforms and regulations, and Manual of Migration Procedures, September 21, 2000.

2. In the case of Uruguay, Decree of February 28, 1947 and Decree 441/01.

CHAPTER XIII

INVESTMENT

SECTION A. Definitions

Article 13-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

equity shares or debentures : include voting or non-voting shares, bonds or convertible debt instruments, stock options, and warrants;

ICSID : the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

ICSID Convention : the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded in Washington on March 18, 1965;

Inter- American Convention : the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, held in Panama on January 30, 1975;

New York Convention: the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held in New York, on June 10, 1958;

company : any entity constituted or organized under the current legislation of any of the Parties, whether or not for profit and privately or governmental property, including companies, branches, trusts, participations, sole proprietorships, joint ventures or others associations that carry out or have contemplated carrying out, directly or indirectly, activities necessary for the production of a good or the provision of a service in the country receiving the investment;

company of a Party : a company incorporated or organized under the law of a Party; and a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out business activities therein;

investment : means the following assets

to. a company;

b. shares representing the capital of a company;

c. debt instruments of a company:

i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor, or

ii) when the original maturity date of the debt instrument is at least three (3) years,

but does not include a debt instrument of the State or of a State company, regardless of the original date of maturity

d. a loan to a company:

i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor, or

ii) when the original maturity date of the loan is at least three (3) years,

but does not include a loan to a state enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;

and. a share in a business, which allows the owner to share in the income or profits of the business;

F. a participation in a company that grants the owner the right to participate in the social assets of that company in a liquidation, provided that this does not derive from a debt instrument or a loan excluded according to literals c) or d);

g. real estate or other property, tangible or intangible1 , acquired with the expectation of, or used for the purpose of obtaining economic benefit, or for the purpose of producing a good or providing a service, or for other business purposes; and

h. the participation resulting from the capital or other resources committed for the development of an economic or productive activity in the territory of the other Party, among others, according to:

i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of the other Party, including concessions, construction and turnkey contracts, or

ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company;

but it will not be understood by investment:

Yo. pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:

i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of one Party to a company in the territory of the other Party, or

ii) the granting of credit in relation to a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, except for a loan covered by the provisions of subparagraph d); either

j. any other pecuniary claim;

that does not entail the interest rates set forth in subparagraphs a) to h).

financial institution : any financial intermediary or other enterprise that is authorized to do business and is regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the laws of the Party in whose territory it is located;

investment of an investor of a Party : an investment owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an investor of that Party;

investor of a Party : a Party or an enterprise thereof, or a national or enterprise of such a Party, that intends to make, is making, or has made an investment;

non-Party investment: an investor who is not an investor of a Party, who intends to make, is making, or has made an investment,

Disputing Investor : An investor who makes a claim under Section C;

Disputing Party : the Party against which a claim is made under the terms of Section C;

disputing party means the disputing investor or the disputing Party;

disputing parties : the disputing investor and the disputing Party;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules : the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations, on December 15, 1976;

Secretary General : the Secretary General of ICSID;

transfers : international transfer and payments; and

tribunal : an arbitral tribunal established under article 13-20 or 13-26.

 

SECTION B. Investment

Article 13-02 : Scope of application.
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

to. investors of the other Party;

b. investments of investors of another Party made in the territory of the Party; and

c. as regards Article 13-07, all investments in the territory of the Party.

2. This chapter covers both existing investments on the date of entry into force of this Agreement and investments made or acquired afterward. The provisions of this Agreement shall not apply to any controversy, claim or dispute that arose prior to its entry into force.

3. A Party has the right to carry out exclusively the economic activities indicated in Annex IV (Activities Reserved to the State), and to refuse to authorize the establishment of investments in such activities.

4. This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party in relation to investors of the other Party and investments of such investors in financial institutions in the Party's territory.

5 Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from providing social services or carrying out functions, such as law enforcement, social rehabilitation services, pension or unemployment insurance, or social security services. , social welfare, public education, public training, health, and child protection, when they perform in a manner that is not incompatible with this chapter.

Article 13-03 : National treatment.
1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to its own investors in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale, or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall grant to the investments of investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to the investments of its own investors in the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of investments.

3. Treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with respect to a state or department, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded by that state or department, in like circumstances, to investors and investments of the Party of which they are an integral part.

4. For greater certainty, neither Party may:

to. impose on an investor of another Party a requirement that a minimum level of shareholding in a company established in the territory of the Party be in the hands of its nationals, except in the case of registered shares for directors or founding members of companies; either

b. require that an investor of another Party, by reason of his nationality, sell or otherwise dispose of an investment in the territory of a Party.

Article 13-04 : Most favored nation treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to investors of the other Party or of a country that is not a Party, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investments of investors of the other Party or of a country that is not a Party, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of investments.

Article 13-05 : Level of treatment.
Each Party will grant to the investors and to the investments of investors of another Party the best of the treatments, required by articles 13-03 and 13-04.

Article 13-06 : Minimum level of treatment.
1. Subject to the provisions of Annex 13-06(1), each Party shall accord to investments of investors of the other Party treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as full protection and security.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 and notwithstanding the provisions of Article 13-09, each Party shall grant to investors of the other Party and to investments of investors of the other Party, whose investments suffer losses in its territory due to armed conflicts or civil strife, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to any measure that it adopts or maintains in relation to those losses.

3. The second paragraph does not apply to existing measures related to subsidies or advantages that could be incompatible with article 13-03, except as provided by article 13-09.

Article 13-07 : Performance requirements.
1. No Party may impose or enforce any of the following requirements or enforce any commitment or initiative, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct or operation of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a country non-Party in its territory to:

to. export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;

b. reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

c. acquire or use or grant preference to goods produced or services provided in its territory, or acquire goods from producers or services from service providers in its territory;

d. relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the volume of foreign currency earnings related to said investment;

and. restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to earnings that they generate in foreign currency; either

F. transfer to a person in its territory, technology, a productive process or other reserved knowledge, except when the requirement is imposed or the commitment or initiative is enforced by a judicial or administrative court or competent authority to repair an alleged violation of the laws in competition matters or to act in a manner that is not inconsistent with other provisions of this Agreement.

2. A measure that requires an investment to use a technology to generally comply with applicable health, safety, or environmental requirements shall not be considered inconsistent with paragraph 1(f). To provide greater certainty, articles 13-03 and 13-04 apply to said measure.

3. No Party may condition the receipt of an advantage or the continued receipt thereof, in relation to an investment in its territory by an investor from a Party or non-Party country, on compliance with any of the following requirements:

to. reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

b. buy, use or give preference to goods produced in its territory, or to buy goods from producers in its territory;

c. relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; either

d. restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings that they generate in foreign currency.

4. Nothing in paragraph 3 shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to condition the receipt of an advantage or the continuation of its receipt, in relation to an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or non-Party country. Part, to the requirement that it locate production, provide services, train or employ workers, build or expand particular facilities, or carry out research and development, in its territory.

5. Paragraphs 1 and 3 do not apply to any requirements other than those listed in those paragraphs.

6. Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in paragraphs 1 b) or c) or 3 a) or b) shall be construed to mean to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including those of an environmental nature, competition, consumer protection and others necessary to:

to. ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

b. protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

c. the preservation of non-renewable natural resources alive or not.

Article 13-08 : Senior executives and boards of directors.
1. Neither Party may require that an enterprise of that Party, which is an investment of an investor of the other Party, appoint individuals of any particular nationality to senior management positions.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of a board of directors or any committee of such a board of an enterprise of that Party that is an investment of an investor of the other Party be of a particular nationality or is resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control over his investment.

Article 13-09 : Reservations and exceptions.
1. Articles 13-03, 13-04, 13-07 and 13-08 shall not apply to:

to. any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by:

i) a Party at the national or federal, or state or departmental level, as appropriate, as stipulated in its list of Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions) or IV (Activities Reserved to the State); either

ii) a municipal government; nor to

b. the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph a); either

c. the reform of any non-conforming measure referred to in literal a) provided that said reform does not reduce the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force before the reform, with articles 13-03, 13- 04, 13-07 and 13-08.

2. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, none of the Parties will increase the degree of non-conformity of their existing measures with respect to articles 13-03, 13-04 and 13-07 and 13-08. The Parties will list their non-conforming measures in Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions), which must be completed by the Parties no later than a period of one year from the entry into force of this Agreement.

3. Each Party will have one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement to indicate in its list in Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions) any non-conforming measure that, not including local governments, is maintained by a state or departmental government.

4. Articles 13-03 and 13-04 do not apply to any measure that constitutes an exception or derogation from the obligations, pursuant to Article 15-04 (National Treatment), as expressly stated in that article.

5. Article 13-04 is not applicable to the treatment granted by one of the Parties in accordance with the treaties, or with respect to the sectors, stipulated in its list of Annex III (Exceptions to the Most Favored Nation Treatment).

6. Articles 13-03, 13-04 and 13-08 do not apply to:

to. purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; either

b. subsidies or contributions, including government-backed loans, guarantees and insurance, provided by a Party or by a State enterprise.

7. The provisions contained in:

to. paragraphs 1 a), b) and c), and 3 a) and b) of article 13-07 shall not apply to the requirements for qualification of goods and services with respect to export promotion and foreign aid programs;

b. paragraphs 1 b), c), f) and g), and 3 a) and b) of Article 13-07 shall not apply to purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; and

c. paragraphs 3 a) and b) of Article 13-07 shall not apply to the requirements imposed by an importing Party on goods that, by virtue of their content, qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.

Article 13-10 : Transfers.
1. Each Party shall permit all transfers related to the investment of an investor of the other Party in the Party's territory to be made in freely convertible currency without restriction and without delay.

Such transfers include among others:

to. profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administrative expenses, technical assistance and other charges, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;

b. products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;

c. payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or an investor's investment is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

d. payments made pursuant to section 13-11; and

and. payments that come from the application of Section C.

2. With regard to spot transactions of the currency to be transferred, each Party shall allow transfers to be made in freely usable currency at the prevailing market exchange rate on the date of transfer.

3. No Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits, or profits or other amounts derived from, or attributable to investments carried out in the territory of another Party, nor shall it penalize them in the event that they do not carry out the transfer.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, the Parties may prevent the making of transfers, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of their laws in the following cases:

to. bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;

b. issuance, trading and operations of securities;

c. criminal offences;

d. reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments; either

and. guarantee of compliance with rulings in contentious proceedings.

5. Paragraph 3 shall not be construed as an impediment for a Party, through the application of its laws in an equitable, non-discriminatory manner and in good faith, to impose any measure related to subparagraphs a) to e) of paragraph 4 .

6. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may restrict transfers of in-kind earnings in circumstances where it could otherwise restrict such transfers in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, including as provided in paragraph 4. .

Article 13-11 : Expropriation and compensation.
1. Neither Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an investment of an investor of the other Party in its territory, or take any measure equivalent to the expropriation or nationalization of that investment (expropriation), unless: a) by cause of public utility; b) on non-discriminatory grounds; c) in accordance with the principle of legality and article 13-06; and d) by compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 6.

2. The compensation will be equivalent to the market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out (date of expropriation), and will not reflect any change in value because the intention to expropriate was known. prior to the expropriation date. The valuation criteria will include the current value, the value of the asset (including the declared tax value of tangible assets), as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the market value.

3. The payment of the compensation will be made without delay and will be fully payable.

4. The amount paid shall not be less than the equivalent amount that would have been paid for compensation on the date of expropriation in a currency that is freely convertible in the international financial market and that currency would have been converted at the current market price on the date of expropriation. valuation, plus interest corresponding to a reasonable commercial rate for said currency until the date of payment.

5. Once paid, compensation may be freely transferred in accordance with article 13-10.

6. This article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of said rights to the extent that said issuance of revocation, limitation or creation is in accordance with Chapter XV ( Intellectual property).

Article 13-12 : Special formalities and information requirements.
1. Nothing in Article 13-03 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of another Party, such as the requirement that investors are residents of the Party or that the investments are constituted in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do not significantly impair the protection granted by a Party to investors of the other Party and investments of investors of the other Party in accordance with this chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 13-03 and 13-04, a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its investment, in its territory, to provide routine information regarding that investment exclusively for information purposes. or statistics. The Party shall protect confidential information from any disclosure that could adversely affect the competitive situation of the investment or the investor. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing a Party from obtaining or disclosing information regarding the fair and good faith application of its laws.

Article 13-13 : Relationship with other chapters.
1. In case of incompatibility between this chapter and another chapter, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

2. If a Party requires a service provider of the other Party to post a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition of providing a service in its territory; This, by itself, does not make this chapter applicable to the cross-border provision of that service. This chapter applies to the treatment accorded by that Party to the deposited bond or financial guarantee.

Article 13-14 : Denial of benefits.
Upon notice and consultation, pursuant to Articles 16-03 (Notification and Provision of Information) and 18-03 (Consultations), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that Party. Part and the investments of such an investor, if investors from a country that is not a Party, own or control the company and it does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is constituted or organized.

SECTION C. Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party.

Article 13-15 : Objective.
Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties established in Chapter XVIII, (Dispute Settlement), this section establishes a mechanism for the settlement of investment disputes that ensures equal treatment between investors of the Parties in accordance with the principle of international reciprocity, ensuring due legal process and the impartiality of the courts.

Article 13-16 : Claim by the investor of a Party on his own account, by virtue of the damages and losses suffered by himself.
1. Pursuant to this section, the investor of a Party may submit to arbitration a claim that the other Party has violated an obligation established in:

to. Section B or Article 14-04, paragraph 2, (State Enterprises); either

b. Article 14-03, paragraph 4, letter a) (Monopolies), when the monopoly has acted inconsistently with the Party's obligations under Section B;

and that the investor has suffered loss or damage by virtue of or as a consequence of the breach.

2. The investor may not file a claim if more than 3 (three) years have elapsed from the date on which they first knew or should have known of the alleged violation, and that they suffered losses or damages.

Article 13-17 : Claim by the investor of a Party on behalf of a company, by virtue of damages suffered by a company of the other Party that is a legal person owned by the investor or that is under its direct or indirect control.
1. The investor of a Party may submit to arbitration, in accordance with this section, a claim that the other Party has violated an obligation established in:

(a) Section B or Article 14-04, paragraph 2, (State Enterprises); or (b) Article 14-03, paragraph 4, letter a) (Monopolies), when the monopoly has acted inconsistently with the Party's obligations under Section B,

and that an enterprise of the other Party that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the investor has suffered loss or damage by virtue of or as a consequence of that breach.

2. An investor may not file a claim under paragraph 1, if more than 3 (three) years have elapsed from the date on which the company first became aware, or should have been aware of the alleged violation and who suffered loss or damage.

3. When an investor files a claim in accordance with this article and in parallel the investor or an investor that does not have control of a company, files a claim under the terms of article 13-16 as a consequence of the same acts that gave If a claim is filed under this article, and two or more claims are submitted to arbitration under the terms of article 13-20, the Tribunal established pursuant to article 13-26 shall jointly examine such claims, except that the Tribunal determines that the interests of a disputing party would be prejudiced.

4. An investment may not make a claim under this section.

Article 13-18 : Settlement of a claim through consultation and negotiation.
The disputing parties will first try to settle the controversy through consultation or negotiation.

Article 13-19 : Notification of the intention to submit the claim to arbitration.
The disputing investor shall notify the disputing Party in writing of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration, at least 90 days before the claim is formally filed, and the notice shall state the following:

to. the name and address of the disputing investor; and when the claim has been made in accordance with article 13-17, it will include the name and address of the company;

b. the provisions of this Agreement allegedly breached and any other applicable provision;

c. the issues of fact and law on which the claim is based; and

d. the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

Article 13-20 : Submission of the claim to arbitration.
1. As long as 6 (six) months have elapsed since the acts giving rise to the claim took place, a disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration in accordance with:

to. the ICSID Convention, provided that both the disputing Party and the investor Party are State parties thereto;

b. the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, where either the disputing Party or the investing Party, but not both, is a Party to the ICSID Convention; either

c. the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

2. If a disputing investor or an enterprise of the other Party that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the investor initiates proceedings before a domestic court with respect to a measure that constitutes an alleged breach pursuant to Articles Articles 13-16 or 13-17, the dispute may not be submitted to arbitration, in accordance with this section. Likewise, in the event that an investor has submitted the dispute to international arbitration, the choice of that procedure will be final.

3. In the event that an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration, the investment - the company of the other Party that is a legal entity owned by the investor or that is under its direct or indirect control - may not start or continue. proceedings before a national court or any other dispute resolution procedure claiming the same measure.

4. The arbitration rules applicable to the dispute resolution procedure shall follow that procedure except to the extent modified in this section.

Article 13-21 : Budgets for the submission of a claim to the arbitration procedure.
1. A disputing investor may submit a claim to the arbitration procedure in accordance with article 13-16, only if:

to. consents to arbitration under the terms of the procedures set forth in this Agreement; and

b. the investor and the company, when the claim refers to loss or damage of a share of a company of another Party that is a legal person owned by the investor or that is under its direct or indirect control, waive their right to start or continue any procedure before an administrative or judicial court in accordance with the law of any of the Parties or other dispute resolution procedures regarding the measure allegedly in violation of the provisions referred to in article 13-16. The foregoing, except for procedures in which the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declaratory or extraordinary nature is requested,

2. A disputing investor may submit a claim to arbitration in accordance with article 13-17, only if both the investor and the company:

to. consent to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures set forth in this Agreement; and

b. waive their right to initiate or continue any proceeding with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be one of the violations referred to in Article 13-17 before any administrative or judicial tribunal under the law of either Party or other dispute resolution procedures. The foregoing, except for the procedures in which the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declarative or extraordinary nature is requested, which do not imply the payment of damages before the administrative or judicial court, in accordance with the law of the disputing Party.

3. The consent and waiver required by this article shall be in writing, delivered to the disputing Party, and included in the submission of the claim to arbitration.

4. Only in the event that the disputing Party has deprived the disputing investor of control in an enterprise:

to. the resignation of the company shall not be required under paragraph 1 b) or 2 b); and

b. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of article 13-20 will not be applicable, as pertinent.

Article 13-22 : Consent to arbitration.
1. Each Party consents to submit claims to arbitration in accordance with the procedures established in this Agreement.

2. The consent referred to in paragraph 1 and the submission of a claim to arbitration by a disputing investor shall comply with the requirements indicated in:

to. Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the Parties;

b. Article II of the New York Convention, which requires a written agreement; and

c. Article I of the Inter-American Convention, which requires an agreement.

Article 13-23 : Number of arbitrators and method of appointment.
With the exception of the tribunal established pursuant to article 13-26, and unless the disputing Parties otherwise agree, the tribunal shall be composed of 3 (three) arbitrators. Each disputing Party shall nominate one. The third arbitrator, who will be the president of the arbitral tribunal, will be appointed by agreement of the disputing parties.

Article 13-24 : Composition of the tribunal in the event that a Party does not designate an arbitrator or the disputing parties do not reach an agreement on the appointment of the president of the arbitral tribunal.
1. The Secretary General of ICSID, (hereinafter the Secretary General) shall appoint the arbitrators in arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this section.

2. When a tribunal, other than that established pursuant to Article 13-26, is not established within a period of ninety days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, the Secretary General, at the request of either of the disputing Parties shall appoint, at its discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed, but not the president of the tribunal who will be appointed pursuant to paragraph 3.

3. The Secretary General shall appoint the President of the Tribunal from among the arbitrators from the list referred to in paragraph 4, ensuring that the President of the Tribunal is not a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary General will designate, from the ICSID Panel of arbitrators, the President of the arbitral tribunal, provided that he is of a different nationality than that of any of the Parties.

4. As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will establish and maintain a list of 10 arbitrators as possible presidents of the arbitral tribunal, who meet the qualities established in the Agreement and in the rules contemplated in article 13-20 and who have experience in international law and investment matters. The members of the list will be appointed by consensus regardless of their nationality.

Article 13-25 : Consent for the appointment of arbitrators.
For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator under Article 13-24(3) or on a basis other than that nationality:

to. the disputing Party accepts the appointment of each member of a tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules;

b. a disputing investor referred to in Article 13-16, may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules, only on the condition that the disputing investor consents in writing to the appointment of each of the members of the court; and

c. the disputing investor referred to in Article 13-17(1) may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules, only on the condition that the disputing investor and the company express their written consent to the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal.

Article 13-26 : Accumulation of proceedings.
1. A tribunal established pursuant to this article shall be established in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of said Rules, except as provided in this section.

2. When a tribunal established under this article determines that the claims submitted to arbitration under article 13-20 raise common issues of fact or law, the tribunal, in the interest of fair and efficient resolution, and having heard to the disputing Parties, may order that:

to. assume jurisdiction, substantiate and resolve all or part of the claims, jointly; either

b. assume jurisdiction, pursue and resolve one or more of the claims on the basis that it will contribute to the resolution of the others.

3. A disputing party that seeks consolidation to be determined under the terms of paragraph 2, shall request the Secretary General to set up a tribunal and shall specify in its request:

to. the name of the disputing Party or of the disputing investors against whom the accumulation order is sought;

b. the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

c. the grounds on which the request is based.

4. A disputing party shall deliver a copy of its request to the other disputing party or to the disputing investors against whom the accumulation order is sought.

5. Within a period of 60 days from the date of receipt of the request, the Secretary General will set up a court made up of three arbitrators. The Secretary General shall appoint the President of the tribunal from the list of arbitrators referred to in Article 13-24(4). In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary General shall designate, from the list of ICSID Arbitrators, the president of the tribunal who shall not be a national of any of the Parties. The Secretary General will designate the other two members of the court; from the list referred to in Article 13-24(4) and, when they are not available on said list, he will select them from the ICSID list of Arbitrators; If there are no arbitrators available on this list, the Secretary General will make the remaining appointments at his discretion. One of the members shall be a national of the disputing Party and the other member of the tribunal shall be a national of a Party of the disputing investors.

6. When a tribunal has been established pursuant to this article, the disputing investor who has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to article 13-16 or 13-17 and has not been named in the application for consolidation made pursuant to paragraph 3 , you may apply in writing to the Court to be included in an order made in accordance with paragraph 2, specifying in that application:

to. the name and address of the disputing investor;

b. the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

c. the grounds on which the request is based.

7. A disputing investor referred to in paragraph 6 shall deliver a copy of its request to the disputing Parties named in a request made pursuant to paragraph 3.

8. A tribunal established pursuant to article 13-20 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, over which a tribunal established pursuant to this article has assumed jurisdiction.

9. At the request of a disputing party, a tribunal established pursuant to this article may, pending its decision pursuant to paragraph 2, order that the proceedings of a tribunal established pursuant to article 13-20 be adjourned, unless that last court has suspended its proceedings.

10. A disputing Party shall deliver to the Secretariat within 15 days from the date it is received by the disputing Party:

to. a request for arbitration made pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention;

b. a notice of arbitration under the terms of Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; either

c. a notice of arbitration under the terms provided by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

11. A Party to the dispute shall provide the Secretariat with a copy of the request made in the terms of paragraph 3:

to. within 15 days of receipt of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing investor; either

b. within 15 days from the date of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing Party.

12. A disputing Party shall deliver to the Secretariat a copy of a request made under the terms of paragraph 6 within 15 days from the date of receipt of the request.

13. The Secretariat will keep a public record of the documents referred to in paragraphs 10, 11- and 12.

Article 13-27 : Notification.
The disputing Party shall deliver to the other Party:

to. written notice of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration no later than 30 days after the date of submission of the claim to arbitration; and

b. copies of all pleadings filed in the arbitration proceeding.

Article 13-28 : Participation of a Party.
Prior written notification to the disputing parties, a Party may communicate to a court its legal interpretation on issues related to the interpretation of the provisions of this treaty, within the framework of the dispute in question.

Article 13-29 : Documentation.
1. A Party shall be entitled, at its own expense, to receive from the disputing Party a copy of:

to. the evidence offered to the court; and

b. the written arguments submitted by the disputing Parties.

2. A Party receiving information pursuant to paragraph 1 shall treat the information as if it were a disputing Party.

Article 13-30 : Seat of the arbitration procedure.
Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, a tribunal shall conduct the arbitral proceedings in the territory of a Party that is a party to the New York Convention, which shall be chosen in accordance with:

to. the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those rules or by the ICSID Convention; either

b. the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those rules.

Article 13-31 : Applicable law.
1. A tribunal established under this section shall decide disputes submitted to it in accordance with this Agreement and the applicable rules and principles of international law.

2. The Commission's interpretation of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on a tribunal established pursuant to this section.

Article 13-32 : Interpretation of the annexes.
1. When a Party alleges as a defense that a measure allegedly in violation falls within the scope of a reservation or exception listed in Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions), Annex III (Exceptions to the Most Favored Nation Treatment) or Annex IV (Reserved Activities to the State), at the request of the disputing Party, the court will ask the Commission for an interpretation on that matter. The Commission, within a period of 60 days from the delivery of the request, will submit its interpretation to the court in writing.

2. Pursuant to Article 13-31(2), the Commission's interpretation submitted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be binding on the Tribunal. If the Commission does not submit an interpretation within a period of 60 days, the Tribunal will decide on the matter.

Article 13-33 : Expert opinions.
Without prejudice to the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the court, at the request of a disputing party, or on its own initiative unless the disputing parties do not accept it, may appoint one or more experts to rule in writing on any matter of fact relating to environmental, health, safety, or other scientific matters that a disputing party has raised in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.

Article 13-34 : Provisional protection measures.
A court may order or recommend an interim measure of protection to preserve the rights of the disputing party or to ensure that the jurisdiction of the court is given full effect, including an order to preserve evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party, or orders to protect the jurisdiction of the court. A court may not order the embargo, nor the suspension of the application of the measure presumably in violation referred to in article 13-16 or 13-17.

Article 13-35 : Final award.
1. When a court renders a final award unfavorable to the Party, the court may only grant, separately or in combination:

to. repair of pecuniary damages and the corresponding interests;

b. the restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the disputing Party may pay pecuniary damages, plus the applicable interest, instead of the restitution.

2. A court may also order the payment of costs in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.

3. Pursuant to paragraph 1, when the claim is made on the basis of article 13-17(1):

to. the award that provides for the restitution of the property, will provide that the restitution be granted to the company;

b. the award that grants pecuniary damages and corresponding interest, will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company; and

c. The award will provide that it be rendered without prejudice to any right that any person may have regarding reparation under applicable domestic law.

4. A court may not order a Party to pay damages that are punitive in nature.

Article 13-36 : Definitive nature and execution of the award.
1. The award issued by a court will be binding only for the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and the review procedure applicable to an interim award, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.

3. A disputing party may not request the enforcement of a final award as long as:

to. in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID Convention:

i) 120 days have not elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested its review or annulment; either

ii) the revision or annulment procedures have not been concluded; and

b. in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;

i) 3 (three) months have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has initiated a proceeding to review, dismiss or annul it; either

ii) a Court has dismissed or admitted a request for reconsideration, dismissal or annulment of the award and this decision cannot be appealed.

4. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.

5. When a disputing Party fails to comply with or does not comply with a final award, the Commission, upon delivery of a request from a Party whose investor was a party to the arbitration proceeding, shall form a panel pursuant to Article 18-04 (Request for Integration of an Arbitral Tribunal). The requesting Party may invoke such procedures to:

to. a determination that the breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement; and

b. a recommendation that the Party comply with and abide by the final award.

6. The disputing investor may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the procedures contemplated in paragraph 5 have been initiated.

7. For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or operation.

Article 13-37 : General provisions.
A. Moment in which the claim is considered submitted to the arbitration procedure.

1. A claim is considered submitted to arbitration under the terms of this section when:

to. the request for arbitration under paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention has been received by the Secretary-General;

b. the notice of arbitration pursuant to Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules has been received by the Secretary-General; either

c. the notice of arbitration provided for in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules has been received by the disputing Party.

B. Delivery of documents.

2. The delivery of the notification and other documents to a Party shall be made at the place designated by it in Annex 13-37.2.

C. Payments under Insurance or Guarantee Contracts.

3. In an arbitration proceeding pursuant to the provisions of this section, a Party shall not adduce as a defense, counterclaim, right of compensation, or others, that the disputing investor has received or will receive, in accordance with an insurance or guarantee contract, compensation or other compensation for all or part of the alleged damages.

D. Publication of awards.

4. Annex 13-37.4 applies to the Parties named in that annex in relation to the publication of awards.

Article 13-38 : Exclusions.
1. Notwithstanding the application or non-application of the dispute settlement provisions of this section or of Chapter XVIII (Dispute Settlement), to other actions agreed to by a Party pursuant to Article 19-03, (National Security) , the resolution of a Party that prohibits or restricts the acquisition of an investment in its territory by an investor of the other Party or its investment, in accordance with that article, shall not be subject to said provisions.

2. The dispute resolution provisions of this section and those of Chapter XVIII (Dispute Resolution) shall not apply to the matters referred to in Annex 13-38.2.

Annex 13-06(1)

Minimum Standard of Treatment under International Law

1. Article 13-06(1) establishes the minimum level of treatment for aliens under customary international law, as the minimum level of treatment that must be accorded to the investments of investors of another Party.

2. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” do not require treatment in addition to that required by the minimum level of treatment of aliens under customary international law, nor does it go beyond it.

3. A determination that another provision of this Agreement or of a separate international agreement has been violated does not establish that Article 13-06(1) has been violated.

 

Addendum 13-37.2

Delivery of documents to a Party pursuant to Section C

For the purposes of article 13-37 (2), the place for delivery of notices and other documents under section C shall be:

1. In the case of Mexico:

General Directorate of Foreign Investment
Ministry of Economy
Insurgentes Sur 1940, 8th Floor,
Colonia Florida, CP 01030, Mexico, DF

2. In the case of Uruguay:

Ministry of Economy and Finance
Colonia 1089
CP 11100, Montevideo, Uruguay

 

Addendum 13-37.4

Publication of awards

Mexico

When Mexico is the disputing Party, the corresponding procedural rules will apply with respect to the publication of an award.

 

Addendum 13-38.2

Exclusions from Dispute Resolution Provisions

Mexico

The provisions relating to the dispute resolution mechanism provided for in Chapter XVIII (Dispute Resolution) shall not apply to a decision of the National Foreign Investment Commission resulting from reviewing an investment in accordance with the provisions of Annex I (Reservations and Exceptions) regarding whether or not an acquisition that is subject to such review should be permitted.

Chapter XIV

POLICY ON COMPETITION, MONOPOLIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES

Article 14-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

commercial considerations : consistent with the normal business practices carried out by the private companies that make up that industry;

designate : establish, designate, authorize, or expand the scope of the monopoly to include an additional good or service, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

State enterprise : "State enterprise" as defined in Article 2-01 (General Definitions);

market – the geographic and commercial market for a good or service;

monopoly : an entity, including a consortium or government body, which, in any relevant market in the territory of a Party, has been designated as the sole supplier or purchaser of a good or service, but does not include an entity to which it has been granted an exclusive intellectual property right derived solely from such grant;

government monopoly : a monopoly owned or controlled, through proprietary rights, by the government of a Party or another such monopoly;

discriminatory supply includes:

to. more favorable treatment of a parent, subsidiary or other common-owned company than a nonaffiliated company; either

b. more favorable treatment for one type of company than another, in similar circumstances; and

non-discriminatory treatment : the best treatment, between national treatment and most favored nation treatment, as indicated in the relevant provisions of this Agreement.

Article 14-02 : Legislation on competition.
1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that prohibit anti-competitive business practices and shall undertake the appropriate actions in this regard, recognizing that these measures will contribute to achieving the objectives of this Agreement. To this end, the Parties shall from time to time consult on the effectiveness of the measures taken by each Party.

2. Each Party recognizes the importance of cooperation and coordination between its authorities to promote the effective application of competition law in the free trade area. Likewise, the Parties will cooperate in matters related to compliance with competition law, including mutual legal assistance, communication, consultation and exchange of information related to the application of competition laws and policies in the free trade zone.

3. The exchange of information referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be carried out taking into account the applicable legislation of each Party, as well as the confidentiality provisions agreed upon by the Parties or their application authorities.

4. Neither Party may have recourse to the dispute settlement procedures of this Agreement with respect to any matter arising pursuant to this Article.

5. No investor of a Party may submit a dispute under Chapter XIII (Investment) for any matter arising under this article.

Article 14-03 : State monopolies.
1. For the purposes of this article, it shall be understood as:

Delegation : includes a legislative concession and an order, instruction or other government act that transfers government powers to the monopoly or authorizes it to exercise them; and

maintain : established before the entry into force of this Agreement and its existence on that date.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from designating a monopoly.

3. When a Party intends to designate a monopoly, and this designation may affect the interests of persons of the other Party, the Party:

to. whenever possible, it will notify the designation to the other Party, previously and in writing; and

b. at the time of the designation, it will try to introduce in the operation of the monopoly conditions that minimize or eliminate any annulment or impairment of benefits, in the sense of Annex 18-01 (Annulment and Impairment).

4. Each Party shall ensure, through regulatory control, administrative supervision or the application of other measures, that any privately owned monopoly that the Party designates, or governmental that it maintains or designates:

to. acts in a manner that is not inconsistent with the obligations of the Party under this Agreement, when that monopoly exercises governmental functions that the Party has delegated to it in relation to the monopolized good or service, such as the power to grant import or export permits, approve business operations or impose fees, duties or other charges;

b. except when it comes to compliance with any of the terms of his appointment or prevents the regular performance of his legal powers that are not incompatible with literals c) or d), act only according to commercial considerations in the purchase or sale of the monopolized good or service in the relevant market, including in relation to its price, quality, availability, saleability, transportation and other terms and conditions for its purchase and sale. The difference in pricing between types of customers, between affiliated and non-affiliated companies, and the granting of cross-subsidies,

c. grant non-discriminatory treatment to the investors' investment, goods and service providers of the other Party when buying and selling the monopolized good or service in the relevant market; and

d. does not use its monopoly position to carry out anti-competitive practices in a non-monopolized market in its territory that adversely affect the investment of an investor of the other Party, directly or indirectly, including through operations with its parent company , subsidiary or other joint venture, including the discriminatory provision of the monopolized good or service, the granting of cross subsidies or predatory conduct.

5. Paragraph 4 does not apply to the acquisition of goods or services by government agencies, for official purposes, and not for the purpose of commercial resale or use in the production of goods or in the provision of services for commercial sale .

6. Nothing in this article shall be construed in the sense of preventing a monopoly from setting prices in different geographic markets, when those differences are based on normal commercial considerations such as considering the conditions of supply and demand in those markets.

Article 14-04 : State Companies.
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from maintaining or establishing state enterprises.

2. Each Party shall ensure, through regulatory control, administrative supervision, or other measures, that any State enterprise that it maintains or establishes acts in a manner that is not inconsistent with the Party's obligations under Chapter XIII (Investment), when said companies exercise governmental functions that the Party has delegated to them, such as the power to expropriate, grant licenses, approve commercial operations or impose quotas, rights or other charges.

3. Each Party shall ensure that any State enterprise that it maintains or establishes grants non-discriminatory treatment to the investments of investors of the other Party in its territory, in relation to the sale of its goods and services.

Article 14-05 : Trade and Competition Committee.
The Commission may establish a Trade and Competition Committee, made up of representatives of each Party, which shall meet at least once a year. The Committee will inform and make appropriate recommendations to the Commission regarding questions about the relationship between competition laws and policies, and trade in the free trade area.

CHAPTER XV

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

Section A - Definitions and General Provisions

Article 15-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

TRIPS Agreement : the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, dated April 15, 1994;

Berne Convention : the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, pursuant to the Paris Act, dated July 24, 1971;

Geneva Convention : the Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against the Unauthorized Reproduction of their Phonograms, adopted in the city of Geneva on October 29, 1971;

Paris Convention : the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, in accordance with the Stockholm Act, dated July 14, 1967;

Rome Convention : the International Convention on the Protection of Performing Artists, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations, adopted in the city of Rome on October 26, 1961;

UPOV Convention : the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants of December 2, 1961, revised in Geneva on November 10, 1972, in accordance with the Act of October 23, 1978; and

intellectual property rights : includes all categories of intellectual property that are protected by this chapter, under the terms indicated therein.

Article 15-02 : Protection of intellectual property rights
1. Each Party shall provide in its territory adequate and effective protection and defense of the intellectual property rights referred to in this Chapter and shall ensure that measures aimed at defending such rights do not become, in turn, obstacles to legitimate trade.

2. Each Party may provide in its legislation, a broader protection than that required in this chapter, provided that such protection does not infringe the provisions of the same.

Article 15-03 : Relationship with other agreements on intellectual property.
1. Nothing in this chapter, referring to intellectual property rights, shall be detrimental to the obligations that the Parties may have among themselves under the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention, the Geneva Convention and the UPOV Convention, nor will it prejudice any rights or obligations under other treaties.

2. In order to provide adequate and effective protection and defense of the intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter, the Parties shall apply, at least, the substantive provisions of the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention , the Geneva Convention and the UPOV Convention.

3. The Parties will make every effort to accede to the WIPO Copyright Treaty 1996 and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty 1996, if they are not already party to them on the date of entry into force of this Treaty.

Article 15-04 : National treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant to the nationals of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to its nationals with respect to the protection of intellectual property rights provided for in this Chapter, subject to the exceptions already provided for in, the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention, the Geneva Convention and the UPOV Convention.

2. Each Party may resort to the exceptions permitted in paragraph 1 in connection with judicial and administrative proceedings, for the protection of intellectual property rights including the designation of a legal domicile or the appointment of an agent within the jurisdiction of a Party, only when such exceptions:

to. are necessary to achieve compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter; and

b. when such practices are not applied in such a way as to constitute a disguised restriction on trade.

3. No Party may require the holders of intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter to comply with any formality or condition to acquire copyright and related rights, as a condition for granting national treatment in accordance with this article.

Article 15-05 : Most favored nation treatment.
With respect to the protection of intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by a Party to the nationals of any other non-Party country shall be granted immediately and without conditions to the nationals Of the other part. Any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by a Party that:

to. are derived from international agreements on judicial assistance or observance of the law of a general nature and not limited in particular to the protection of intellectual property;

b. have been granted in accordance with the provisions of the Berne Convention or the Rome Convention that authorize that the treatment granted is not based on national treatment but on the treatment given in another country; either

c. refer to the rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations, which are not provided for in this chapter.

Article 15-06 : Control of abusive or anti-competitive practices and conditions.
Each Party may apply, as long as it is compatible with the provisions of this chapter, appropriate measures to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by their holders or the use of practices that unreasonably limit trade or result in detriment of the transfer of technology.

Article 15-07 : Cooperation to eliminate trade in goods subject to infringements.
The Parties will cooperate with each other in order to eliminate trade in goods that infringe intellectual property rights.

Section B - Copyright

Article 15-08 : Copyright.
1. Each Party shall protect the works covered by Article 2 of the Berne Convention, including any others that incorporate an original expression in the sense that that term is conferred by said Convention.

2. Each Party shall grant to authors or their successors in title the rights set forth in the Berne Convention with respect to the works referred to in paragraph 1.

3. Computer programs, whether source programs or object programs, will be protected as literary works under the Berne Convention.

4. Compilations of data or other materials, in machine-readable form or otherwise, which for reasons of the selection or arrangement of their contents constitute creations of an intellectual nature, will be protected as such. Such protection shall not cover the data or materials themselves and shall be without prejudice to any copyright that may subsist in such data or materials.

5. At least with respect to computer programs and cinematographic works, the Parties will confer on the authors, successors in title and other owners, the right to authorize or prohibit the commercial leasing to the public of the originals or copies of their works covered by the Copyright. A Party shall be exempted from that obligation with respect to cinematographic works, unless the rental has resulted in a widespread making of copies of those works that materially impairs the exclusive right of reproduction conferred in that Party on the authors, assigns and other owners. With regard to computer programs, this obligation does not apply to leases whose essential object is not the program itself.

Article 15-09 : Performers.
1. Each Party shall grant performers the rights referred to in the Rome Convention.

2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, once a performer has consented to their performance being incorporated into a visual or audiovisual fixation, Article 7 of the Rome Convention shall cease to be applicable.

Article 15-10 : Producers of phonograms.
1. Each Party shall grant to the producers of phonograms the rights referred to in the Rome Convention and the Geneva Convention, including the right to authorize or prohibit the first public distribution of the original and of each copy of the phonogram through sale, lease or any other means.

2. Each Party shall confer on producers of phonograms, in accordance with its legislation, the right to authorize or prohibit commercial leasing to the public of originals or copies of protected phonograms.

Article 15-11 : Protection of satellite signals carrying programs.
Within the five years following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties undertake to establish that any person who manufactures, imports, sells, leases, or performs an act with a commercial purpose, that allows have devices that are of essential help to decipher an encrypted satellite signal carrying programs, or use them for commercial purposes, without the authorization of the legitimate provider or distributor of the service, depending on the legislation of each Party.

Article 15-12 : Powers conferred on the Parties with respect to copyright and related rights.
1. Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights, any person who acquires or holds economic or economic rights:

to. can freely and separately, transfer them to any title; and

b. have the capacity to exercise those rights in their own name and to fully enjoy the benefits derived from them.

2. Each Party shall circumscribe the limitations and exceptions to copyright and related rights to determined special cases that do not impede their normal exploitation, nor cause unjustified prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder.

Article 15-13 : Duration of copyright and related rights.
1. Copyright lasts for the life of the author and extends for at least 50 years after his death.

2. When the duration of the protection of a work is calculated on a basis other than the life of a physical or natural person, that duration shall be no less than 50 years counted from the end of the calendar year of the authorized publication or, at lack of such authorized publication, within a period of 50 years from the completion of the work, counted from the end of the calendar year of its completion.

3. The duration of the protection granted to performers and producers of phonograms may not be less than 50 years, counted from the end of the calendar year in which the fixation was made or the performance took place. .

4. The duration of the protection granted to broadcasting organizations shall be granted by each Party in accordance with its current legislation.

 

Section C – Trademarks

Article 15-14 : Subject matter of protection.
1. Any sign or combination of signs that are capable of distinguishing the goods or services of a natural or legal person from those of another natural or legal person may constitute a trademark. Such signs may be registered as trademarks, in particular words, including personal names, letters, numbers, figurative elements and color combinations, as well as any combination of these signs.

2. When the signs are not intrinsically capable of distinguishing the relevant goods or services, each Party may make the possibility of registering them subject to the distinctive character that they have acquired through their use.

3. The marks will include service and collective marks, and depending on the legislation of each Party, they will include certification marks.

4. Each Party may require as a condition for registration that the signs are visually perceptible.

5. Each Party may establish prohibitions for the registration of trademarks in accordance with the provisions of its legislation on the matter.

6. The nature of the good or service to which the trademark is to be applied will not be in any case an obstacle to the registration of the trademark.

7. In accordance with its law, each Party shall publish trademarks before or soon after their registration, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity to request deregistration. In addition, each Party may offer the opportunity to oppose the registration of a trademark.

Article 15-15 : Rights conferred.
The owner of a registered trademark shall enjoy the exclusive right to prevent third parties, without his consent, from using in the course of commercial operations identical or similar signs for goods or services that are identical or similar to those for which the trademark has been registered, when that use gives rise to the probability of confusion. It will be presumed that there is a probability of confusion in the event that an identical or similar sign is used for identical or similar goods or services. The aforementioned rights will be understood without prejudice to previously existing rights and will not affect the possibility of the Parties to recognize rights based on use.

Article 15-16 : Well-known trademarks.
1. It shall be understood that a trademark is well-known in a Party, when a certain sector of the public or of the commercial circles of the Party knows the trademark, as a consequence of the commercial activities carried out in that Party or outside it, by a person that uses that trademark in relation to its goods or services, as well as when the trademark is known in the territory of the Party, as a result of its promotion or publicity.

2. Each Party shall establish in its legislation the necessary means to prevent or cancel the registration as a trademark of those signs, equal or similar to a well-known trademark, to be applied to any good or service.

3. Each Party shall apply Article 16.3 of the TRIPS Agreement.

4. For the purposes of demonstrating the brand's notoriety, all the means of proof admitted by the Party in which it is desired to prove its notoriety may be used.

Article 15-17 : Exceptions.
The Parties may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, for example, the fair use of descriptive terms, provided that the exceptions take into account the legitimate interests of the owner of the trademark and of third parties.

Article 15-18 : Duration of protection.
The initial registration of a trademark will have a duration of at least ten years from the date of filing of the application or from the date of its granting, according to the legislation of each Party, and may be renewed indefinitely for periods successive ones of not less than ten years, provided that the conditions for its renewal are met.

Article 15-19 : Requirement to use the trademark.
1. If, in order to maintain the registration of a trademark, a Party requires use, the registration may only be canceled after an uninterrupted period of at least 3 (three) years of non-use, unless the owner of the trademark demonstrates that there was for this valid reasons based on the existence of obstacles to said use. Circumstances that arise independently of the will of the owner of the trademark and that constitute an obstacle to its use, such as import restrictions or other official requirements imposed on protected goods or services, will be recognized as valid reasons for non-use. for the brand.

2. Each Party, in accordance with national law, shall determine when a trademark is in use.

3. When it is controlled by the owner, it will be considered that the use of a trademark by another person constitutes use of the trademark for the purpose of maintaining the registration.

Article 15-20 : Other requirements.
Use of a mark shall not be unreasonably complicated in the course of business with special requirements, such as use with another mark, use in a special way, or use in a manner that impairs the mark's ability to distinguish between goods or services of a natural person or company from those of other natural persons or companies.

Article 15-21 : Licenses and assignment of trademarks.
Each Party may establish the conditions for the licenses and the assignment of trademarks, it being understood that compulsory trademark licenses will not be allowed and that the owner of a registered trademark shall have the right to assign it with or without the transfer of the company to which it belongs. the brand.

Section D - Geographical Indications and Appellations of Origin

Article 15-22 : Protection of geographical indications and appellations of origin.
1. Each Party shall protect appellations of origin and geographical indications as provided by its legislation, at the request of the competent authorities or interested parties of the Party where that geographical indication or appellation of origin is protected.

2. Designations of origin or geographical indications protected in a Party shall not be considered common or generic to distinguish a good, while their protection subsists in the country of origin.

3. In relation to appellations of origin and geographical indications, each Party shall establish legal means so that interested parties can prevent:

to. the use of any means that, in the designation or presentation of the good, indicates or suggests that the good in question comes from a territory, region or geographical location different from the true place of origin, so as to mislead the public in regarding the geographical origin of the good; and

b. any other use that constitutes an act of unfair competition within the meaning of Article 10 bis of the Paris Convention.

4. Each Party, ex officio if its legislation allows it, or at the request of an interested party, shall deny or annul the registration of a trademark that contains or consists of a geographical indication or appellation of origin with respect to goods that do not originate in the territory, indicated region or locality, if the use of that indication in the mark for those goods is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true place of origin of the goods.

5. Paragraphs 4 and 5 apply to any appellation of origin or geographical indication that, while correctly indicating the territory, region or locality in which the goods originate, gives the public a false idea that the goods originate from another territory, region or locality.

6. Uruguay will recognize the denominations of origin "Tequila" and "Mezcal", for their exclusive use in goods originating in Mexico provided that they are produced and certified in Mexico, in accordance with the laws, regulations and rules of Mexico applicable to those goods.

Section E - Patents

Article 15-23 : Patentable Subject Matter.
1. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, patents shall be granted for inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields of technology, provided they are new, result from an inventive step and are capable of industry application.

2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, there shall be no discrimination in the granting of patents, nor in the enjoyment of the respective rights, based on the field of technology in the territory of the country where the invention was made or whether the products are imported or produced locally.

3. Each Party may exclude from patentability inventions whose commercial exploitation in its territory must be prevented to protect public order or morality, including to protect human, animal or plant health or life, or to avoid serious harm. to nature or the environment, provided that this exclusion is not based solely on the fact that the Party prohibits in its territory the commercial exploitation of the subject matter of the patent.

4. Likewise, each Party may exclude from patentability:

to. diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of people or animals;

b. plants and animals except microorganisms, and essentially biological processes for the production of plants or animals, except non-biological or microbiological processes; either

c. biological and genetic material, as it exists in nature.

Article 15-24 : Rights conferred.
1. A patent will confer on its holder the following exclusive rights:

to. when the matter of the patent is a product, to prevent third parties, without their consent, from carrying out acts of: manufacture, use, offer for sale, sale or import for these purposes of the product object of the patent; either

b. when the matter of the patent is a procedure, to prevent third parties, without their consent, from carrying out the act of using the procedure and the acts of: use, offer for sale, sale or import for these purposes of, at least , the product obtained directly by means of said procedure.

2. Likewise, the holders of the patents shall have the right to assign or transfer the patent and to conclude license contracts.

Article 15-25 : Exceptions.
Each Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent, or unreasonably prejudice the interests of the patent owner, taking into account the legitimate interests of third parties.

Article 15-26 : Other uses without authorization of the owner of the right.
Where the law of a Party allows other uses of patent subject matter, other than those permitted under Article 15-25, without the authorization of the right holder, including use by the government or by third parties authorized by the government, the the provisions of Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 15-27 : Nullity or expiration.
Each Party, in accordance with its legislation, shall have the possibility of reviewing any decision to invalidate or lapse a patent.

Article 15-28 : Evidence in cases of infringement of patented processes .
1. For the purposes of civil or administrative procedures, in the event that the legislation of each Party establishes it, in matters of infringement of the rights of the holder referred to in paragraph 1 b) of article 15-24, when the object of a patent is a procedure to obtain a product, the judicial or administrative authorities will be empowered to order the defendant to prove that the procedure to obtain a product is different from the patented procedure. Accordingly, each Party shall provide that, unless proven otherwise, any identical product produced by any party without the consent of the patentee has been obtained by the patented process, in at least one of the following circumstances:

to. if the product obtained by the patented process is new;

b. if there is a substantial probability that the identical product was manufactured by the process and the patentee cannot establish through reasonable efforts which process was actually used.

2. In the collection and evaluation of the evidence, the legitimate interest of the defendant for the protection of his industrial and commercial secrets will be taken into account.

Article 15-29 : Duration of protection.
Each Party shall establish a protection period for patents of at least 20 years, counted from the filing date of the application.

Section F - Utility Models

Article 15-30 : Protection of Utility Models.
Each Party shall protect utility models in accordance with its legislation, for a period of at least ten years from the date of filing of the application.

Section G - Industrial Designs

Article 15-31 : Conditions for protection.
1. Each Party shall grant protection to new or original industrial designs that are independently created.

2. Each Party may establish that designs are not considered new or original if they do not differ significantly from known designs or from combinations of characteristics of known designs.

3. Each Party may establish that this protection does not extend to designs based essentially on functional or technical considerations.

Article 15-32 : Duration of protection.
Each Party shall grant a protection period for industrial designs of at least ten years, counted from the filing date of the application.

Article 15-33 : Rights conferred.
1. The owner of an industrial design shall have the right to prevent third parties, who do not have the consent of the owner, from manufacturing, importing or selling products that display or incorporate their design or that fundamentally copy it, when these acts are carried out for commercial purposes. commercial.

2. Each Party may provide for limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided that such exceptions do not unduly interfere with the normal exploitation of industrial designs, or cause unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the owner of the design, taking into account the legitimate interests of third parties.

Section H - Protection of Plant Breeders' Rights

Article 15-34 : Protection of Plant Breeders' Rights.
In accordance with its legislation, each Party shall recognize and grant protection to plant varieties, through breeder's rights granted in accordance with the UPOV Convention.

Section I - Protection of undisclosed information

Article 15-35 : Protection of industrial and business secrets.
1. When guaranteeing effective protection against unfair competition, in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 bis of the Paris Convention (1967), each Party shall protect industrial and business secrets, in accordance with paragraph 2.

2. Natural and legal persons will have the possibility to prevent information that is legitimately under their control from being disclosed to third parties or from being acquired or used by third parties without their consent in a manner contrary to honest commercial uses, to the extent that said information:

to. is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and assembly of its components, generally known or easily accessible to persons within the circles in which the type of information in question is normally used; and

b. has a commercial value because it is secret; and

c. has been the subject of reasonable measures, in the circumstances, to keep it secret, taken by the person who legitimately controls it.

3. To grant the protection referred to in this article, each Party shall require that an industrial and business secret be recorded in documents, electronic or magnetic means, optical discs, microfilms, films or other similar instruments.

4. No Party may limit the duration of protection for industrial and business secrets, as long as the conditions described in subparagraphs a), b) and c) of paragraph 2 exist.

5. No Party shall discourage or prevent the voluntary licensing of trade and trade secrets by imposing excessive or discriminatory conditions on those licences, or conditions that dilute the value of trade and trade secrets.

Section J - Control of anti-competitive practices in contractual licenses

Article 15-36 : Control of anti-competitive practices in contractual licences.
1. The Parties agree that certain practices or conditions related to the granting of licenses of the intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter, which restrict competition, may have detrimental effects on trade and may prevent the transfer and technology disclosure.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the Parties from specifying in their legislation practices or conditions related to the granting of licenses that may constitute, in certain cases, an abuse of intellectual property rights that has an adverse effect on competition in the corresponding market. As set forth in paragraph 1, a Party may adopt, consistent with the remaining provisions of this Chapter, appropriate measures to prevent or control such practices, which may include exclusive retrocession conditions, conditions that preclude challenges to the validity and compulsory joint licences, in light of the relevant laws and regulations of that Party.

Section K - Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights.

Article 15-37 : General obligations.
1. The Parties will ensure that their legislation establishes enforcement procedures for the intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this section that allow the adoption of effective measures against any action infringing these rights, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements, and remedies that are an effective means of deterring further infringements. These procedures shall be applied in such a way as to avoid the creation of obstacles to legitimate trade and shall provide safeguards against their abuse.

2. Procedures relating to the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and equitable. They will not be unnecessarily complicated or burdensome, nor will they involve unreasonable time limits or unnecessary delays.

3. Decisions on the merits of a case will preferably be formulated in writing and will be reasoned. They shall be made available, at least to the parties to the proceedings, without undue delay. They will only be based on evidence about which the parties have been given an opportunity to be heard.

4. The parties to the proceeding shall be given the opportunity for a review by a judicial authority of the final administrative decisions and, subject to the jurisdictional provisions provided for in the legislation of each Party regarding the importance of a case , of at least the legal aspects of the initial court decisions on the merits of the case. However, it will not be mandatory to give them the opportunity to review the acquittals issued in criminal cases.

5. It is understood that this section does not impose any obligation to establish a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights different from the one that already exists for the application of the legislation in general, nor does it affect the ability of the Parties to enforce its legislation in general. Nothing in this section creates any obligation with respect to the allocation of resources between enforcement agencies and law enforcement in general.

Article 15-38 : Fair and equitable procedures.
The Parties will make civil judicial procedures available to rights holders to ensure compliance with all intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter. Defendants shall have the right to receive timely written notice with sufficient detail, including the basis for the claim. Parties will be authorized to be represented by independent counsel and the proceedings will not impose unreasonably onerous requirements for mandatory personal appearances. All parties to these proceedings will be duly empowered to substantiate their allegations and present all pertinent evidence. The procedure must provide means to identify and protect confidential information,

Article 15-39 : Evidence.
1. The judicial authorities will be empowered to order that, when a party has presented the evidence that it reasonably has and that is sufficient to support its allegations, and has identified any pertinent evidence to substantiate its allegations that is under the control of the opposing party , it provides said proof, subject, in appropriate cases, to conditions that guarantee the protection of confidential information.

2. In the event that one of the parties to the proceedings voluntarily and without solid reasons denies access to necessary information or otherwise fails to provide such information within a reasonable period of time or substantially impedes a proceeding relating to a measure taken to ensure the observance of a right, the Parties may authorize the judicial authorities to formulate preliminary and final determinations, affirmative or negative, based on the information that has been presented to them, including the claim or the allegation presented by the affected party. unfavorably for the denial of access to information, provided that the parties are given an opportunity to be heard regarding the allegations or evidence.

Article 15-40 : Court orders.
1. The judicial authorities shall have the power to order a party to desist from an infringement, among other things to prevent imported goods that infringe an intellectual property right from entering the commercial circuits of their jurisdiction, immediately after the customs clearance of the same. The Parties are not required to grant such authority in relation to a protected matter that has been acquired or requested by a person before knowing or having reasonable grounds to know that operating with such material would imply an infringement of an intellectual property right.

2. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, and subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter specifically regarding use by the government, or by third parties authorized by the government, without the consent of the rights holder, the Parties They may limit the remedies available against such use to the payment of adequate compensation to the owner of the rights, according to the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic value of the authorization. In all other cases, the remedies provided for in this section will be applied or, when these are incompatible with national legislation, declaratory judgments and adequate compensation may be obtained.

Article 15-41 : Damages.
1. The judicial authorities shall be empowered to order the infringer to pay the right holder adequate compensation to compensate the damage that the right holder has suffered due to an infringement of his intellectual property right, caused by an infringer who knowingly or having reasonable grounds to knowing it, has developed an infringing activity.

2. The judicial authorities will also be empowered to order the infringer to pay the right holder's expenses, which may include attorneys' fees, as applicable. When appropriate, the Parties may authorize the judicial authorities to grant reparation for benefits and/or compensation for previously recognized damages, even when the infringer, not knowing it or not having reasonable grounds to know it, has carried out an infringing activity.

Article 15-42 : Other resources.
In order to establish an effective means of dissuading infringements, the judicial authorities will be empowered to order that the goods that have been determined to be infringing goods are, without any compensation, removed from the commercial circuits, so as to avoid causing damage to the owner. of law, or that they be destroyed, provided that this is not incompatible with current constitutional provisions. The judicial authorities will also be empowered to order that the materials and instruments that have been used predominantly for the production of the infringing goods, be, without any compensation, separated from the commercial circuits, in such a way that the risks of new infringements are reduced to a minimum. . They will be considered, when processing the corresponding requests, both the need for a proportion between the seriousness of the infringement and the measures ordered, as well as the interests of third parties. With regard to counterfeit brand merchandise, the simple removal of the illegally placed brand will not suffice, except in exceptional cases, to allow the placement of the goods in commercial circuits.

Article 15-43 : Right to information.
The Parties may provide that, unless it is disproportionate to the seriousness of the infringement, the judicial authorities may order the infringer to inform the right holder of the identity of third parties who have participated in the production and distribution of the infringing goods or services. , and on their distribution circuits.

Article 15-44 : Compensation to the defendant.
1. The judicial authorities shall have the power to order a party, at whose request measures have been taken and who has abused the enforcement procedure, to adequately indemnify the party on whom an obligation or restriction has been unduly imposed, for the damage suffered as a result of such abuse. The judicial authorities will also have the power to order the plaintiff to pay the defendant's expenses, which may include attorneys' fees, as appropriate.

2. In connection with the administration of any legislation relating to the protection or enforcement of intellectual property rights, the Parties shall release both authorities and public officials from liabilities that would give rise to appropriate remedial measures only in the case of actions carried out or planned in good faith for the administration of said legislation.

Article 15-45 : Administrative procedures.
To the extent that civil remedies may be ordered derived from administrative proceedings relating to the merits of a case, such proceedings shall abide by principles substantially equivalent to those set forth in Articles 15-38 through 15-44.

Article 15-46 : Provisional measures.
1. The judicial authorities will be empowered to order the adoption of quick and effective provisional measures aimed at:

to. prevent the infringement of any intellectual property right included in this chapter and, in particular, prevent the merchandise from entering the commercial circuits of their jurisdiction, including imported merchandise, immediately after customs clearance; and

b. preserve relevant evidence related to the alleged infringement.

2. The judicial authorities shall be empowered to adopt provisional measures, when appropriate, without having heard the other party, in particular when there is a probability that any delay will cause irreparable damage to the right holder, or when there is a demonstrable risk of destruction of evidence.

3. The judicial authorities will be empowered to require the plaintiff to present the evidence reasonably available, in order to establish to their satisfaction with a sufficient degree of certainty that the plaintiff is the owner of the right and that their right is subject to or will be to be imminently infringed, and to order the plaintiff to post a bond or equivalent guarantee sufficient to protect the defendant and prevent abuse.

4. Where provisional measures have been taken without hearing the other party, they shall be notified without delay to the affected party no later than immediately after their application. At the request of the defendant, within a reasonable period of time from that notification, a review will be carried out, in which the right to be heard will be recognized, in order to decide whether these measures should be modified, revoked or confirmed.

5. The authority in charge of the execution of the provisional measures may require the plaintiff to present any other information necessary for the identification of the goods in question.

6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 4, provisional measures taken under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be revoked or otherwise rendered null and void, at the request of the respondent, if the proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case matter is not initiated within a reasonable period of time that shall be established when the legislation of a Party allows it, by determination of the judicial authority that has ordered the measures, and that in the absence of such determination shall not exceed 20 business days or 31 calendar days, if this period is longer.

7. In the cases in which the provisional measures are revoked or expire by action or omission of the plaintiff, or in those cases in which it is subsequently determined that there was no infringement or threat of infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities will be empowered to order the plaintiff, upon the defendant's request, to pay the defendant adequate compensation for any damage caused by those measures.

8. To the extent that provisional measures derived from administrative procedures may be ordered, these procedures shall adhere to principles substantially equivalent to those set forth in this article.

Section L - Special requirements related to border measures

Article 15-47 : Suspension of customs clearance by the customs authorities.
1. The Parties, in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall adopt procedures so that the holder of a right, who has valid reasons to suspect that the import of counterfeit trademark merchandise or pirated merchandise that infringes copyright is being prepared, may Submit a written request to the competent, administrative or judicial authorities in order for the customs authorities to suspend the release of these goods for free circulation.

2. The Parties may authorize such demand to be made also with respect to goods that involve other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of articles 15-47 to 15-56 are met. The Parties may also establish similar procedures for customs authorities to suspend the clearance of such goods for export from their territory.

Article 15-48 : Demand.
Any right holder initiating a proceeding under Article 15-47 shall be required to submit sufficient evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authorities that, under the law of the importing country, there is a presumption of infringement of his right. intellectual property right and that provides a sufficiently detailed description of the goods, so that they can be easily recognized by the customs authorities. The competent authorities will notify the claimant, within a reasonable time, if they have accepted the claim and, when they are the ones who establish it, the term of action of the customs authorities.

Article 15-49 : Bond or equivalent guarantee.
1. The competent authorities shall have the power to require the plaintiff to provide a bond or equivalent guarantee that is sufficient to protect the defendant and the competent authorities and prevent abuse. Such a bond or equivalent guarantee shall not unduly discourage recourse to these procedures.

the importer or the consignee of these goods shall have the right to obtain their customs clearance after posting a bond for an amount that is sufficient to protect the holder of the right in any case of infringement. The payment of said deposit will be understood without prejudice to any other resource available to the holder of the right, and it will also be understood that the deposit will be returned if he does not exercise the right of action within a reasonable period of time.

Article 15-50 : Notification of the suspension.
The importer and the claimant will be promptly notified of the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods, in accordance with article 15-47.

Article 15-51 : Duration of the suspension.
In the event that within a period not exceeding 10 business days from the notification of the suspension to the plaintiff, the customs authorities have not been informed that a party, other than the defendant, has initiated the procedure leading to a decision on the merits of the matter or that the authority duly empowered for this purpose has adopted provisional measures that prolong the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods, they will be released if all other conditions have been met required for import or export. Where appropriate, the aforementioned term may be extended for another 10 business days. If the procedure leading to a decision on the merits of the case has been initiated at the request of the defendant, a review, including the right of the latter to be heard, shall be carried out within a reasonable period of time in order to decide whether those measures should be modified, revoked or confirmed. However, when the suspension of customs clearance is effected or continued by virtue of a provisional judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 6 of Article 15-46 shall apply.

Article 15-52 : Compensation to the importer and the owner of the goods.
The relevant authorities shall have the power to order the claimant to pay the importer, the consignee and the owner of the goods adequate compensation for any damage to them caused by the unfounded detention of the goods or by the detention of the goods that have been released in accordance with the law. with the provisions of article 15-51.

Article 15-53 : Right of inspection and information.
Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, the Parties shall empower the competent authorities to give the right holder sufficient opportunities to have any goods detained by the customs authorities inspected, in order to substantiate their claims. The competent authorities shall also have the power to give the importer equivalent opportunities to have these goods inspected. The Parties may authorize the competent authorities so that, when a positive decision on the merits of the case has been adopted, they communicate to the right holder the name and address of the consignor, the importer and the consignee, as well as the quantity of the merchandise of in question

Article 15-54 : Acting ex officio.
When the Parties request the competent authorities to act on their own initiative and suspend the clearance of those goods with respect to which they have the presumption that they infringe an intellectual property right:

to. the competent authorities may at any time request from the right holder any information that may be useful to them to exercise that power;

b. The suspension must be notified without delay to the importer and the right holder. If the importer appeals against it before the competent authorities, the suspension will be subject, mutatis mutandis , to the conditions set forth in article 15-51; and

c. the Parties shall exempt both authorities and public officials from liability, which would give rise to appropriate corrective measures only in the case of actions taken or attempted in good faith.

Article 15-55 : Resources.
Without prejudice to the other actions that correspond to the holder of the right and subject to the right of the defendant to appeal before a judicial authority, the competent authorities will be empowered to order the destruction or elimination of the infringing goods, in accordance with the principles established in article 15-42. With regard to counterfeit branded goods, the authorities will not allow, except in exceptional circumstances, infringing goods to be re-exported in the same state or subject them to a different customs procedure.

Article 15-56 : Insignificant imports.
The Parties may exclude from the application of the preceding provisions small quantities of merchandise that are not of a commercial nature and are part of the personal baggage of travelers or are sent in small consignments.

Section M – Penal Provisions

Article 15-57 : Criminal proceedings.
1. The Parties shall establish criminal procedures and sanctions, at least for cases of willful counterfeiting of trademarks or piracy infringing on copyright on a commercial scale. The remedies available will include imprisonment and/or the imposition of sufficiently dissuasive pecuniary sanctions that are consistent with the level of sanctions applied for crimes of corresponding seriousness.

2. Where appropriate, available remedies shall also include confiscation, forfeiture and destruction of the infringing goods and all materials and accessories predominantly used in the commission of the offence. The Parties may provide for the application of criminal procedures and sanctions in other cases of infringement of intellectual property rights, in particular when committed with intent and on a commercial scale.

Section N - Final Provisions

Article 15-58 : Application of the rules of this chapter.
1. The norms contained in this chapter do not generate obligations related to acts carried out before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Unless otherwise provided, the rules contained in this chapter create obligations relating to all matter existing on the date of entry into force of this Agreement and that is protected in that Party on that date. As regards this paragraph and paragraph 3, copyright protection obligations relating to existing works shall be determined solely in accordance with Article 18 of the Berne Convention.

3. There will be no obligation to restore protection to matter that, on the date of entry into force of this Treaty, has passed into the public domain.

CHAPTER XVI

TRANSPARENCY

Article 16-01 : Information Center.
1. Each Party shall designate a unit or office as an information center to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. When requested by a Party, the information center of the other Party will indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.

Article 16-02 : Publication.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative resolutions of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement, are published as soon as possible in the State Party that issues or processes them or are made available to knowledge of the Parties and any interested party.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall publish in advance any measure that it proposes to adopt that relates to any matter related to this Agreement, and shall provide the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to request information and comment on the proposed measures. .

Article 16-03 : Notification and provision of information.
1. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, notify the other Party of any measure in force that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the interests of that other Party under the terms of this Agreement.

2. Each Party, at the request of the other Party, will provide information and promptly respond to their requests for information on any current measure related to this Agreement, without prejudice to the fact that that Party has been previously notified of that measure.

3. The notification or supply of information referred to in this article will be carried out without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

CHAPTER XVII

ADMINISTRATION OF THE TREATY

Article 17-01 : Administrative Commission.
1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission, made up of the officials referred to in Annex 17-01(1) or by the persons they designate.

2. The Commission will have the following functions:

to. ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Treaty;

b. evaluate the results achieved in the application of this Agreement and monitor its development;

c. resolve differences that arise regarding its interpretation or application;
d. supervising the work of all committees established under this Agreement and included in Annex 17-01(2); and
and. hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, or any other that is entrusted to it by the Parties.
3. The Commission may:

to. establish and delegate responsibilities to ad hoc or standing committees;

b. request the advice of persons or groups without governmental ties; and

c. if agreed by the Parties, adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions.
4. The Commission will take all its decisions unanimously.

5. The Commission will meet at least once a year. The meetings will be chaired successively by each Party.

Article 17-02 : Secretariat.
1. Each Party shall designate an official office or dependency to serve as the Secretariat of that Party and shall communicate to the other Party: The name and position of the official responsible for its Secretariat; and the address of its Secretariat to which communications should be addressed.

2. The Commission shall oversee the coordinated functioning of the secretariats of the Parties.

3. It will correspond to the Secretariats:

to. provide assistance to the Commission;

b. provide administrative support to arbitral tribunals;

c. on instructions from the Commission, support the work of the committees established under this Agreement;
d. the payment of the remuneration and expenses owed to the arbitrators and experts appointed in accordance with this Treaty, as provided in the annex to this article; and
and. fulfill the other functions entrusted to it by the Commission.
Annex 17-01(1)

Officials of the Administrative Commission

The officials referred to in article 17-01 are:

to. in the case of Mexico, the Secretary of Economy, or his successor; and

b. in the case of Uruguay, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, or his successor.

Annex 17-01(2)

Committees

1. Committee on Trade in Goods (Article 3-15)

2. Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures (Article 4-18)

3. Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (Article 8-10)

4. Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons (Article 12-06)

5. Committee on Trade and Competition (Article 14-05)

Addendum 17-02

Remuneration and Payment of Expenses

1. The Commission will set the amounts of remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators and experts.

2. The remuneration of the arbitrators, experts and their assistants, their transportation and accommodation expenses, and all the general expenses of the arbitral tribunals will be covered in equal portions by the Parties.

3. Each arbitrator and expert will keep a record and submit a final account of their time and expenses, and the arbitral tribunal will keep a similar record and submit a final account to the Secretariat of all general expenses.

CHAPTER XVIII

DISPUTE RESOLUTION

Article 18-01 : Scope of Application.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, disputes that may arise between the Parties in relation to the interpretation, application, or breach of the provisions contained herein, and disputes that may arise between the Parties, regarding the application of Measures in force that are considered incompatible with the obligations of the Treaty or could cause annulment or impairment of benefits in the sense of Annex 18-01, will be submitted to the dispute resolution procedure established in this chapter.

Article 18-02 : Settlement of disputes in accordance with the WTO Agreement.
1. Any controversy that arises in relation to the provisions of this Agreement and the Agreement on the WTO, may be resolved in one or the other forum, at the choice of the complaining Party.

2. Before the complaining Party initiates dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement against another Party alleging issues substantially equivalent to those it could invoke under this Chapter, the complaining Party shall notify the other Party in writing of its intention to do so. Part.

3. Once a Party has initiated a dispute settlement procedure under the WTO Agreement, or under the procedure provided for in this Chapter, it may not resort to the other forum on the same matter.

4. For the purposes of this article, dispute settlement procedures shall be considered initiated in accordance with the WTO Agreement, when a Party requests the integration of a special group in accordance with article 6 of the Understanding Related to the Rules and Procedures by which Governing Dispute Settlement, which is part of the WTO Agreement. Likewise, the dispute resolution procedures regarding this chapter will be considered initiated when a Party requests the integration of an Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of article 18 -04.

Article 18-03 : Consultations.
1. The Parties shall endeavor to resolve the disputes referred to in Article 18-01 through consultations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.

2. Either Party may request the other to carry out consultations, which must be communicated to the Commission. Any request for consultations shall be submitted in writing to the other Party and shall include the reasons on which it is based, indicating the subject of the dispute and the legal grounds of the claim.

3. The Parties will provide the information that allows the analysis of the matter, treating this written or verbal information in a confidential manner and will consult among themselves to reach a solution. The consultations will not prejudge the rights of any of the Parties that are dealt with in other competent forums.

4. This stage may not be extended for more than 30 days from the date of receipt, by the other Party, of the formal request to initiate consultations, unless the Parties, by mutual agreement, extend that term.

Article 18-04 : Request for the integration of an Arbitral Tribunal.
When the controversy could not have been resolved through consultations, the Party that initiated the procedure may request in writing to the other Party, the integration of an Arbitral Tribunal.

Article 18-05 : Integration of the Arbitral Tribunal.
1. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the Arbitral Tribunal will be made up of 3 (three) arbitrators.

2. In the written notification provided for in Article 18-04, the Party that requests the integration of the Arbitral Tribunal shall designate an arbitrator from said court who may be a national of that Party.

3. Within 15 days of receiving the request for integration of an Arbitral Tribunal, the other Party must designate a member of said Arbitral Tribunal, who may be a national of that Party.

4. Within 30 days of receiving the request for the integration of an Arbitral Tribunal, the Parties will agree on the appointment of the third arbitrator of the Arbitral Tribunal. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the third member may not be a national or resident of any of the Parties. The arbitrator designated in this way will be the president of the Arbitral Tribunal.

5. If any of the three arbitrators has not been designated or appointed within thirty days of receipt of the notification indicated in paragraph 2 of this article, the Director General of the WTO, at the request of any Party, will make the required designations within an additional 30 days.

6. The remuneration of the arbitrators, and the other expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, will be covered in equal amounts by the Parties.

Article 18-06 : Requirements of the Referees.
1. The arbitrators that make up the Arbitral Tribunal shall act in their personal capacity and not as representatives of the Parties, of a government or of an international organization. Therefore, the Parties will refrain from giving them instructions and exercising any kind of influence over them with respect to the matters submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal.

2. The arbitrators that make up the Arbitral Tribunal must attend to and comply with the provisions contained in the Code of Conduct. No later than 30 days after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Commission shall establish the Code of Conduct.

Article 18-07 : Function of the Arbitral Tribunal.
1. The Arbitral Tribunal will consider the dispute raised, objectively evaluating the facts, taking into account the provisions of the Treaty, the additional instruments and agreements signed within its framework, the information provided by the Parties and the usual rules of interpretation of international law. public. The Arbitral Tribunal will give the Parties an opportunity to present their respective positions and formulate their conclusions.

2. The Arbitral Tribunal shall have the right to collect information and request technical advice from any person or entity it deems appropriate. However, before collecting information or requesting advice from a person or entity subject to the jurisdiction of a Party, the Arbitral Tribunal shall notify the Parties.

3. The Parties must give a prompt and complete response to any request made by the Arbitral Tribunal to obtain the information they deem necessary and pertinent. The information provided shall not be disclosed without the formal authorization of the person, institution or authority of the Party that provided it.

Article 18-08 : Consolidation of Procedures.
Unless they decide otherwise, the Parties will combine two or more proceedings that they are aware of under this article relating to the same measure. The Parties may accumulate two or more procedures regarding other matters that they are aware of in accordance with this article, when they consider it convenient to examine them jointly.

Article 18-09 : Rules of procedure.
1. The Arbitral Tribunal shall conduct the proceeding in accordance with the procedural rules established by the Commission no later than 30 days after the entry into force of this Treaty.

2. The Commission may modify, when it deems necessary, the model rules of procedure referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 18-10 : Award of the Arbitral Tribunal.
The Arbitral Tribunal will have a period of 90 days from its integration to send an award with its conclusions to the Commission, on whether the current measure is incompatible with the Treaty or if the measure is cause for annulment or impairment. In the latter case, the Arbitral Tribunal will determine the level of nullification or impairment and may suggest mutually satisfactory adjustments for the Parties.

Article 18-11 : Adoption of the Award of the Arbitral Tribunal.
1. The Commission will meet within 15 days from the date on which the award of the Arbitral Tribunal was sent to it, to consider its adoption. Unless there is a consensus to the contrary, the Commission will adopt the conclusions of the Arbitral Tribunal. If the meeting of the Commission does not take place, it will be understood that the award is automatically adopted.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding article, the Commission may also issue recommendations to reach a mutually satisfactory solution. In the event that the defendant Party does not comply with the Commission's recommendations, the complaining Party may proceed in accordance with the provisions of Article 18-13 to comply with the conclusions of the Arbitral Tribunal contained in its award.

Article 18-12 : Compliance with the award of the Arbitral Tribunal.
1. When the award of the Arbitral Tribunal adopted by the Commission, in accordance with paragraph 1 of article 18-11, concludes by majority that:

to. the measure is inconsistent with the Treaty, the Party complained against shall refrain from implementing the measure or shall repeal it; either

b. the measure is cause for annulment or impairment, the defendant Party will refrain from executing the measure or will repeal it, taking into consideration the level of annulment or impairment determined, as the case may be, by the Arbitral Tribunal.

Article 18-13 : Breach - Suspension of Benefits.
1. The complaining Party may suspend the application of benefits of equivalent effect to the other Party, prior written communication to said Party, if the award of the Arbitral Tribunal adopted by the Commission concludes by majority that:

to. the measure is inconsistent with the obligations of the Treaty and the Party complained against does not refrain from implementing or repealing it within a period of 60 days after the referral of the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal to the Commission, in accordance with article 18-10; either

b. the measure is cause for annulment or impairment and the Parties do not reach a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute within a period of 60 days after the submission of the conclusions of the Arbitral Tribunal to the Commission, in accordance with article 18-10 .

2. The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant Party complies with the award of the Arbitral Tribunal adopted by the Commission or until the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the controversy, as the case may be.

3. When examining the benefits that will be suspended in accordance with the previous article:

to. the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure or that have been the cause of nullification or impairment; and

b. the complaining Party that considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, may suspend benefits in other sectors, indicating the reasons on which it is based.

Article 18-14 : Special Arbitration Court.
1. At the written request of any Party in the controversy, communicated to the Commission, a special Arbitration Tribunal will be installed to determine if the level of benefits that a complaining Party has suspended in accordance with the previous article is manifestly excessive. To the extent possible, the special Arbitral Tribunal will be made up of the same arbitrators that made up the Arbitral Tribunal that issued the final award referred to in article 18-10. Otherwise, the special Arbitral Tribunal will be integrated in accordance with the provisions of article 18-05.

2. The special Arbitral Tribunal must present its award to the Commission within 60 days following its integration, or in any other term that the Parties in the controversy agree.

Article 18-15 : Emergency Situations – Perishable Products.
In cases that affect perishable products, the Parties will initiate consultations within a period not exceeding ten (10) days from the date of the request, and will do everything possible to speed up the terms in the other stages of the procedure.

Article 18-16 : Promotion of Arbitration.
Each Party will seek and facilitate the use of arbitration and other alternative means for the solution of commercial disputes between private parties of both countries. For these purposes, the Commission may establish a consultative group on this matter, made up of experts from both countries.

Addendum 18-01

Nullification and impairment

1. A Party may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism of this Chapter when, by virtue of the application of a measure that does not contravene the Agreement, it considers that the benefits that it could reasonably have expected to receive from the application are annulled or impaired:

to. of chapters III (National Treatment and Market Access of Goods), IV (Regime of Origin), V (Customs Procedures for the Management of Origin of Goods), VI (Safeguards), VII (Unfair Trade Practices), VIII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), IX (Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures);

b. Chapter X (Cross-Border Trade in Services); either

c. of Chapter XV (Intellectual Property).

2. In relation to measures subject to an exception pursuant to Article 19-02 (General Exceptions), a Party may not invoke:

to. paragraph 1 a) to the extent that the benefit derives from any provision relating to cross-border trade in services in chapters III (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods), IV (Origin Regime), V (Customs Procedures for Handling Origin of Goods), VI (Safeguards), VII (Unfair Trade Practices), VIII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), IX (Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures);

b. paragraph 1b); neither

c. paragraph 1c).

CHAPTER XIX

EXCEPTIONS

Article 19-01 : Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

tax convention : a convention to avoid double taxation or other international convention or arrangement in tax matters;

Fund : the International Monetary Fund; and

Taxes and tax measures do not include:

to. a “customs duty” as defined in Article 2-01 (General Definitions); neither

b. the measures listed in exceptions b), c) and d) of that definition; payments for current international transactions: the “payments for current international transactions”, as defined in the Articles of the Fund Agreement; international capital transactions: "international capital transactions" as defined in the Articles of the Fund Agreement; and transfers: international transactions and international transfers and related payments.

Article 19-02 : General exceptions.
1. Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of:

to. Chapters III (National Treatment and Market Access of Goods), IV (Origin Regime), V (Customs Procedures for Goods Origin Management), VI (Safeguards), VII (Unfair Trade Practices), except in the extent to which any of its provisions apply to services or investment;

b. Chapter VIII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services or investment; and

c. Chapter IX (Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services.

2. Article XIV of the GATS is incorporated into this Agreement and forms an integral part thereof, for the purposes of:

to. Chapters III (National Treatment and Market Access of Goods), IV (Regime of Origin), V (Customs Procedures for the Management of Origin of Goods), VI (Safeguards), VII (Unfair Trade Practices) and Chapter VIII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services;

b. Chapter IX (Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures);

c. Chapter X (Cross-Border Trade in Services); and

d. Chapter XI (Telecommunications).

Article 19-03 : National security.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

to. compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;

b. prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:

i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on goods, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment ,

ii) taken in time of war or other emergencies in international relations, or

iii) regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; neither

c. prevent any Party from taking measures in accordance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.

Article 19-04 : Exceptions to the disclosure of confidential information.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed in the sense of obliging a Party to provide or give access to confidential information the disclosure of which may impede compliance or be contrary to its Political Constitution or its laws.

Article 19-05 : Taxation.
1. Except as provided in this article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing provided in this Treaty shall affect the rights and obligations of any of the Parties that derive from any tax agreement. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any of these agreements, the agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

to. Article 3-02 (National Treatment), and those other provisions in this Agreement necessary to give effect to said article, shall apply to tax measures to the same degree as Article III of the GATT 1994; and

b. Article 3-10 (Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. Article 13-11 (Expropriation and compensation) shall apply to tax measures, except that no investor may invoke that article as the basis of a claim made under Article 13-16 (Claim by the investor of a Party for own account, by virtue of the damages suffered by himself) or Article 13-17 (Claim by the investor of a Party on behalf of a company, by virtue of damages suffered by a company of the other Party that is a person entity owned by the investor or under its direct or indirect control). If the competent authorities of the Parties do not agree to examine the matter or if, having agreed to examine it, they do not agree that the measure does not constitute an expropriation,

Article 19-06 : Balance of payments.
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures restricting transfers when the Party faces serious or threatened balance-of-payments difficulties, provided that the restrictions are consistent with this article.

2. As soon as practicable after a Party applies a measure under this Article, the Party shall:

to. submit for review by the Fund all restrictions on current account operations in accordance with Article VIII of the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

b. initiate good faith consultations with the Fund regarding economic adjustment measures aimed at addressing the fundamental economic problems underlying the difficulties; and

c. adopt or maintain economic policies compatible with said consultations.

3. The measures that are applied or maintained in accordance with this article must:

to. avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic or financial interests of the other Party;

b. not be more onerous than necessary to meet balance of payments difficulties, or the threat thereof;

c. be temporary and be phased out as the balance of payments situation improves;

d. be consistent with those of paragraph 2(c), as well as with the Articles of the Fund Agreement; and

and. be applied in accordance with the most favourable, between the principles of national treatment and most favored nation.

4. A Party may adopt or maintain a measure under this Article that gives priority to objectives essential to its economic program, provided that the Party does not apply the measure in order to protect a particular industry or sector, unless the Party measure is consistent with paragraph 2(c), and with Article VIII(3) of the Articles of the Fund Agreement.

5. Restrictions imposed on transfers:

to. they must be compatible with Article VIII (3) of the Articles of the Fund Agreement, when applied to payments for current international transactions;

b. they shall be consistent with Article VI of the Articles of the Fund Agreement and apply only in conjunction with measures on payments for current international transactions in accordance with paragraph 2(a), when applied to international capital transactions;

c. may not substantially prevent transfers from being made in freely usable currency at a market exchange rate, when applied to transfers provided for in Article 13-10 (Transfers) and transfers relating to trade in goods; and

d. they may not take the form of tariff surcharges, quotas, licenses or similar measures.

Addendum 19-05

competent authorities

For the purposes of article 19-05, the competent authorities are:

to. in the case of Mexico, the Undersecretary of Revenue of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, or his successor; and

b. in the case of Uruguay, the General Director of Revenue, or his successor.

CHAPTER XX

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 20-01 : Annexes.
The annexes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.

Article 20-02 : Amendments.
1. The Parties may agree to any modification or addition to this Agreement.

2. The agreed modifications and additions will enter into force once they are approved according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party and will constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 20-03 : Entry into force.
This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after the communications certifying that the necessary legal formalities in each Party have been completed are exchanged.

Article 20-04 : Future Negotiations – Public Sector Procurement and Financial Services.
1. The Parties agree to conclude a chapter on public sector procurement no later than two (2) years after the entry into force of this Agreement. Said chapter will be defined by mutual agreement with a broad scope of application. The Commission will establish the pertinent procedures to carry out the foregoing.

2. The Parties agree to conclude a chapter on financial services no later than two (2) years after the entry into force of this Agreement. Said chapter will be defined by mutual agreement with a broad scope of application. The Commission will establish the pertinent procedures to carry out the foregoing.

Article 20-05 : Reserves.
This Treaty may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations at the time of its ratification.

Article 20-06 : Accession.
1. Any country or group of countries may join this Agreement subject to the terms and conditions agreed between that country or group of countries and the Commission, and once its accession has been approved in accordance with the applicable legal procedures of each country.

2. This Agreement shall not be in force between a Party and any country or group of countries that join, if at the time of accession either of them does not give its consent.

3. The accession will enter into force once the communications certifying that the legal formalities have been completed are exchanged.

Article 20-07 : Complaint.
1. Any Party may denounce this Agreement. The denunciation will take effect 180 days after it is communicated to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term.

2. In the case of the accession of a country or group of countries in accordance with the provisions of Article 20-06, notwithstanding that a Party has denounced the Treaty, it shall remain in force for the other Parties.

Article 20-08 : Review Clause of the Treaty.
No later than two (2) years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Commission shall consider further steps in the process of trade liberalization between Mexico and Uruguay. For this purpose, a review will be carried out, case by case, of the customs tariffs applicable to the products listed in Annexes I and II, the current quotas and the pertinent rules of origin, as deemed appropriate.

Article 20-09 : Repeals and transitional provisions.
The Parties annul ACE No. 5. However, regarding Chapter V (Customs Procedures for the Management of the Origin of Goods), importers may request the application of ACE No. 5, for a period of 30 days, counted from the entry into force of this Treaty. For these purposes, the certificates of origin issued in accordance with ACE No. 5 must have been completed prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, be in force and be enforced for up to the indicated period.

Signed in the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia, on November 15, two thousand and three, in two equally authentic original copies.

Jorge Batlle Ibáñez
President of the
Oriental Republic of Uruguay	Vicente Fox Quesada
President of the
United Mexican States