Economic Complementation Agreement No. 55 entered
into between MERCOSUR and the United Mexican States

The plenipotentiaries of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay, the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, States Parties to MERCOSUR, and the United Mexican States, accredited by their respective Governments, according to powers granted in good and due form, timely deposited in the General Secretariat of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI);

CONSIDERING the need to strengthen the integration process in Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty;

The importance of having a legal framework that promotes the development of trade relations between the Parties;

The convenience of offering economic agents clear rules that enable the development of trade and economic complementarity; and

Decisions 32/00 and 37/00 of the Common Market Council regarding trade negotiations between MERCOSUR and the United Mexican States;
 

AGREE :

Enter into this Economic Complementation Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Latin American Free Trade Association (ALALC), under the terms and conditions established next.
 

Goals

Article 1.- The Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay, the Oriental Republic of Uruguay and the United Mexican States (hereinafter "the Signatory Parties") sign this Agreement with the objective of laying the foundations for the establishment of free trade in the automotive sector and promoting the integration and productive complementation of its automotive sectors.

The States Parties to MERCOSUR and the United Mexican States (hereinafter "the Contracting Parties") agree that this Agreement will be incorporated into the future Free Trade Agreement that will be signed between MERCOSUR and the United Mexican States in due course, constituting the referring clauses. to the automotive sector of said Agreement.
 

Definitions

Article 2.- For the purposes of this Agreement, it shall be understood as:

Tariff: Any import tax or levy and any charge of any kind levied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except:

a) any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III.2 of the GATT 1994, with respect to goods from which the imported good has been totally or partially elaborated or transformed;

b) any antidumping duty or countervailing measure that is applied in accordance with the legislation of each Signatory Party;

c) any duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered; and

d) any premium offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariffs-quota or tariff preference quotas.

days: calendar or calendar days;

NALADISA: identifies the Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association, based on the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System , in force, including its general rules and its section, chapter, heading and subheading legal notes, in the manner in which the Signatory Parties have adopted it in their respective legislation;

Free trade: free circulation with a tariff preference margin of one hundred percent (100%) (zero percent (0%) tariff) of the goods included in Article 3, provided that the requirements of the Regime of Origin are met. and of the Technical Regulations that will be established according to the provisions of Articles 6 and 7 of this Agreement.  

Agreement Coverage

Article 3 °.- The provisions contained in this Agreement shall apply to the commercial exchange of the goods listed below (hereinafter "automotive products"), provided they are new goods.

- Vehicles (included in the NALADISA positions, with their respective descriptions, which appear in Annex I):

a) automobiles;

b) vehicles with a total weight with a maximum load less than or equal to 8,845 kg – eight thousand eight hundred and forty-five kilograms- (light commercial vehicles, chassis with engine and cabin and bodies for these vehicles, trucks and chassis with engine and cabin of total weight with a maximum load less than or equal to 8,845 kg – eight thousand eight hundred and forty-five kilograms-) ;

c) Vehicles with a total weight with a maximum load greater than 8,845 kg - eight thousand eight hundred and forty-five kilograms - (trucks, truck tractors and chassis with motor and cabin with a total weight with a maximum load greater than 8,845 kg - eight thousand eight hundred and forty and five kilograms-);

d) buses (complete buses, chassis with motor and bodies for buses);

e) bodies;

f) trailers and semi-trailers;

g) agricultural tractors, harvesters, agricultural machinery and self-propelled road machinery.

- Auto parts:

h) auto parts (parts, assemblies and subassemblies, including tires) necessary for the production of the vehicles listed in subparagraphs a) to g) of this Article, as well as those necessary for the production of the goods indicated in this subparagraph, including those intended for to the replacement market.
 

commercial provisions

Article 4.- The Signatory Parties may apply to imports made under this Agreement their commercial and legal provisions on automotive matters that are compatible with the Marrakech Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization.

The Signatory Parties may maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the import of used goods, of those included in Article 3, observing the special conditions provided for in their current legislation, in the MERCOSUR Automotive Policy for its Member States and the transitory provisions established in Appendices I (Argentina-Mexico), II (Brazil-Mexico), III (Paraguay-Mexico) and IV (Uruguay-Mexico) (hereinafter “the Bilateral Appendices”) to this Agreement, respectively.
  

Transition period for free trade

Article 5.- The Contracting Parties will establish free trade in automotive products included in Article 3 gradually, after a transition period from the entry into force of this Agreement and until June 30, 2011. During the transition period, the provisions established in the Bilateral Appendices will regulate trade between the Signatory Parties mentioned in each of them in terms of market access, tariff preferences and technical regulations.

The Signatory Parties referred to in the Bilateral Appendices may, at any time, alter by mutual agreement the provisions established therein, as well as incorporate into their scope of application automotive products listed in Article 3 of this Agreement, communicating these modifications to the other Signatory Parties.  

Origin Regime

Article 6 °.- As regards origin, the provisions of Annex II of this Agreement govern.


technical regulations

Article 7.- The Contracting Parties will agree, before the establishment of Free Trade of the automotive products included in Article 3, the Technical Regulations that must be complied with by the exchanged goods. These regulations will be defined based on the harmonization of the provisions on the matter contained in the Bilateral Appendices.

Notwithstanding the previous paragraph, in case of not reaching an agreement on the Technical Regulations, the Signatory Parties will continue to apply the provisions established on the matter in the Bilateral Appendices.
Agreement Administration

Article 8 °.- The Contracting Parties agree to establish an Automotive Committee in order to monitor the application of the provisions contained in this Agreement and in the Bilateral Appendices, comply with the provisions of Articles 5, 6 and 7, decide on additional provisions that are necessary for the incorporation of this Agreement into the Free Trade Agreement between MERCOSUR and Mexico, as provided for in Article 1, and permanently seek to improve the operation of this Agreement.

Due to the characteristics of this Agreement, the monitoring and eventual adjustments in the Bilateral Appendices will be resolved between the Signatory Parties involved, and reported to the Automotive Committee for the purpose of formalizing them in the Agreement.

The Automotive Committee will approve its internal regulations.  


dispute resolution

Article 9 °.- The Contracting Parties must initiate, from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the necessary negotiations to define and agree on a dispute resolution procedure to resolve disputes that arise between the Signatory Parties in relation to interpretation, application or breach of this Agreement.

In the event of a dispute regarding the application, interpretation or breach of the provisions of this Agreement, the Automotive Committee will meet extraordinarily at the request of any Signatory Party to reach a solution to the dispute, within a maximum period of thirty (30 ) days, counted from the date of the request.

In the event that a satisfactory solution is not reached within the scope of the Automotive Committee, and while the Contracting Parties agree on a common dispute resolution regime, the Signatory Parties involved in the dispute will submit to the dispute resolution procedures indicated in the Appendices. Bilateral, as appropriate.

Convergence

Article 10.- On the occasion of the meetings of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference referred to in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the Contracting Parties will examine the possibility of proceeding with the progressive multilateralization of the treatments included in this Agreement.


Accession

Article 11.- This Agreement will be open to adhesion, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries and this will be formalized through the signing of a Protocol of Adhesion to this Agreement that will enter into force thirty (30) days after its deposit in the ALADI General Secretariat.  


Validity

Article 12.- This Agreement shall enter into force between Mexico and each State Party to MERCOSUR, respectively, within a period not exceeding thirty (30) days from the date of the corresponding notification to the General Secretariat of ALADI, of Mexico and the MERCOSUR State Party in question, regarding the completion of the legal formalities necessary for its application.

This Agreement will be in force until it is replaced by a Free Trade Agreement between MERCOSUR and Mexico in accordance with Article 1.


Complaint

Article 13.- The Contracting Party that wishes to withdraw from this Agreement must communicate its decision to the other Contracting Party sixty (60) days in advance of depositing the respective complaint instrument with the ALADI General Secretariat.

As of the formalization of the complaint, the acquired rights and obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will cease for the complaining Contracting Party, maintaining those referring to Commercial Provisions and other aspects that the Contracting Parties agree within sixty (60) days. days after the formalization of the complaint.

These rights and obligations will continue in force for a period of one (1) year from the date of deposit of the respective denunciation instrument, unless the Contracting Parties agree on a different term.  


General disposition

Article 14.- Once this Agreement enters into force, the Eighth Additional Protocol to the Partial Scope Agreement for Renegotiation No. 9 (AAP.R 9 Brazil-Mexico), the Twelfth Additional Protocol to the Economic Complementation Agreement shall be void . No. 6 (ACE 6 Argentina-Mexico), regarding only the products classified in item NALADISA 8407.34.00, and the Fourteenth Additional Protocol to the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 6 (ACE 6 Argentina-Mexico).

Article 15.- The Bilateral Annexes and Appendices to this Agreement form an integral part thereof.


Amendments and additions

Article 16.- The Contracting Parties may, at any time, review and amend, by mutual agreement, the provisions contained in this Agreement, seeking to adjust it to the conditions that they consider most appropriate to the fulfillment of the objectives established in Article 1.


Transitory dispositions

Article 17.- Appendix III (Paraguay-Mexico) will be incorporated into this Agreement once the negotiations provided for in paragraph 1.(b) of the Agreement between the Ministry of Economy of Mexico and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Paraguay for the establishment of the Bilateral Trade and Investment Council, signed on the fifth (5) day of July two thousand and two.


Depositary

Article 18.- The General Secretariat of ALADI will be the depositary of this Agreement, of which it will send duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Parties .


IN WITNESS WHEREOF , the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Protocol in the city of Montevideo, on the twenty-seventh day of September two thousand two, in an original in the Spanish and Portuguese languages, both texts being equally valid. (Signed .:) For the Government of the Argentine Republic: Juan Carlos Olima; For the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil: Bernardo Pericás Neto; For the Government of the Republic of Paraguay: José María Casal; For the Government of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay: Elbio Oscar Rosselli Frieri; For the Government of the United Mexican States: Jesús Puente Leyva.

ANNEX TEXT:

ANNEX II

ORIGIN REGIME REFERRED TO IN
ARTICLE 6 OF THE AGREEMENT


Structure of the Annex

Article 1.- This Annex establishes the rules of origin applicable to the exchange of goods in the automotive sector between the Contracting Parties, for the purposes of :

1. qualification and determination of origin of a good;

2. issuance of certificates of origin; and

3. Verification, Control and Sanctions processes.
 

Area of ​​application

Article 2.- The Contracting Parties will apply the present Regime of Origin to the goods subject to this Agreement, without prejudice to the fact that it may be modified by resolution of the Automotive Committee.

To access the preferential conditions established in the Agreement, the goods must prove compliance with the origin requirements in accordance with the provisions of this Annex.
 

Definitions

Article 3.- For the purposes of this Annex, it shall be understood as:

auto parts: parts, assemblies and subassemblies, including tires necessary for the production of vehicles, as well as those necessary for the production of other auto parts, including those destined for the replacement or spare parts market;

customs authority: the authority which, under the legislation of each Signatory Party, is responsible for the administration of its customs laws and regulations;

competent authority: in the case of Argentina: the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Mining or its successor; in the case of Brazil: the Ministry of Foreign Trade or its successor; in the case of Mexico: the Ministry of Economy or its successor; in the case of Paraguay: the Ministry of Industry and Commerce or its successor; and in the case of Uruguay: the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Ministry of Industries, Energy and Mining or their successors.

frame: the bottom plate of a motor vehicle;

good: the good produced, even when its subsequent use is planned in another production operation and is any merchandise, product or article;

originating good or material: a good or material that complies with the provisions of this Annex;

non-originating good or material : a good or material that does not qualify as originating under this Annex;

fungible goods or materials: those that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical and that it is not possible to differentiate them by simple visual examination;

identical goods: those that are the same in everything, including their physical characteristics, quality and commercial prestige; where small differences in appearance do not prevent goods that otherwise conform to their definition from being considered identical;

similar goods: those that, although they are not the same in everything, have similar characteristics and composition, which allows them to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable. In order to determine if the goods are similar, their quality, commercial prestige and the existence of a commercial brand must be considered, among other factors;

goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party: those obtained wholly from minerals extracted 1 in its territory and by-products obtained from animals born and raised in the territory of that Signatory Party. Waste and scrap derived from production in the territory of a Signatory Party or from goods used or collected in the territory of a Signatory Party, provided that such goods are used only for the recovery of raw materials. As well as the goods produced in the territory of a Signatory Party exclusively from the aforementioned goods or their derivatives at any stage of production;

Customs Valuation Code: the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization;

shipping containers and packaging materials: goods that are used to protect a good during transportation, other than retail packaging and materials;

total cost: the sum of the following elements:

a) the costs or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;

b) the costs of direct labor used in the production of the good; and

c) an amount for direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the good, reasonably assigned to it, except for the following concepts:

i) the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to that good;

ii) the costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the producer's company, which constitutes a discontinued operation;

iii) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of accounting principles;

iv) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good;

v) costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure;

vi) the profits obtained by the producer of the good, regardless of whether they were retained by the producer or paid to others as dividends, nor the taxes paid on those profits, including taxes on capital gains; neither

vii) the interest costs that have been agreed between related parties and that exceed those interests that are paid at market interest rates;

FOB: free on board, regardless of the means of transport;

place where the producer is located: in relation to a good, the production plant of that good;

material: that used in the production of another good, such as raw materials, inputs, intermediate products and auto parts;

own-manufactured material: that produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;

indirect material: that used in the production, verification or inspection of a good, but that is not physically incorporated into the good; or that used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of a good, including:

a) fuel and power;
b) tools, dies and molds;
c) spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;
d) lubricants, greases, compound materials and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;
e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;
f) equipment, devices and attachments used for the verification or inspection of the goods;
g) catalysts and solvents; either
h) any other material that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be part of that production;

intermediate materials: self-manufactured materials used in the production of a good, and designated in accordance with Article 9 of this Annex;

NALADISA: identifies the Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) based on the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System, in force, including its general rules and its section, chapter, heading and subheading legal notes, in the form in which the Signatory Parties have adopted it in their respective legislations;

model name: the word or group of words, letter or letters, number or numbers or similar designation assigned to a motor vehicle by a marketing division of a motor vehicle assembler included in subparagraphs a) to d) of Article 3 of the Framework Agreement for:

a) differentiate the motor vehicle from other motor vehicles that use the same platform; either

b) associate the motor vehicle with other motor vehicles that use a different platform;

heading: refers to the first four digits of the NALADISA;

related person: a person who is related to another person, as follows:

a) one of them holds positions of responsibility or direction in a company of the other;
b) are legally recognized as business associates;
c) are in an employer-employee relationship;
d) a person has, directly or indirectly, ownership, control or possession of 25 percent or more of the outstanding shares or titles and with voting rights of both;
e) one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;
f) both persons are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;
g) together directly or indirectly control a third party; or
h) are from the same family and includes only children, siblings, parents, grandparents or spouses;

plant: a building or buildings near but not necessarily contiguous, machinery, apparatus and accessories that are under the control of a producer and are used for the production of motor vehicles;

platform: the primary assembly of a load-carrying structural assembly of a motor vehicle that determines the basic size of that vehicle and forms the structural base that supports the powertrain and serves as a junction for the motor vehicle in various types of frames, such as for body assembly, dimensional frame or unit body;

ex-factory price of the product: the price of the good paid to the producer by a distributor in a sale to the domestic market, in whose company the last elaboration or transformation took place, provided that the price includes the value of all the materials used and does not include internal taxes:

generally accepted accounting principles: those on which there is a recognized consensus or that enjoy substantial and authorized support in the territory of a Signatory Party, regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements and that are applied in the territory of that Party. These standards can be broad guidelines of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;

production: the extraction, manufacture, processing, or assembly of a good;

producer: a person who extracts, manufactures, processes, or assembles a good;

subheading: refers to the first six digits of the NALADISA;

used: used or consumed in the production of goods;

transaction value of a good: the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the good is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good; and

transaction value of a material: the price actually paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the material is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the supplier of the material and the buyer referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good.

Instruments of application and interpretation

Article 4 °.-

1. For purposes of this Annex:
a) the tariff classification basis is NALADISA;

b) the determination of the transaction value of a good or a material will be made in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code; and

c) all costs referred to in this Annex will be recorded and maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Signatory Party where the good is produced.
2. For the purposes of this Annex, when applying the Customs Valuation Code to determine the origin of a good, the principles of that code will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications that circumstances require, as they would be applied to international ones.

3. The qualifying unit for the application of this Annex will be the specific good considered as the basic unit at the time of determining its classification in accordance with NALADISA.

Therefore, it is considered that:

a) When a product made up of a group or assembly of articles is classified in a single NALADISA heading, the totality constitutes the unit of qualification.

b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical goods classified under the same NALADISA heading, each good will be considered individually when applying the provisions of this Annex.
 

Origin Qualification

 

Article 5 °.-

1. Except as provided in Article 6 and without prejudice to the other provisions of this Annex, the good will be considered original:

a) wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party;
b) produced entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Annex;

c) made using non-originating materials, except for the goods included in paragraphs 2 to 4 of this Article, provided that it results from a production process carried out entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party in such a way that the good is classified in a heading different from those of said materials according to the NALADISA; either

d) made using non-originating materials that did not comply with the provisions of subparagraph (c) above, except for goods classified in headings 40.09, 40.10 and 40.11 of the NALADISA and those included in paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article, provided that results from a production process carried out entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party, so that the value of non-originating materials does not exceed 50 percent of the value of the good.

2. A good classified under heading 70.07 of the NALADISA will be considered as originating if, as a result of a production process carried out entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party, non-originating materials classified under heading 70.01 are used at the time of its production. or in another chapter of the NALADISA other than chapter 70.

3. A good classified in subheadings 8482.10 to 8482.80 of the NALADISA will be considered originating if, as a result of a production process carried out entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party, non-originating materials classified in a subheading are used at the time of its production. other than 8482.10 to 8482.80, except for internal or external tracks or cups classified in subheading 8482.99 of the NALADISA or, in case this rule is not satisfied, the provisions of literal 1(d) of this Article are complied with.

4. A good classified in headings 84.07, 84.08, 87.06 or 87.07 of the NALADISA will be considered as originating if, as a result of a production process carried out entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party, it complies with the provisions of Article 6, depending on the type of vehicle for which it is intended.

Article 6 °.-

1. The determination of the Regional Content Index (ICR) of an automotive product contained in subparagraphs a) to d) and g) of Article 3 of the Agreement, will be as follows:

In the case of the States Parties to MERCOSUR:

Value of non-originating materials

ICR = {1 - --------------------------------------------- --------- } x 100

Price of the “ex-factory” product,

In the case of Mexico:

Value of originating materials

ICR = { ----------------------------------------------- - } x 100

Value of the good

 

2. Except for the provisions of paragraph 5 of this Article, an automotive product contained in literals a) to d) of Article 3 of the Agreement will be considered as originating if, as a result of a production process carried out entirely in the territory in Argentina or Brazil the ICR is at least 60 percent, in the case of Uruguay it is at least 50 percent or in the case of Mexico, it is at least:

ANNEX TEXT:

Accumulation

Article 7.- For the purposes of this Annex, materials originating in the territory of any of the Signatory Parties, used in the production of a good in the territory of another Signatory Party, will be considered as originating in the territory of the latter.


Assessment

Article 8 °.-

1. Except as provided in paragraph 4 of this Article and for the purposes of Articles 5, 6, 10 or 15 of this Annex, the value of non-originating materials will be the transaction value, calculated in accordance with the Code Customs Valuation.

Said value must include when it does not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred for the transport of the material to the import port 2 in the Signatory Party where the producer of the product is located. good, except that when the producer of the good acquires the non-originating material within the territory of the Signatory Party where it is located, the value of said material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs in which it has been incurred. incurred for the transportation of the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located.

The value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used by:

a) another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of the good; either

b) the producer of the good in the production of an original material of own manufacture and that is designated by the producer as intermediate material in accordance with Article 9 of this Annex.

2. Except as provided in paragraph 4 of this Article and for the purposes of Article 6 of this Annex, the value of the original materials will be the transaction value, calculated in accordance with the Customs Valuation Code and will include, when not included in said value, freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred for the transport of the material to the place where the producer of the good is located.

3. For the purposes of Articles 5, 6, 10 or 15 of this Annex, the value of the good will be the transaction value, calculated in accordance with the Customs Valuation Code and adjusted on the FOB basis. However, when the producer of the good does not export it directly, the transaction value of said good will be determined up to the point in which the buyer receives the good within the territory where the producer is located.

Each Party shall provide that the producer or exporter use the total cost of production of the good as the value of the good when:

a) there is no transaction value because the good is not the object of a sale;

b) the transaction value of the asset cannot be determined because there are restrictions on the assignment or use of the asset by the buyer, except those that:

i) imposed or required by the law or the authorities of the Signatory Party where the buyer of the good is located,

ii) limit the geographical territory where the good can be resold, or

iii) do not substantially affect the value of the asset;

c) the sale or the price depend on some condition or consideration whose value cannot be determined in relation to the good;

d) reverts directly or indirectly to the seller any part of the proceeds of the resale or of any subsequent assignment or use of the good by the buyer, unless the due adjustment can be made in accordance with Article 8 of the Customs Valuation Code;

e) the buyer and the seller are related persons and the relationship between them influences the price, except as provided in paragraph 2 of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code;

f) the good is sold by the producer to a related person and the volume of sales, in quantity units of identical or similar goods, sold to related persons, during a period of six (6) months immediately preceding the month in which the producer has sold that good, exceeds 85 percent of the producer's total sales of those goods during that period; either

g) the good is designated as intermediate material in accordance with Article 9 of this Annex.

4. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 or 2 of this Article, when the producer designates a material as an intermediate material in accordance with Article 9, the value of said material will be the total cost of its production.

intermediate materials

Article 9.- The producer of the good may, for purposes of determining its origin, designate as an intermediate material any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good.
 
"De Minimis"

Article 10.- A good shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in its production, which do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in subparagraph c) of paragraph 1, paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 of Article 5 of this Annex do not exceed 7 percent of the value of the property.

Expendable goods and materials

Article 11.- For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when original and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined in inventory are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined by one of the handling methods. of inventories established in the accounting principles generally accepted in the Signatory Party where the good is produced.

When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Signatory Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of another Signatory Party, the origin of the good may be determined based on one of the inventory management methods referred to in the previous paragraph.

Once one of the inventory management methods is selected, it will be used throughout the fiscal year or period.


indirect materials

Article 12.- Indirect materials will not be considered in determining the origin of the good. However, said materials must be included in the price of the "ex-factory" product or in the value of the good, as the case may be. The value of these materials will be their cost that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.


Containers and packaging materials for retail sale

Article 13.- For purposes of establishing whether a good is original, the containers and packaging materials in which a good is presented for retail sale will not be taken into account, when they are classified with the good they contain, in accordance with the General Rule 5 b) of the NALADISA, except when the property is subject to one of the requirements indicated in literal d) of paragraph 1 of Article 5, Article 6 or 10 of this Annex, in which case, they will be taken into account in the corresponding calculation.


Shipping containers and packing materials

Article 14.- The containers and packaging materials in which a good is packed or conditioned exclusively for its transport, will not be taken into account for the purposes of compliance with the provisions of Articles 5, 6, 10 or 15 of this Exhibit.


Games or assortments

Article 15.- The sets or assortments that are classified according to the provisions of General Rule 3 of the NALADISA, as well as the goods whose description, according to the NALADISA, is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in the set or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of the goods in this Annex.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of the non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed 7 percent of the value of the good as a set or assortment.

The provisions of this Article shall prevail over the other provisions established in this Annex.


Accessories, spare parts and tools

Article 16.- The accessories , spare parts and tools that are issued with a material, machine, device or vehicle and are part of its normal equipment, whose value is included in the value of these and are not invoiced separately, will be considered integral part of the corresponding material, machine, apparatus or vehicle.


Processes carried out outside the territories of the Signatory Parties

Article 17.- A good that has been produced in accordance with the requirements of this Annex, will lose its originating condition if it undergoes a subsequent process or is the object of any other operation outside the territories of the Signatory Parties, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep it in good condition or to transport it to the territory of another Signatory Party.


Of the expedition, transport and transit of the goods

Article 18.- In order for originating goods to benefit from the preferential tariff treatment established in the Agreement, they must have been shipped directly from the exporting Signatory Party to the importing Signatory Party. For this purpose, direct dispatch is considered:

a) goods transported without passing through the territory of a State that is not a Party to the Agreement;

b) goods in transit through one or more States that are not Parties to the Agreement, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the control or surveillance of the competent customs authority, provided that:

i) transit is justified for geographical reasons or considerations related to transportation requirements;

ii) are not intended for trade, use or employment in the State of transit; and

iii) they do not undergo, during their transport or storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or handling to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

 
Modification of the Regime of origin
Article 19.- To modify the provisions of Articles 1 to 18 of this Annex, any of the Signatory Parties must submit a well-founded request to the Automotive Committee, providing the respective background information.


Declaration and certification of origin

Article 20.- The Signatory Parties will apply to the operations carried out under the Agreement, the provisions regarding the declaration and certification of origin (articles seven to fourteen), contained in the ALADI General Regime of Origin (consolidated text and ordered by Resolution 252 of the Committee of Representatives).


Request for certificate of origin

Article 21.- The request for a Certificate of Origin must be accompanied by a statement with the necessary background that demonstrates in documentary form that the good meets the requirements demanded in accordance with this Annex, such as:

a) name or company name of the applicant;

b) legal domicile;

c) name of the good to be exported and its NALADISA classification;

d) value of the good or the ex-factory price of the product;

e) demonstrative elements of the components of the property indicating:

i) materials, components and/or parts and pieces produced in the territory of the Signatory Party where the good is produced;

ii) materials, components and/or parts and pieces originating from another Signatory Party, indicating:

origin,

NALADISA codes,

value of said materials,

percentage that they represent in the value of the good or the price of the product “ex-factory”.
iii) component materials and/or non-originating parts and pieces:

NALADISA codes,
value of said materials,
percentage that they represent in the value of the good or the price of the product “ex-factory”.
The description of the good must coincide with the one that corresponds to the code in NALADISA and with the one registered in the commercial invoice, as well as in the Certificate of Origin, which accompanies the documents presented for customs clearance.

The aforementioned statements must be submitted sufficiently in advance for each certification application.

In the case of goods that were regularly exported, and as long as the process and materials were not altered, the declaration may be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of its issuance.


Origin determination criteria that must be indicated on the certificate

Article 22.- The certificates of origin must identify the article, paragraph and literal, as the case may be, under which the origin requirements established in this Annex are being complied with, according to the following detail:

A good obtained in its entirety or produced entirely: Article 5, paragraph 1, literal a).

A good produced entirely in the territory of a Signatory Party exclusively from originating materials: Article 5, paragraph 1, literal b).

A good produced using non-originating materials that complies with a change of classification at the starting level: Article 5, paragraph 1, literal c).

A good produced using non-originating materials that complies with regional content: Article 5, paragraph 1, literal d).

For a good classified in headings 40.09, 40.10 or 40.11 of the NALADISA if non-originating materials were used in its production: Article 5, paragraph 1, literal c).

For a good classified in heading 70.07 of the NALADISA if non-originating materials were used in its production: Article 5, paragraph 2.

For a good classified in subheadings 8482.10 to 8482.80 of the NALADISA if non-originating materials were used in its production: Article 5, paragraph 3.

For a good classified in headings 84.07, 84.08, 87.06 or 87.07 of the NALADISA: Article 6, paragraph 2.

For an automotive product contained in subparagraphs a) to c) of Article 3 of the Agreement: Article 6, paragraph 2.

For an automotive product contained in letter d) of Article 3 of the Agreement: Article 6, paragraph 3.

For a new automotive product defined in accordance with Article 6, paragraph 7 of the Agreement: Article 6, paragraph 5.

For a good that is a game or assortment: Article 15.

If the "De minimis" mechanism was used, it must be indicated in the observations field of the certificate of origin.


Import obligations

Article 23.- _

1. When an importer has requested preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into the territory of a Signatory Party and has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which his import declaration is based contains incorrect information, and the customs authority of the Signatory Party Importing Signatory has not initiated a verification of origin in accordance with Article 26 of this Annex or has not initiated any other tax verification procedure, it must present, without delay, a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding customs duties. When the importer complies with the preceding obligations, he will not be penalized.

2. For trade between Argentina and Mexico, when no preferential tariff treatment has been requested or a guarantee has been left for an imported good that has qualified as originating, the importer of the good, within a period not exceeding thirty (30) days from from the date of importation, you may request the return of customs duties paid in excess for not having granted preferential tariff treatment to the good or the cancellation of the guarantee that had been left to guarantee the payment of customs duties, provided that the application is accompanied by the certificate of origin.


Export obligations

Article 24.- _

 

1. Each Signatory Party will provide that its exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate of origin and has reason to believe that, due to alterations in the production processes of the good or due to variations in the value of the materials, that certificate contains information incorrect, notify, without delay and in writing, any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate of origin to all persons to whom it has been delivered, as the case may be, as well as to the competent authority. In these cases, the exporter or producer may not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certification.

2. Each Signatory Party will provide that the false certification of origin, made by its exporter or producer, in the sense that a good that is going to be exported to the territory of another Signatory Party qualifies as originating, has the same legal consequences, with the modifications circumstances require, than those that would apply to your importer who makes false declarations or statements in contravention of their customs laws and regulations. In addition, it may apply such measures, as the circumstances warrant, when the exporter or producer does not comply with any of the requirements of this Annex.

3. The competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party shall notify the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party in writing of the notification referred to in paragraph 2.


records

Article 25.- _

1. The certifying entities must correlatively number the certificates issued and file a copy for a minimum period of five (5) years, from the date of issue. Said file must also include all the background information that served as the basis for the issuance of the certificate of origin. Likewise, they will keep a permanent record of all certificates of origin issued, which must contain at least the number of the certificate, the applicant for the same and the date of its issuance.

2. Each Signatory Party shall provide that:

a) its exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate of origin keeps, for a minimum period of five (5) years after the date of issuance of said certificate, all the records and documents related to the origin of the good, including those referring to to:

i) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the good that is exported from its territory,

ii) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials, including indirect materials, used in the production of the good that is exported from its territory, and

iii) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory; and

b) An importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good that is imported into its territory from the territory of another Signatory Party, keeps for a minimum period of five (5) years, counted from the date of importation, the certificate of origin and all other documentation related to importation required by the importing Signatory Party.


Verification and control processes

Article 26 -.
1. The customs authority of the importing Signatory Party may request, from the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party responsible for the verification and control of certificates of origin, information in order to verify the authenticity of the certificate(s). of origin, the veracity of the information established therein or the origin of the goods.

2. The customs authority of the importing Signatory Party must notify the initiation of the investigation and control procedure to the importer and the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party. Said notification must be sent by courier or certified mail and will include the number and date of the certificates of origin and the time period for which the information referred to in paragraph 1 is requested.

In no case will the importing Signatory Party stop the import process of the goods covered by the certificates referred to in the preceding paragraph, but it may adopt the measures it deems necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest.

3. The competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party must provide the information requested by application of the provisions of paragraph 2, within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, counted from the date of receipt of the respective request.

In cases where the requested information is not provided within the period stipulated in the preceding paragraph, the customs authority of the Signatory Party importing such goods may deny preferential tariff treatment.

4. When the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party has received a response from the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party within the term set forth in the previous numeral and deems that more information is required to decide on the origin of the good or goods subject to verification , may request additional information from said entity, through a subsequent notification that will be sent by courier or certified mail. The same must be answered within a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, counted from the date of receipt of the notification.

In cases where the requested information is not provided within the period stipulated in the preceding paragraph, the customs authority of the Signatory Party importing such goods may deny preferential tariff treatment.

5. Once the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party has responded in the terms established in paragraphs 3 or 4, the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party will determine if the information provided is sufficient to conclude the verification process.

If the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party considers that the information referred to in the preceding paragraph is not sufficient to dispel doubts about the origin of the good, it may, through the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party, request in writing that this authority take the pertinent steps, in order to be able to carry out verification visits to the facilities of an exporter, in order to examine the production processes, the facilities used in the production of the good, as well as other actions that contribute to the verification of its origin. Once the aforementioned competent authority receives the letter with the request,

Once the verification investigation is concluded, the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party will issue a written resolution to the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party. Said resolution will indicate whether or not the good or goods subject to verification qualify as originating and will include the conclusions of fact and the legal bases of the determination.

6. Once the resolution on the origin of a good has been issued, if the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party determined that the good qualifies as originating, provided that it has adopted some measure to guarantee the fiscal interest, it will refund the contributions received in excess or warranty will be released.

If the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party determines that the good does not qualify as originating, provided that it has adopted some measure to guarantee the fiscal interest, it will make the measure effective or, in the event that no measure has been adopted, it will deny the preferential tariff treatment.

In the event that the resolution issued in accordance with numeral 5 of this Article is unsatisfactory for the exporting Signatory Party, the Parties involved may hold consultations to reach a mutually satisfactory solution. If the results of these consultations are not satisfactory to the affected Party, it may resort to the dispute settlement regime provided for in the Agreement.

7. When the resolution of a verification carried out by the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party establishes that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, said The authority will notify the exporting Signatory Party so that it does not grant any new certificate to the exporter in question, until he proves to both the certifying entity and the customs authority of the importing Signatory Party that he complies with the provisions of this Annex.


confidentiality

Article 27.- Each Signatory Party will maintain, in accordance with the provisions of its legislation, the confidentiality of the information of such nature obtained in accordance with this Annex and will protect it from any disclosure that could harm the person who provides it.

The confidential information obtained in accordance with this Annex may only be made known to the authorities responsible for the administration and application of the regime of origin and customs or tax matters, when appropriate, as well as to the certifying entities, as appropriate.


sanctions

Article 28. - Each Signatory Party shall establish or maintain criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations related to this Annex, in accordance with its laws and regulations.


Improvement of the declaration and certification of origin

Article 29.- The Contracting Parties agree that the provisions of Article 20 of this Annex shall be in force for one year from the entry into force of the Agreement, which may be extended for one more year by the Automotive Committee. During this period, the Contracting Parties undertake to perfect the declaration and certification of origin through the working group established in Article 30 of this Annex.


Consultations, cooperation and modifications

Article 30.- The Automotive Committee establishes, within its scope, the Rules of Origin Working Group made up of representatives of each Signatory Party. The Working Group will make its decisions by consensus and will have the following functions:

a) comply with the provisions of Article 29 of this Annex,

b) cooperate in the application of this Annex;

c) at the request of any of the Signatory Parties, consider proposals for modifications to the origin requirements in accordance with the provisions of Articles 2 and 19 of this Annex; and

d) propose to the Automotive Committee the modifications and additions to this Annex.

APPENDIX TEXT:

APPENDIX I

ON TRADE IN THE AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR
BETWEEN ARGENTINA AND MEXICO

Area of ​​application

Article 1.- The provisions contained in this Appendix shall apply to the commercial exchange between Argentina and Mexico (hereinafter "the Parties") of the goods listed below (hereinafter "Automotive Products"), provided that it is of new goods included in the NALADISA positions, with their respective descriptions, which appear in Annex I (automotive products included in literals a) to c) of this Appendix.

a) automobiles;

b) trucks with a total weight with a maximum load less than or equal to 8,845 kg – eight thousand eight hundred and forty-five kilograms- (vehicles, chassis with engine and cabin and bodies for these vehicles);

c) agricultural tractors, harvesters, self-propelled agricultural machines and road machines.
 

Article 2.- At any time, the Parties may, by mutual agreement, include automotive products included in the coverage of the Agreement. Whenever one of the Parties makes a request of this nature, the other Party must examine it and respond within fifteen (15) days, in a justified manner.


reciprocal trade

Article 3.- The Parties will grant, reciprocally, a zero percent (0%) tariff on imports of automotive products included in subparagraphs a) to c) of Article 1 of this Appendix, that comply with the origin provisions of Annex II (Origin Regime) of the Agreement, under the following conditions:

For automotive products included in paragraphs a) and b) of Article 1 of this Appendix:

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

50,000*

50,000*

50,000

50,000

Free trade

*: made up of 45,000 units for established companies and 5,000 units for those not established in both Parties.

The annual periods will be counted from May 1 of each year, until April 30 of the following year. The quotas referred to in this literal will be assigned by the importing Party.

b) For the automotive products included in literal c) of Article 1 of this Appendix: free trade from the effective date of the Agreement.

Article 4.- From the entry into force of the Agreement, the Parties will apply a zero percent (0%) tariff to imports of the good classified in item 8407.34.00 of the NALADISA .

The Parties agree to continue negotiating the conditions of access and preferences for the rest of the auto parts, within a period of ninety (90) days from the signing of this Agreement.

Article 5 °.- As of January 1, 2004, no distinction will be made between installed and non-installed companies for the purposes of the distribution of quotas established in Article 3 of this Appendix.

Article 6 °.- The provisions of this Appendix apply exclusively to new automotive products.


technical regulations

Article 7 °.- The Parties may not adopt, maintain or apply standards and technical regulations that create unnecessary obstacles to trade.

Article 8.- The Parties shall observe the provisions of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the ALADI Framework Agreement for the Promotion of Trade by Overcoming Technical Barriers to Trade.

Article 9 °.- The Parties will exchange the regulatory measures in force within a period of six (6) months, and will report on new measures that are adopted.

Article 10.- The Parties will intensify cooperation between the competent bodies in the matter in order to promote mutual knowledge of their respective systems and regulations.

Whenever they deem it necessary, the Parties shall establish coordinated guidelines and criteria for the compatibility of standards and technical regulations, with a view to complying with the harmonization objective established in the first paragraph of Article 7 of the Agreement.


Administration

Article 11.- The Parties will ensure the application of the provisions of this Appendix and its improvement, informing the Automotive Committee of the mutually agreed modifications for the purposes of its formalization in this Appendix, in accordance with the provisions of Article 8 of the Agreement. .

Article 12.- The Parties will meet, at least once a year, with the objective of promoting the full incorporation of the universe of automotive products to the provisions of this Appendix and advancing in the liberalization, before 2006, of the bilateral trade of the sector. .


dispute resolution

Article 13.- Controversies that arise between the Parties in relation to the interpretation, application or breach of the provisions contained in this Agreement, will be submitted to the Dispute Resolution Regime established in the Thirteenth Additional Protocol to the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 6.

__________

ANNEX TO APPENDIX I

AUTOMOTIVE PRODUCTS
REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 1

I. VEHICLES

I.1 Automobiles.

Subparagraph a) of Article 1 of this Appendix includes the following automotive products:
APPENDIX II

ON TRADE IN THE AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR
BETWEEN BRAZIL AND MEXICO

Area of ​​application

Article 1.- The provisions contained in this Appendix shall apply to the commercial exchange between Brazil and Mexico (hereinafter "the Parties") of the goods listed below (hereinafter "Automotive Products"), provided that it is of new goods included in the NALADISA positions, with their respective descriptions, which appear in Annexes I (automotive products included in literals (a) to (c)) and II (automotive products included in literal (d)) of this Appendix.

a) automobiles;

b) vehicles with a total weight with a maximum load less than or equal to 8,845 kg – eight thousand eight hundred and forty-five kilograms- (light commercial vehicles, chassis with engine and cabin and bodies for these vehicles, trucks and chassis with engine and cabin);

c) agricultural tractors, combines, self-propelled agricultural machines and self-propelled road machines; and

d) auto parts for the automotive products listed in the previous paragraphs, including those intended for the spare parts market.
 

Article 2 °-. At any time, the Parties may, by mutual agreement, include automotive products included in the coverage of the Agreement, as well as include other auto parts in Annex II of this Appendix. Whenever one of the Parties makes a request of this nature, the other Party must examine it and respond within fifteen (15) days, in a justified manner.


reciprocal trade

Article 3.- The Parties will grant, reciprocally, a reduction in import taxes in an amount such that it is equivalent to applying the tariff that appears in the following tables, to the imports of automotive products included in literals a) to c) of Article 1 of this Appendix, that comply with the origin provisions of Annex II (Origin Regime) of the Agreement. This tariff reduction will be applicable to the following reciprocal annual import quotas:

Annual periods shall be counted from the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 4.- The Parties will apply, reciprocally, from the entry into force of the Agreement, tariff preference margins of one hundred percent (100%), without quantitative restrictions, to the auto parts listed in Annex II of this Appendix, provided they comply with the minimum regional content requirements established in Annex II (Regime of Origin) of the Agreement.

Article 5 °.- As of January 1, 2004, there will be no distinction between installed and non-installed companies for purposes of the distribution of the quantitative limits referred to in Article 3 of this Appendix.

Companies not installed in the territory of one of the Parties referred to in this Appendix must comply with the rules of the country in which they are not installed in terms of safety and consumer guarantees, therefore they must demonstrate to the competent body that have in the country in which they are not established with:

a) a network of authorized distributors;

b) service offices specialized in their products; and

c) supply of spare parts or spare parts, which allow such offices to ensure normal maintenance and coverage of claims and guarantees that are presented.

These conditions may be covered using the infrastructure and services of a company established in the territory of the country in which they were not established and in which the companies wish to market their products.

Article 6 °.- The provisions of this Appendix apply exclusively to new automotive products.

Article 7 °.- Imports from the Republic of Brazil of merchandise from the United Mexican States, included in Annexes I and II of this Appendix, will not be subject to the application of the Additional Freight for the Renewal of the Merchant Marine , established by Decree-Law No. 2,404 of December 23, 1987, in accordance with the provisions of Decree No. 97,945 of July 11, 1989, with its modifications.


technical regulations

Article 8 °.- The Parties may not adopt, maintain or apply standards and technical regulations that have the effect or purpose of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.

Article 9.- The Parties shall observe the provisions of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the ALADI Framework Agreement for the Promotion of Trade by Overcoming Technical Barriers to Trade.

Article 10.- The Parties will exchange the regulatory measures in force within a period of six (6) months and will report on new measures adopted.

Article 11.- The Parties will intensify cooperation between the competent bodies in the matter in order to promote mutual knowledge of their respective systems and regulations.

Whenever they deem it necessary, the Parties shall establish coordinated guidelines and criteria for the compatibility of standards and technical regulations, with a view to complying with the harmonization objective established in the first paragraph of Article 7 of the Agreement.


Administration

Article 12.- The Parties will ensure the proper application of the provisions of this Appendix and its improvement, informing the Automotive Committee of the mutually agreed modifications for the purpose of its formalization in this Appendix, in accordance with the provisions of Article 8. of the Agreement.

Article 13.- The Parties will meet, at least once a year, with the objective of promoting the full incorporation of the universe of automotive products to the provisions of this Appendix by 2006 at the latest.

The Parties will begin negotiations within ninety (90) days from the entry into force of this Agreement, with a view to the incorporation of the product "chassis with motor for bus" (NALADISA 8706.00.00), to the provisions of this Appendix.


dispute resolution

Article 14.- Controversies that arise between the Parties in relation to the interpretation, application or breach of the provisions contained in this Agreement, will be submitted to the dispute resolution procedure established in the First Additional Protocol to the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 53. (ACE 53), signed on July 3, 2002.

Article 15.- Until the First Additional Protocol to ACE 53 enters into force, the Parties shall be governed by the following:

a) The Parties shall endeavor to resolve disputes arising in connection with the Agreement through direct consultations and negotiations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution. Either Party may request in writing to the other the holding of consultations and direct negotiations. The request shall indicate the subject of the controversy and the reasons on which it is based.

b) The Parties will provide the information that allows the analysis of the matter and will give confidential treatment to the exchanged written or verbal information. They will carry out consultations and direct negotiations between them to reach a solution within thirty (30) days following the submission of the request, unless the Parties, by mutual agreement, extend that term. Consultations and direct negotiations will not prejudice the rights of any of the Parties in other forums.

c) If, after the term established in subparagraph b), a Party considers that the other Party adopts a measure incompatible with the Agreement and a mutually satisfactory solution has not been reached, the Party against whose asset the measure is applied may impose , prior written communication to the other Party, temporary compensatory measures, such as suspension of concessions or others that have substantially equivalent effects to those of the measure in question.

d) When a Party considers that its measure is not incompatible with this Agreement or that the compensatory measures adopted are excessive, it may request consultations in accordance with subparagraph a) of this Article.

__________

 

ANNEX I TO APPENDIX II

AUTOMOTIVE PRODUCTS REFERRED TO
IN LITERALS a), b) and c) OF ARTICLE 1

APPENDIX II

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE No. 1

The Parties may reciprocally exchange, under the provisions contained in this Appendix, without technical restrictions in the importing country, vehicles that comply with the EEC Technical Regulation (European standard) or the FMVSS (American standard). ) on the vehicle lighting system.

 

__________

 

APPENDIX II

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE No. 2

1. The Parties may reciprocally exchange, under the provisions contained in this Appendix, a quantity of up to 250 armored vehicles per year, included in the annual quotas established in subparagraphs a) and b) of Article 3 of this Appendix, during the transition period for free trade.

2. The materials of proven application in the armor of the referred vehicles will not be taken into consideration in the computation of compliance with the origin requirements of those vehicles.

 

__________

 

APPENDIX III

ON TRADE IN THE AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR
BETWEEN PARAGUAY AND MEXICO

(Reserved for future use)

 

__________

 


APPENDIX IV

ON TRADE IN THE AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR
BETWEEN URUGUAY AND MEXICO

Area of ​​application

 

Article 1.- The provisions contained in this Appendix shall apply to the commercial exchange between Uruguay and Mexico (hereinafter "the Parties"), of the goods listed below (hereinafter "Automotive Products), whenever it is of new goods, included in the NALADISA positions, with their respective descriptions, which appear in Annex I (automotive products included in literals (a) and (b)) of this Appendix.

a) Automobiles; and

b) Vehicles with a total weight with a maximum load less than or equal to 8,845 kg – eight thousand eight hundred and forty-five kilograms- (light commercial vehicles, chassis with engine and cabin and bodies for these vehicles, trucks and chassis with engine and cabin).

Article 2.- At any time, the Parties may, by mutual agreement, include automotive products included in the coverage of the Agreement. Whenever one of the Parties makes a request of this nature, the other Party must examine it and respond within fifteen (15) days, in a justified manner.


reciprocal trade

Article 3.- The Parties will grant, reciprocally, a zero percent (0%) tariff on imports of automotive products included in subparagraphs a) and b) of Article 1 of this Appendix, that comply with the origin provisions of Annex II (Origin Regime) of the Agreement under the following conditions:

Automotive products included in subparagraphs a) and b) of Article 1 of this Appendix will have the following annual quotas measured in units:

The annual periods will be counted from January 1 to December 31 of each year.

Article 4.- During 2005 , the Parties will negotiate the access conditions for 2006 onwards, taking into account the negotiations that Uruguay conducts within MERCOSUR for this purpose. If an agreement is not reached, the quotas established in article 3 of this Appendix will remain at the 2005 level until an agreement is reached.

The Parties agree to continue negotiating the conditions of access and preferences for auto parts, within a period of ninety (90) days from the signing of this Agreement.

Article 5 °.- For the purposes of this Appendix, the distribution of the quotas established in Article 3, will be made by the exporting Party and there will be no distinction in terms of access between companies installed and not installed in the territories of the Parties. They will not impose other restrictions that limit the use of said quotas.

Article 6 °.- The provisions of this Appendix apply exclusively to new automotive products.

Article 7 °.- The Parties will exchange the regulatory measures in force within a period of six (6) months and will report on new measures adopted.

Article 8 °.- The Parties will intensify cooperation between the competent bodies in the matter in order to promote mutual knowledge of their respective systems and regulations.

Whenever they deem it necessary, the Parties shall establish coordinated guidelines and criteria for the compatibility of standards and technical regulations, with a view to complying with the harmonization objective established in the first paragraph of Article 7 of the Agreement.


Administration

Article 9.- The Parties will ensure the application of the provisions of this Appendix and its improvement, informing the Automotive Committee of the mutually agreed modifications for the purposes of their formalization in this Appendix, in accordance with the provisions of Article 8. of the Agreement.

Article 10.- The Parties will meet, at least once a year, with the objective of promoting the full incorporation of the universe of automotive products to the provisions of this Appendix and advancing in the liberalization, before 2006, of the bilateral trade of the sector. .


dispute resolution

Article 11.- Controversies that arise between the Parties in relation to the interpretation, application or breach of the provisions contained in the Agreement, will be submitted to the Dispute Resolution Regime established in the Sixteenth Additional Protocol to the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 5 or the regime that replaces it.


_________

 

ANNEX TO APPENDIX IV

AUTOMOTIVE PRODUCTS
REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 1

I. VEHICLES

I.1 Automobiles.

Subparagraph a) of Article 1 of this Appendix includes the following automotive products: