Economic Complementation Agreement signed between the Governments of the
Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay,
States Parties to MERCOSUR, and the Government of the Republic of Peru (ACE No. 58 )

The Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, States Parties to MERCOSUR, and the Government of the Republic of Peru, hereinafter referred to as "Signatory Parties". For the purposes of this Agreement, the "Contracting Parties" are MERCOSUR and the Republic of Peru.

CONSIDERING

That it is necessary to strengthen the integration process in Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, through the conclusion of agreements open to the participation of the other member countries of ALADI, which allow the formation of a expanded economic space;

That this Agreement constitutes a fundamental stage for the integration process and the establishment of a free trade area between MERCOSUR and the Andean Community;

That it is convenient to offer economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade and investment, in order to promote, in this way, a more active participation of the same in the economic and commercial relations between the States Parties to MERCOSUR and the Republic From Peru;

That the formation of free trade areas in Latin America constitutes a relevant means to approximate the existing integration schemes, in addition to being a fundamental stage for the integration process;

That regional economic integration is one of the essential instruments for the countries of Latin America to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples;

That the validity of democratic institutions constitutes an essential element for the development of the regional integration process;

That the Marrakech Agreement, which establishes the World Trade Organization, constitutes the framework of rights and obligations to which trade policies and the commitments of this Agreement will be adjusted;

That the Parties promote free competition and reject the exercise of practices restrictive to it; and

That the integration process should cover aspects related to the development and full use of the physical infrastructure;

AGREE:

To enter into this Economic Complementation Agreement, under the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution No. 2 of the Council of Ministers of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI).
TITLE I
OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Article 1.- This Agreement has the following objectives:

- Establish the legal and institutional framework for cooperation and economic and physical integration that contributes to the creation of an expanded economic space that tends to facilitate the free circulation of goods and services and the full use of productive factors, under conditions of competition between the Signatory Parties;

- Form a free trade area between the Contracting Parties, through the expansion and diversification of commercial exchange and the elimination of tariff and non-tariff restrictions that affect reciprocal trade;

- Achieve harmonious development in the region, taking into account the asymmetries derived from the different levels of economic development of the Signatory Parties;

- Promote the development and use of the physical infrastructure, with special emphasis on the establishment of integration corridors, which allows the reduction of costs and the generation of competitive advantages in reciprocal regional trade and with third countries outside the region;

- Promote and promote investments among the economic agents of the Signatory Parties;

- Promote complementarity and economic, energy, scientific and technological cooperation;

- Promote consultations, when appropriate, in trade negotiations that are carried out with third countries and blocks, groups of extra-regional countries.

Article 2.- The Signatory Parties undertake, in accordance with their constitutional norms, that the provisions of this Agreement are fulfilled in their territories at the federal, state or provincial, departmental or municipal level and any other political division that the Parties have. Signatories.

TITLE II
TRADE RELEASE PROGRAM

Article 3.- The Signatory Parties will form a Free Trade Zone through a Trade Liberalization Program, which will be applied to products originating in and coming from the territories of the Signatory Parties . Said Program will consist of progressive and automatic reductions applicable to the taxes in force for imports from third countries in each Signatory Party at the time of the application of the preferences in accordance with the provisions of their legislation.

Notwithstanding what is established in the previous paragraph, for the products included in Annex I, the preferences will only be applied to the tariffs consigned in said Annex.

In the trade of goods between the Parties, the classification of merchandise will be governed by the Nomenclature of the Harmonized System of Designation and Coding of Merchandise, in its regional version NALADISA 1996.

In order to provide transparency to the application and scope of the preferences, the Signatory Parties will be notified as of the entry into force of this Agreement, the classifying resolutions issued or issued by their respective competent bodies based on the explanatory notes of the Harmonized System. In the event of divergences of interpretation, the Parties may resort to the World Customs Organization.

Article 4.- For the purposes of implementing the Trade Liberalization Program, the Signatory Parties agree among themselves on the specific schedules and their rules and disciplines, contained in Annex II.

Article 5.- The Signatory Parties may not adopt levies and charges of equivalent effect other than customs duties, which affect bilateral trade under this Agreement. Regarding those existing on the date of signing the Agreement, only the encumbrances and charges that appear in the Complementary Notes to this Agreement may be maintained, but without increasing their incidence. The aforementioned Notes appear in Annex III.

"Charges" shall be understood as customs duties and any other tax or surcharge of equivalent effect, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affects imports originating from the Signatory Parties. This concept does not include similar rates and surcharges when they are equivalent to the cost of the services rendered, nor antidumping or countervailing duties.

Article 6.- The importation by the Federative Republic of Brazil of the products included in this Agreement will not be subject to the application of the Additional Freight for the Renewal of the Merchant Marine, established by Decree Law No. 2,404 of December 23 , 1987 , in accordance with the provisions of Decree No. 97,945 of July 11, 1989, its amendments and supplements.

Imports by the Argentine Republic will not be subject to the application of the Statistical Tax, reintroduced by Decree No. 389 dated March 23, 1995, its amendments and supplements.

Article 7.- Without prejudice to the provisions of the Agreements of the World Trade Organization, the Signatory Parties will not apply new taxes to reciprocal trade to exports, nor will they increase the incidence of those in force, in a discriminatory manner between them as of the entry into force of this Agreement. The current liens appear in the Complementary Notes that appear in Annex IV.

Article 8.- The Signatory Parties will not maintain or introduce new non-tariff restrictions to their reciprocal trade.

"Restrictions" shall be understood as any measure that prevents or hinders the imports or exports of a Signatory Party, whether through quotas, licenses or other mechanisms, except as permitted by the WTO.

Article 9.- The Signatory Parties will keep each other informed through the competent national organizations about possible modifications of customs duties and will send a copy of them to the General Secretariat of ALADI for their information.

Article 10.- Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Signatory Party from adopting or applying measures in accordance with Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty or with Articles XX and XXI of the 1994 GATT.

Article 11.- The Release Program will not apply to used products.

TITLE III ORIGIN REGIME

Article 12.- The Signatory Parties will apply the Origin Regime contained in Annex V of this Agreement to imports made under the Trade Liberalization Program.

TITLE IV NATIONAL TREATMENT

Article 13.- In matters of national treatment, the Signatory Parties shall be governed by the provisions of Article III of the GATT of 1994 and Article 46 of the Montevideo Treaty of 1980.

TITLE V ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING MEASURES

Article 14.- In the application of antidumping duties or countervailing measures, the Signatory Parties will be governed by their respective legislation, which must be consistent with the Agreement Relative to the Application of Article VI of the GATT 1994, and the Agreement on Subsidies and WTO Countervailing Measures.

Likewise, the Signatory Parties will comply with the commitments assumed with respect to subsidies in the sphere of the WTO.

Article 15.- In the event that a Signatory Party applies antidumping duties or countervailing measures on imports from third countries, it will notify the other Signatory Party of them, for the evaluation and follow-up of imports into its market of the products. object of the measure, through the competent national bodies.

Article 16.- The Contracting or Signatory Parties must report any modification or repeal of their Laws, Regulations or provisions regarding antidumping duties or compensatory measures, within fifteen (15) days after the publication of the respective regulations in the regulatory body. official broadcast. Said communication will be made through the mechanism provided in the Title referring to the Administration of the Agreement.

TITLE VI
RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES OF FREE COMPETITION

Article 17.- The Signatory Parties will promote the actions that are necessary to have an adequate framework to identify and sanction eventual practices restrictive of free competition.

TITLE VII APPLICATION AND USE OF EXPORT INCENTIVES

Article 18.- The Signatory Parties condemn all unfair trade practices and undertake to eliminate measures that may cause distortions in bilateral trade.

The Signatory Parties agree not to apply to reciprocal agricultural trade, export subsidies and other measures and practices of equivalent effect that distort trade and production of agricultural origin. Likewise, the Signatory Parties agree not to apply export subsidies to reciprocal industrial trade, in accordance with the provisions of the WTO on the date of signing this Agreement.

Products that do not comply with the provisions of the previous paragraph will not benefit from the Liberation Program.

The Signatory Party that considers itself affected by the measure may request detailed information from the other Signatory Party on the subsidy allegedly applied. The consulted Signatory Party must submit detailed information within fifteen (15) days. Within thirty (30) days after receiving the information, a consultation meeting will be held between the Signatory Parties involved. After this consultation, if the existence of the subsidy is verified, the affected Signatory Party may suspend the benefits of the Trade Liberalization Program for the product or products benefited by the measure.

TITLE VIII SAFEGUARDS

Article 19.- The Signatory Parties adopt the Safeguards Regime contained in Annex VI.

TITLE IX DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 20.- The Signatory Parties adopt the Dispute Resolution Regime contained in Annex VII.

Until the corresponding ratification has been obtained, the Transitional Dispute Settlement Regime contained in Annex VIII will be applicable.

TITLE X CUSTOMS VALUATION

Article 21.- In their reciprocal trade, the Signatory Parties will be governed by the provisions of the Agreement regarding the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and by Resolution 226 of the Committee of Representatives of ALADI.

TITLE XI TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS

Article 22.- The Signatory Parties will be governed by what is established in the Regime of Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment, contained in Annex VIII.

TITLE XII SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 23.- The Signatory Parties undertake to prevent sanitary and phytosanitary measures from becoming unjustified obstacles to trade.

The Signatory Parties will be governed by the provisions of the Regime of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures contained in Annex IX.

TITLE XIII SPECIAL MEASURES

Article 24.- The Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of Peru adopt the Special Measures Regime contained in Annex X for the products listed in the Appendix of said Annex.

 

TITLE XIV PROMOTION AND EXCHANGE OF COMMERCIAL INFORMATION

Article 25.- The Signatory Parties will support themselves in the programs and tasks of diffusion and commercial promotion, facilitating the activity of official and private missions, the organization of fairs and exhibitions, the holding of informative seminars, market studies and other actions aimed at to the best use of the Commercial Liberalization Program and of the opportunities offered by the procedures agreed upon in commercial matters.

Article 26.- For the purposes provided in the previous Article, the Signatory Parties will schedule activities that facilitate reciprocal promotion by public and private entities in both Signatory Parties, for the products of their interest, included in the Trade Liberalization Program of this Agreement.

Article 27.- The Signatory Parties will exchange information about the regional and global offers and demands of their export products.

TITLE XV SERVICES

Article 28.- The Signatory Parties will promote the adoption of measures to facilitate the provision of services. Likewise, and within a period to be defined by the Administrative Commission, the Signatory Parties will establish the appropriate mechanisms for the liberalization, expansion and progressive diversification of trade in services in their territories, in accordance with the rights, obligations and commitments derived from the participation in the WTO / GATS, as well as in other regional forums.

TITLE XVI INVESTMENTS AND DOUBLE TAXATION

Article 29.- The Signatory Parties will encourage reciprocal investments, with the aim of intensifying bilateral trade and technology flows, in accordance with their respective national legislation.

Article 30.- The Signatory Parties will examine the possibility of signing new Agreements on Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments. The Bilateral Agreements signed hereby between the Signatory Parties will remain in full force.

Article 31.- The Signatory Parties will examine the possibility of signing new Agreements to avoid double taxation. The Bilateral Agreements signed herein will remain in full force.

TITLE XVII INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

Article 32.- The Signatory Parties will be governed by the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, contained in Annex 1 C) of the Marrakech Agreement, as well as by the rights and obligations contained in the Agreement. on Biological Diversity. They will also seek to develop standards and disciplines for the protection of traditional knowledge.

TITLE XVIII TRANSPORTATION

Article 33.- The Signatory Parties will promote the facilitation of land, river, lake, sea and air transportation services, in order to offer adequate conditions for the best circulation of goods and people, meeting the increased demand that will result from space. expanded economy.

Article 34.- The Administrative Commission will identify those Agreements entered into within the framework of MERCOSUR or its State Parties and the Andean Community or its Member Countries whose application by both Signatory Parties is of common interest.

Article 35.- The Signatory Parties may establish specific rules and commitments tending to facilitate land, river , lake, maritime and air transportation services that fall within the framework indicated in the rules of this Title and set the deadlines for their implementation.

TITLE XIX
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL COMPLEMENTATION

Article 36.- The Signatory Parties will seek to facilitate and support forms of collaboration and joint initiatives in the field of science and technology, as well as joint research projects.

For such purposes, they may agree on reciprocal technical assistance programs, aimed at raising the levels of productivity of the aforementioned sectors, obtaining the maximum use of available resources and stimulating the improvement of their competitive capacity, both in the regional and international markets. .

The aforementioned technical assistance will be developed among the competent national institutions, through survey programs of the same.

The Signatory Parties will promote the exchange of technology in the agricultural, industrial, technical standards, animal and plant health and other areas considered of mutual interest.

For these purposes, the Agreements signed in Scientific and Technological matters in force between the Signatory Parties of this Agreement will be taken into account.

TITLE XX
ADMINISTRATION AND EVALUATION OF THE AGREEMENT

Article 37.- The administration and evaluation of this Agreement will be in charge of an Administrative Commission made up of the MERCOSUR Common Market Group and the Vice Ministry of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism of the Republic of Peru.

The Administrative Commission will be constituted within sixty (60) calendar days from the effective date of this Agreement and at its first meeting it will establish its internal regulations.

1. The Delegations of both Contracting Parties will be chaired by the representative designated by each of them.

2. The Administrative Commission will meet in ordinary sessions at least once a year, in a place and on a date determined by mutual agreement, and in extraordinary sessions, when the Signatory Parties, after consultation, so agree.

The Administrative Commission will adopt its decisions by agreement of the Signatory Parties. For the purposes of this Article, it shall be understood that the Administrative Commission has adopted a decision by consensus on a matter submitted for its consideration if none of the Signatory Parties formally opposes the adoption of the decision, without prejudice to the provisions of the Regime. Dispute Resolution.

Article 38.- The Administrative Commission will have the following powers:

to. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement and its Additional Protocols and Annexes;

b. Determine in each case the modalities and deadlines in which the negotiations aimed at achieving the objectives of this Agreement will be carried out, being able to establish working groups for this purpose;

c. Periodically evaluate the progress of the Trade Liberation Program and the general operation of this Agreement;

d. Deepen the Agreement, including accelerating the Trade Liberalization Program for any product or group of products that, by mutual agreement, the Signatory Parties agree upon;

and. Contribute to the solution of controversies and carry out the planned negotiations in accordance with the provisions of Title IX;

F. Monitor the application of the commercial disciplines agreed between the Signatory Parties, such as origin regime, safeguard clauses, defense of competition and unfair trade practices;

g. Modify the Rules of Origin and establish or modify Specific Requirements;

h. Establish, when appropriate, procedures for the application of the commercial disciplines contemplated in this Agreement and propose to the Signatory Parties eventual modifications to said disciplines;

Yo. Establish adequate mechanisms to carry out the exchange of information related to the national legislation provided in Article 16 of this Agreement;

j. To convene the Signatory Parties to comply with the objectives and provisions established in Annex VII of this Agreement, regarding Standards and Technical Regulations and those established in Annex IX on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures;

k. Exchange information on the negotiations that the Signatory Parties carry out with third countries to formalize Agreements not provided for in the Montevideo Treaty of 1980;

he. Comply with the other tasks that are entrusted to the Administrative Commission by virtue of the provisions of this Agreement, its Additional Protocols and other Instruments signed in its scope, or by the Signatory Parties;

m. Provide in its internal regulations the establishment of bilateral consultations between the Signatory Parties on the matters contemplated in this Agreement;

no. Determine the reference values ​​for the fees of the arbitrators referred to in the Dispute Resolution Regime.

TITLE XXI GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 39.- As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Signatory Parties annul the negotiated tariff preferences and the regulatory aspects related to them, which appear in the Partial Scope Agreements for Economic Complementation No. 39 and No. 48 and the Partial Scope of Renegotiation Agreements No. 20 and No. 33 and their respective Protocols signed within the framework of the Montevideo Treaty of 1980. However, the provisions of said Agreements and their Protocols that are not incompatible with the this Agreement, when they refer to matters not included in it.

Article 40.- The Party that enters into an Agreement not provided for in the Montevideo Treaty of 1980, must:

a) Inform the other Parties, within a period of fifteen (15) days of signing the Agreement, accompanying the text thereof and its complementary instruments;

b) Announce, on the same occasion, the willingness to negotiate, within a period of ninety (90) days, concessions equivalent to those granted and received globally;

c) In the event that a mutually satisfactory solution is not reached in the negotiations provided for in subparagraph b), the Signatory Parties will negotiate equivalent compensation within a period of ninety (90) days;

d) If an agreement is not reached in the negotiations established in subparagraph c), the affected Signatory Party may resort to the procedure established in the Dispute Settlement Regime that is part of this Agreement;
TITLE XXII CONVERGENCE

Article 41.- On the occasion of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference, referred to in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the Signatory Parties will examine the possibility of proceeding to the progressive convergence of the treatments provided for in this Agreement.

TITLE XXIII ACCESSION

Article 42.- In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement is open to adhesion, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries.

The adhesion will be formalized, once its terms have been negotiated between the Signatory Parties and the adhering country, through the execution of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement, which will enter into force thirty (30) days after being deposited in the General Secretariat of ALADI. .

TITLE XXIV
VALIDITY

Article 43 . - This Agreement will enter into force from its protocolization in the General Secretariat of ALADI and will have an indefinite duration.

This Agreement must be incorporated by each of the Signatory Parties, in accordance with their national legislation.

As of its protocolization and until the procedure mentioned in the preceding paragraph is completed, the Signatory Parties of MERCOSUR and Peru may apply the Agreement bilaterally, to the extent that this is authorized in their respective internal legislation.

The Signatory Parties will notify the ALADI General Secretariat, which will notify the Signatory Parties, of the date of compliance with the requirement mentioned in the second paragraph of this Article, as well as, if applicable, the decision to apply this agreement. as provided in the previous paragraph.

TITLE XXV COMPLAINT

Article 44.- The Signatory Party that wishes to denounce this Agreement must communicate its decision to the Administrative Commission, sixty (60) days prior to the deposit of the respective instrument of denunciation in the General Secretariat of ALADI. The denunciation will take effect for the Signatory Parties, once a year has elapsed from the deposit of the instrument and from that moment the rights acquired and the obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will cease for the denouncing Signatory Party.

Notwithstanding the foregoing and before the 6 (six) months after the formalization of the complaint, the Signatory Parties may agree on the rights and obligations that will continue in force for the period agreed upon.

TITLE XXVI EVOLUTION

Article 45.- The Signatory Parties may agree to modifications to the Trade Liberalization Program, as well as adopt other specific regulations and disciplines.

TITLE XXVII AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS

Article 46.- Amendments or additions to this Agreement may only be made by consensus of the Signatory Parties. They will be submitted for approval by decision of the Administrative Commission and formalized by Protocol.

Other amendments or additions to this Agreement may be adopted by consensus between the Signatory Parties involved, will be valid exclusively between them, communicated to the Administrative Commission and formalized by Protocol.

TITLE XXVIII
EVALUATION CLAUSE

Article 47.- The Signatory Parties will convene a Conference for the Evaluation of the results and improvement of all the mechanisms and disciplines of this Agreement in August 2018, to guarantee the dynamic balance of the results for all the Parties and the deepening of the process. of integration between MERCOSUR and the Republic of Peru.

TITLE XXIX FREE ZONES

Article 48.- The signatory Parties agree to continue dealing with the issue of free zones and special customs areas.

TITLE XXX
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 49.- The General Secretariat of ALADI will be the depositary of this Agreement, of which it will send duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Parties.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Agreement in the city of Montevideo on the thirtieth day of November 2005, in the Spanish and Portuguese languages, both texts being equally valid.

For the Government of the Republic of Argentina:
Juan Carlos Olima

For the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil:
Bernardo Pericás Nieto

For the Government of the Republic of Paraguay:
Juan Carlos Ramírez Montalbetti

For the Government of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay:
Gonzalo Rodríguez Gigena

For the Government of the Republic of Peru:
William Belevan Mc Bride

ANNEX TEXT:

ANNEX III


TAXES AND CHARGES AFFECTING BILATERAL TRADE

(Supplementary Notes to Article 5)
 
 

ARGENTINIAN REPUBLIC

Complementary Notes to Article 5


1. Law No. 24,674 and its amendments and/or substitutes. Internal tax.

2. Law No. 23,966 and its amendments and/or substitutes. Tax on liquid fuels and natural gas

3. Decree No. 1,076/92 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Income tax advance tax.

4. Decree No. 1,684/93 and DGI General Resolution No. 3,431/91 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Tax in advance of value added tax.

5. MEyOSP Resolution No. 892/93 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. It exempts donations made in favor of the National, Provincial or Municipal State and other entities from the prohibition of importing used clothing.

6. Law No. 22,289 SENASA Resolution No. 240/95 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Prohibition to import Dieldrin and Hexachlorocyclohexane and lindane-based formulated veterinary products.

7. SENASA Provision No. 56 of 1/22/87 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Prohibition to import Diethylstilbestrol, its salts and esters and any veterinary product that contains it in its formulation.

8. SENASA Resolution No. 253/95 of 05/12/95 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Prohibition to import products that contain the active ingredient Chloramphenicol, in food or drug formulations intended for animals whose products and by-products are used for human consumption.

9. Decree No. 2.284/91 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior authorization from the IASCAV for the import, export and commercialization of vegetables, their products and by-products and derivatives, whether in their natural, semi-processed or totally or partially processed state, industrialized their specific inputs and biological products for internal consumption. Conditioned not for sale to the public.

10. ANA Resolution No. 2,012/93 91 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior authorization from SENASA for the import, export of products, by-products and derivatives of animal origin that do not constitute food products for human consumption, packaged for direct sale to the public. Import and export of active ingredients and formulations for application in veterinary medicine.
 

11. ANA Resolution No. 2,013/93 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior authorization from the IASCAV for the import, export of vegetables, their products, by-products and derivatives, which do not constitute food products for human consumption conditioned for direct sale to the public. Import and export of active principles and agrochemical and biological products used in the production and commercialization of agricultural products and plant therapeutic products, amendments and fertilizers.

12. Decree No. 6,704/91 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Ban on importing vegetables, their products and by-products, soils, fertilizers, containers and any material attacked by any pest or agent detrimental to agricultural production and potted plants with adhered soil, vegetable soils alone or mixtures.

13. Law No. 22,344 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importing and exporting live specimens, producers, sub-producers of wild fauna and flora. Exceptions.

14. Law No. 24.051/92 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importing waste, waste and toxic waste, waste or waste from recycling or material recovery of waste that is not accompanied by a certificate of sanitary and environmental safety issued prior to shipment, by the competent authority of the country of origin and/or provenance and ratified by the Secretary of Natural Resources and Human Environment of the Presidency of the Nation.

15. Law No. 21,932 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Regime for the automotive industry: import quotas.

16. MEYOSP Resolution No. 790/92 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importing used velocipedes and motorcycles. Exceptions.

17. MEYOSP Resolution No. 909/94 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importing some used goods included in chapters 84, 85, 86, 87, 88 and 90. Prior authorization for the importation of some used goods included in the mentioned chapters.

18. Decree-Law No. 22,477/56 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior authorization from the National Commission

of Atomic Energy for the importation of nuclear elements or materials.

19. Law No. 20,429 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior authorization from the National Registry of Weapons for the import and export of weapons. The destination of explosives requires prior authorization issued by the National Executive Power prior to the intervention of the DGFM.
 

20. Law No. 16,463 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Prior authorization and registration in the Registry of Pharmaceutical Products. Subject to compliance with the hygienic-sanitary and quality requirements established for products made in the country. Imports under the regime of dispatch to the market without authorization for use until the control of the Ministry of Health is carried out.

21. Decree Law No. 9,244/63 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Requirement of Commercial Quality Certification issued by the competent authority in the matter of the exporting country in which it is accredited to comply with the conditions of quality, conditioning and identification of containers, in force in the matter, and for the importation of fresh fruits and vegetables , desiccated, dehydrated and/or dried.

22. Law No. 20,466 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Requirement for Certification of fitness for use, registration and quality control by the technical services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Food for the importation of fertilizers and amendments.

23. Law No. 17,818 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Prior intervention of the national health authority for the import and export of narcotic and psychotropic drugs.

24. ANA Resolution No. 2,014/93; ANA Resolution No. 2,015/93; AFIP Resolution No. 30/97 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior intervention of the Secretary of Health of the Ministry of Health and Social Action, includes medicines, reagents and material for medical use.

25. Resolution No. 983/89 SENASA and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Registration requirement in a Registry of the Food and Pharmacological Products Approval Department of SENASA for industrialized products intended for animal nutrition that are imported.

26. Law No. 20,247 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Registration in the SAGPyA National Registry of Seed Commerce and Inspection for the importation of seeds.

27. MEYOSP Resolution No. 622/95 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Labeling and certification of origin requirements for the importation of garments, clothing and footwear.

28. ANMAT Provision No. 3,624/95 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition to import blood products, made from human placenta.

29. ANA Resolution No. 2,016/93 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior authorization requirement issued by the Secretary of Health of the Ministry of Health and Social Action for the importation of hygiene and toiletries, cosmetics and perfumes.
 

30. SAGYP Resolution No. 657/93 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition to enter the provinces of Jujuy, Salta, Tucumán and Catamarca of citrus plants and/or their parts (buds, fruits, etc.), regardless of their origin. Except propagation material that has the certificate of free transit issued by the Argentine Institute of Plant Health and Quality.

31. Decree No. 13,501/59 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importation of pollen from plants of the Rosaceae family.

32. Provision Subsec. Health No. 214/91 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Requirement for a Health Certificate for the importation of lettuce, cabbage, endive, parsley, strawberry, celery, chicory, radichi, watercress, strawberry, strawberry, spinach, fennel, broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage, kale, asparagus and basil.

33. Decree No. 2.121/90 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importation of the active principles and the formulations for agricultural application that contain them: butyl ester of 2,4,5 trichlorophenoxyacetic acid butyl acetate; ethylene dibromide; DDT (dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane); lead arsenate; arsenic; captafol-cis-n[(1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethyl)thio]4-cyclohexene-1,2-dicarboximide; endrin hexachloro epoxy octahydro-endro endodimethane naphthalene; aldrin 1,2,3,4,10,10-hexachloro-1,4,4a,5,8,8a-hexahydro-hexo-1,4-zorzalendo-5,8-dimethanenaphthalene; strychnine sulfate; ethyl chlorobenzilate-4,4'-dichlorobenzilate; 2,6 dinitro 4-octylphenyl dinocap crotonate; ethyl parathion and methyl parathion; chlordane; lindane; monocrotophos; dodeca chlorine, hcb; camphechlor; methoxychlor, mercury phenyl acetate; thallus and its compounds and pentachlorphenol and its salts.

34. SAGP Resolution No. 1,030/92 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Ban on importing heptachlor and formulations that contain it.

35. SENASA Resolution No. 208/03 of 05/05/2003 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Ban on importing unginned cotton.

36. Resolution MSAS No. 356/94 and its amendments and/or substitutions and complementary regulations. Ban on importing pentachlorophenol and its derivatives.

37. SC Resolution No. 1,994/99 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importing private wireless telephone equipment that operates with a frequency greater than or equal to 1880 MHz, but less than or equal to 1900 MHz.

38. Resolution MSyAS No. 978/99 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Ban on importing childcare and toys intended to be put in the mouth by children under three years of age, especially teethers and pacifiers made with di 2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), di isononyl phthalate (DINP), di n-octyl phthalate (DNOP or DOP), di isodecyl phthalate (DIDP), butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP), and dibutyl phthalate (DBP).
 

39. Decree 939/2004 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Bilateral Agreement between the ARGENTINE REPUBLIC and the FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL on the Common Automotive Policy, which establishes the requirements for regional and national content, trade with non-member countries of the SOUTH COMMON MARKET (MERCOSUR) and exchange monitoring bilateral trade between the two countries.

40. Resolution MS No. 845/00 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importation of amphiboles variety asbestos fibers and chrysotile variety asbestos fibers and products that contain them.

41. Joint MS and MTEFRH Resolution No. 437/01 and 209/01 and their amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importation of polychlorinated biphenyls and products or equipment that contain it.

42. Law No. 19,511/72 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prohibition of importation of products that are graduated in units outside of SIMELA, except merchandise intended for the development of cultural, scientific or technical activities that have a sworn declaration before the application authority and accepted by means of a certificate issued by it.

43. ANA Resolution No. 2,514/93 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Authorization for the importation of publications where the continental, insular and Antarctic territory of the Argentine Republic is fully or partially described or represented.

44. SICM Resolution No. 92/98 and its amendments and/or replacements and complementary regulations. Prior authorization for the importation of low voltage electrical equipment. Certification of compliance with security requirements.



___________

 
FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL
Complementary notes of article 5


1.- Additional Airport Fee (ATAERO)

Legal Basis: Law No. 7,920, of 12/12/89; Law No. 6,009, of December 26, 1973; Decree-Law No. 1,896, of December 17, 1981.

2.- SISCOMEX Utilization Rate

Legal Basis: Law No. 9,716, of 11/26/1998; SRF Normative Instruction No. 206, of 09/25/2002.


__________
 
REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY

Complementary Notes to Article 5




1.- Consular fees: Various specifics.
         Law 1844 of December 2001, Article 11, numeral V

2.- Customs Valuation Service 0.50% of the Customs value.
        Law 489/, article 20



__________

 
EASTERN REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY

Complementary Notes to Article 5



Exclusive import by a State Entity

The exclusive right of the State through the National Fuel, Alcohol and Portland Administration is assigned to:

to. The import and refining of crude oil and its derivatives throughout the territory of the Republic.

b. The import and export of liquid, semi-liquid and gaseous fuels, regardless of their state and composition, when the State refineries produce at least 50% of the naphtha consumed by the country (Law 8,764 of 15/X/31).


Internal taxes linked to imports

1. Internal Specific Tax (IMESI). Law 16,697 of 4/25/95, Article 3 authorizes the Executive Branch to establish payments on account upon importation.

- Article 2 of Title XI of the Ordered Text of 1991 authorizes the Executive Power to determine fictitious prices.

- Decree 96/90 of 2/21/90 and its amendments and/or replacements regulates – IMESI.

2. Value Added Tax (VAT). Law 16,697 of 4/25/95, Article 16 authorizes the Executive Power to establish on importation payments on account of VAT corresponding to the internal circulation of goods and to the prservice station.

3. Consular Fee: Law 17,296 of 02/21/2001, Article 585, by which the consular fee on imported goods is reinstated.

4. Service fee charged by the Banco de la República Oriental del Uruguay (BROU) for import operations. Law 16,492 of June 2, 1994.


__________

ANNEX V


ORIGIN REGIME
 

 
ORIGIN REGIME


This regime establishes the rules for the qualification, declaration, certification, control and verification of the origin of the merchandise applicable to trade in the expanded market, as well as for direct dispatch, sanctions and responsibilities.


Article 1.- Definitions

For the purposes of the application and interpretation of this Regime, it shall be understood as:

Originating merchandise: Any merchandise that meets the general criteria or specific requirements of origin, as appropriate, and/or the other provisions established in Section I of this Regime.

Harmonized System: The Nomenclature of the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System version 1996, which includes the chapters, headings, subheadings and the corresponding numerical codes, the notes of the sections, chapters and subheadings, as well as the Rules General for your interpretation.

Chapters, headings and subheadings: The chapters, headings and subheadings (code of two, four and six digits respectively) used in the nomenclature that constitutes the Harmonized System.

Classification: The classification of a merchandise in a specific position of the NALADISA 1996, unless it is specified that it is in the Harmonized System.

Materials: Raw materials, inputs, intermediate products, parts and pieces, components, sub-assemblies and by-products that are incorporated in obtaining other merchandise.

Fungible Materials: Materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical and cannot be differentiated by simple visual examination.

Merchandise: Marketable materials or products;

Identical merchandise: The one that is equal in all aspects to the imported merchandise, with regard to quality, brand, commercial prestige, origin, etc.

Similar merchandise: The one that without being equal in all aspects to the imported merchandise, presents characteristics close to it, in terms of origin, species and quality.

Preparation: Operation or process by which a good is obtained, including assembly or assembly operations.

Set or Assortment: Set of merchandise that is used for a specific purpose, presented in a single package for retail sale and that is classified in accordance with General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System.


Section I: Criteria for qualification of origin

Article 2.- General criteria

The following shall be considered as goods originating from a Signatory Party:

a) Goods wholly obtained in the territory of a Signatory Party in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of this Regime;

b) Goods made in the territory of a Signatory Party that incorporate non-originating materials from a Signatory Party in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of this Regime;

c) Goods that are made in the territory of a Signatory Party exclusively from materials originating from any of the Signatory Parties in accordance with Articles 3, 4 or 5 of this Regime.

Article 3.- Goods wholly obtained

The following shall be considered as goods wholly obtained in the territory of a Signatory Party:

a) Products of the mineral kingdom obtained from the soil and subsoil of the territory of a Signatory Party, including its sea and other territorial waters, continental shelf or exclusive economic zone;

b) Products of the vegetable kingdom collected or harvested in the territory of a Signatory Party, including its sea and other territorial waters, continental shelf or exclusive economic zone;

c) Live animals born, captured or raised in the territory of a Signatory Party;

d) Products obtained from live animals captured or raised in the territory of a Signatory Party;

e) Products obtained from hunting, gathering, fishing or aquaculture carried out in the territory of a Signatory Party, including its sea and other territorial waters, continental shelf or exclusive economic zone;

f) Sea products extracted outside its sea and other territorial, patrimonial waters and exclusive economic zones by ships owned by companies established in the territory of any Signatory Party, or chartered or leased, provided that such ships are registered and/or registered. in accordance with its internal legislation;

g) Those produced on board factory ships from the products identified in subparagraph e) obtained by ships owned by companies established in the territory of any Signatory Party, or chartered, or leased, provided that such ships are registered and/or registered in accordance with their internal legislation;

h) Waste and scrap resulting from the use, or consumption, or from industrial processes carried out in the territory of any Major Party.
nataria, that are usable only for recovery of raw materials;

i) Those made in the territory of a Signatory Party, exclusively from the products mentioned in subparagraphs a) to h).

Article 4.- Goods that incorporate non-originating materials

They will be considered original:

a) Goods that incorporate non-originating materials in their elaboration, provided that they result from a transformation process, other than assembly or assembly, carried out in the territory of a Signatory Party that gives them a new individuality. This new individuality implies that, in the Harmonized System, they are classified in a heading different from those in which each of the non-originating materials is classified;

b) Goods that do not comply with the provisions of the previous paragraph because the transformation process, other than assembly or assembly, does not confer a new individuality, when the CIF value of non-originating materials does not exceed 50% during the first three years, 45% during the fourth, fifth and sixth years and 40% from the seventh year of the Agreement, of the FOB export value of the merchandise;

c) Goods that result from an assembly or assembly process provided that original and non-originating materials are used in their preparation and the CIF value of the latter does not exceed 50% during the first three years, 45% during the fourth, fifth and sixth years and 40% from the seventh year of the validity of the Agreement, of the FOB export value of the merchandise;

In the case of the Mediterranean Signatory Parties, for purposes of determining the CIF value in the weighting of non-originating materials, the sea or river port located in the territory of any of the Signatory Parties will be considered as the port of destination.

The CIF and FOB terms referred to in literals b) and c) of this Article, may correspond to their equivalent value according to the means of transport used.

Article 5.- Specific Requirements of Origin

The goods that meet the specific origin requirements provided for the cases of use of non-originating materials, which are included in Appendices 1, 2 and 3, will be considered originating.

The specific requirements of origin will prevail over the general criteria except in the cases of goods that comply with subparagraphs a) and c) of Article 2 on General Criteria.

The Administrative Commission of the Agreement may agree on an exceptional and justified basis to establish new specific requirements of origin. Likewise, the specific requirements of origin may be modified and eliminated when there are reasons that warrant it.

Article 6.- Accumulation

For purposes of compliance with the rules of origin, materials originating in the territory of any of the Signatory Parties, incorporated into a specific merchandise in the territory of the exporting Signatory Party, will be considered as originating in the territory of the latter.

For purposes of the accumulation indicated in the previous paragraph, materials originating in Bolivia will also be considered originating from the exporting Signatory Party.

For purposes of cumulation of origin indicated in the previous paragraph, materials originating from Andean Community Member Countries will also be considered originating from the exporting Signatory Party. This condition will remain in force for a period of 1 (one) year, renewable for another year, after evaluation.

Notwithstanding what is stated in the previous paragraph, the Signatory Parties agree that goods originating from Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela, Member Countries of the Andean Community, will automatically be considered as originating from the exporting Signatory Party, at the moment in which the MERCOSUR signs Free Trade Agreements with each of said countries.

Article 7.- Processes or operations that do not confer origin

For the purposes of applying article 4, those goods that incorporate non-originating materials in their preparation, do not confer origin, by themselves or combined with each other, the processes or operations destined to:

i) Preserve the goods in good condition for the purpose of transport or storage;

ii) Facilitate shipment or transportation;

iii) Pack or condition the goods for sale or consumption.

Likewise, the following manufacturing processes or operations, among others, will be considered insufficient to confer the character of originating goods:

a) Ventilation, laying, drying, aeration, refrigeration, freezing, immersion in salty or sulphurous water or other aqueous solutions, addition of substances, salting, separation or extraction of deteriorated parts and similar operations;

b) Dusting, washing, shaking, peeling, husking, shelling, maceration, drying, thinning, classification.
ion, selection, fractionation, screening, sieving, filtering, painting, cutting, trimming and similar operations;

c) Dilution in water or other solvents that do not alter the characteristics of the merchandise;

d) Cleaning, including removal of rust, grease and paint or other coatings; and similar operations;

e) Union, assembly, division or disassembly of parts or packages, and similar operations;

f) Packaging, packaging, unpackaging, repackaging, dosing, and similar operations;

g) The placement of brands, labels and other similar distinctive signs on the merchandise or its packaging, and similar operations;

h) Mixtures of merchandise as long as the characteristics of the merchandise obtained are not essentially different from the characteristics of the merchandise that have been mixed;

i) The sacrifice of animals;

j) Application of oil, protective coatings and similar operations;

k) The accumulation of two or more of these operations.

Article 8.- Particular criteria

The following particular criteria will be applied when applicable:

a) Sets or assortments: A set or assortment of merchandise will originate from a Signatory Party, provided that each of the merchandise contained in it, qualifies as originating according to this Regime. However, the set or assortment containing non-originating merchandise will be considered originating from a Signatory Party provided that the CIF value of such merchandise does not exceed 5% of the FOB value of the set or assortment;

b) Accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or informative material: The accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or informative material that accompany a merchandise, and that classify together with it, will be considered an integral part of the same and will not be taken into account. account to determine the origin of that merchandise, provided that its nature and quantity are customary and are not invoiced separately;

c) Containers, packages, cases, packaging, wrappers and the like:

The origin of the containers, packages, cases, packaging, wrappers and the like, will be considered the same as the merchandise contained therein, as long as they are classified with said merchandise in the same NALADISA item and are presented together with it.

In the event that the containers, packages, cases, packaging, wrappers and the like are classified or submitted to customs clearance separately, their origin will be determined regardless of the origin of the merchandise contained in them.

However, when the merchandise is subject to a specific regional content value requirement, the value of non-originating containers, packages, cases, packaging, wrappers and the like for retail sale will be taken into account to calculate said value. ;

d) Containers and packaging materials for transportation: Containers and packaging materials used exclusively for the transportation of merchandise will not be taken into account in determining its origin;

e) Neutral elements: To determine the origin of a merchandise, the origin of the fuel and energy, the installations and equipment, as well as the machines, tools, molds and dies used to obtain said merchandise or the materials will not be taken into account. used that are not physically incorporated into it;

f) Fungible Materials: For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined by one of the methods of handling inventories established in the current national legislation of each Signatory Party.


Section II: Declaration and certification of origin

Article 9.- Certification of origin

The Certificate of Origin is the document that certifies that the goods comply with the provisions on the origin of this Regime. Said certificate covers a single import operation of one or several goods and its original version must accompany the rest of the documentation, at the time of processing the customs clearance.

The issuance and control of the issuance of Certificates of Origin will be under the responsibility of the competent authorities in each Signatory Party. The Certificates of Origin will be issued by said authorities directly or by entities to which said responsibility has been delegated.

The Signatory Parties will keep in force the current official distributions and the public or private organizations authorized to issue certificates of origin, with the registration and signatures of the officials accredited for this purpose, duly registered with the ALADI General Secretariat.

The modifications that operate in said records will be governed by the provisions of Resolution 252 of the Committee of Representatives of ALADI.

The certificate of origin must be issued in the format established in Resolution 252 of the ALADI Representatives Committee and must be numbered correlatively. It will be issued based on an affidavit from the producer and/or exporter of the merchandise, as appropriate, and the respective commercial invoice of a commercial company domiciled in the country of origin. In the area related to "Observations" of the certificate of origin, the date of receipt of the affidavit referred to in Article 11 must be entered.

Article 10.- Issuance and validity of the Certificate of Origin

The certificate of origin must be issued no later than 5 (five) business days following your request and will be valid for 180 (one hundred eighty) calendar days, counted from the date of issue.

In the event that the merchandise is interned, admitted or temporarily stored under customs control in the importing Signatory Party, the validity period of the certificate of origin indicated in the previous paragraph will be suspended for the time that the customs administration has authorized said operations or regimes.

The certificate of origin must bear the name and autograph signature of the official authorized by the Signatory Parties for this purpose, as well as the seal of the certifying entity.

Certificates of origin may not be issued prior to the date of the commercial invoice, but rather on the same date or within the following 60 (sixty) calendar days.

The description of the merchandise in the certificate of origin must agree with the description of the NALADISA item in which it is classified and with the one that appears on the commercial invoice.

In all cases, the number of the commercial invoice must be entered in the space reserved for it in the Certificate of Origin.

The certificate of origin must have all its fields duly completed or filled out.

The Certificate of Origin must not present scratches, erasures or amendments.

Article 11.- Affidavit of origin

The affidavit must contain at least the following information:

a) Name, denomination or trade name of the producer and/or exporter, as appropriate, and of its legal representative;

b) Legal or registered address for tax purposes, as the case may be;

c) Description of the merchandise to be exported and its tariff classification;

d) FOB value of the merchandise to be exported;

e) Information related to the merchandise indicating:

i) materials originating from the exporting Signatory Party;

ii) materials originating from other Signatory Parties, indicating:
-	origin;
-	tariff classification;
- CIF value, in US dollars;
- percentage that they represent in the FOB value of the merchandise;

iii) non-originating materials of the Signatory Parties, indicating:
-	origin and provenance;
-	tariff classification;
- CIF value, in US dollars;
- percentage that they represent in the FOB value of the merchandise;

f) A description of the entire production process.

Said affidavit must be signed by the producer when he is the exporter. In the event that the producer is not the exporter, the affidavit must be signed by both.

However, in the case of handicrafts and merchandise included in Article 2, literal a), of this Regime, which are obtained by hand by a number of producers, the affidavit may only be signed by the exporter.

Article 12.- Validity of the sworn declaration of origin

The affidavit will be valid for 2 (two) years from the date of receipt by the certifying authorities, unless any of the following data is modified before said period:

a) Origin, quantity, weight, value and NALADISA item of the materials used in the manufacture of the merchandise;

b) Material that confers the essential or main character of the goods;

c) Process of transformation or elaboration used;

d) Proportion of the CIF value of non-originating materials in relation to the FOB value of the merchandise;

e) Name or company name of the producer or exporter, its legal representative or company address.

Article 13.- Billing in a country other than the country of origin

When the originating merchandise is invoiced by an operator of a Party, Signatory or not to the Agreement, other than the one of origin, in the area related to "Observations" of the certificate of origin, it must be indicated that the merchandise will be invoiced by that operator, indicating the name, company name or business name and address of the person who ultimately invoices the operation to the destination, as well as the number and date of the corresponding commercial invoice.

In the situation referred to in the preceding paragraph and, exceptionally, if at the time of issuing the certificate of origin the number of the commercial invoice issued by the operator of the Party, Signatory or not to the Agreement, other than the one not known, is not known. e origin, the importer will present to the corresponding customs administration an affidavit that justifies the fact, in which he must indicate the number and date of the commercial invoice and the certificate of origin that cover the importation.


Section III: Direct dispatch

Article 14.- Direct dispatch

For an originating good to benefit from preferential treatment, it must be shipped directly from the exporting Signatory Party to the importing Signatory Party. For this purpose, direct dispatch is considered:

a) Goods transported only through the territory of one or more Signatory Parties to the Agreement;

b) Goods in transit, through one or more Parties that are not Signatories to the Agreement, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the supervision of the customs authority of the transited country, provided that:

i) The transit was justified by geographical reasons or considerations related to transportation requirements;

ii) They were not intended for trade, use or employment in the country of transit; and

iii) They do not undergo, during their transport or storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or handling, to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

For the purposes of the provisions of subparagraph b) above, in the event of transshipment or temporary storage carried out in a non-Signatory Party to the Agreement, the customs authorities may additionally require a customs control document from said non-Signatory Party, which certifies that the merchandise remained under customs supervision.


Section IV: Control and verification

Article 15.- Customs authorities

The customs authorities of the importing Signatory Party may not prevent import procedures and the dispatch or release of the merchandise when:

a) The Certificate of Origin presents formal errors;

b) There are discrepancies in the tariff classification of the goods;

c) There are doubts about the direct dispatch of the goods;

d) There are doubts about the qualification of the origin of the goods; either

c) There are doubts about the authenticity of the certification.

In such situations, the customs authorities, prior to the dispatch or release of the merchandise, may demand the cancellation of the corresponding liens or the constitution of a guarantee for the equivalent value thereof, in accordance with the national legislation of the importing Signatory Party. .

However, incomplete certificates of origin will not be accepted, in a format other than that established in this Regime, those not issued by authorized officials or when the customs authority makes observations other than those indicated in paragraphs a) to e) above. In such cases, the importer must proceed to pay the taxes corresponding to Parties not Signatory to the Agreement.

Article 16.- Rectification of certificates of origin

In the event of detecting formal errors in the certificate of origin, that is, those that do not affect the classification of origin of the merchandise, the customs authority will keep the original of the certificate of origin and notify the importer indicating the errors presented in the certificate of origin. origin that make it unacceptable. The importer must submit the corresponding rectification within a maximum period of 30 (thirty) calendar days from the date of receipt of the notification. Said rectification must be made by means of a note, in an original copy, which must contain the amendment, the date and number of the certificate of origin, and be signed by a person authorized to issue certificates of origin from the certifying entity. If the importer does not comply with the presentation of the corresponding rectification within the stipulated period, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party may ignore the originating character of the merchandise and proceed to execute the guarantees presented or collect the value of the import duties. , as appropriate.

In case of discrepancies in the tariff classification of the certificate of origin that do not modify the corresponding tariff treatment, the notification from the customs authority indicated in the previous paragraph must be accompanied by a technical report or tariff classification resolution issued by said authority. The customs authority will not require the importer to present guarantees or pay the taxes in the event that the origin criteria stated in the certificate of origin does not include a change in tariff classification. In the event that the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party refuses to rectify the tariff classification, it will proceed according to the consultation process of this Section.

Article 17.- Doubts regarding direct issuance

In the case of doubts about compliance with the direct issuance established in this Regime, the customs authority may It may require the importer the documentation it deems pertinent to clarify this situation. In the event that the requirement is unsatisfactory, said authorities may ignore the preferential tariff treatment and proceed to collect the rights or enforce the guarantees as appropriate, within the period that said authority deems appropriate.

Article 18.- Consultation process

In the case of doubts about the classification of the origin of the goods or the authenticity of the certification, when there are discrepancies in the tariff classification that alter the preferential treatment or when it corresponds to the situations indicated in the last paragraph of Article 16, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party, ex officio or at the request of its customs authorities, may request the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party, information that allows it to clarify said doubts or discrepancies. Such consultations will be carried out specifying in a clear and concrete way the reasons that support them.

The competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party must provide the information requested within a maximum period of 25 (twenty-five) calendar days, counted from the date of receipt of the request.

If, as a result of this process, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party recognizes the originating character of the merchandise or the authenticity of the certification, the guarantees presented or the value of the corresponding encumbrances will be returned.

If the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party does not respond to the request for information within the stipulated period, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party may ignore the originating nature of the merchandise and proceed to execute the guarantees presented or collect the value import duties, as appropriate.

When the situation is not clarified, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party may initiate an investigation process within 15 (fifteen) calendar days of receiving the information. Otherwise, the guarantees presented or the value of the corresponding encumbrances will be returned.




Article 19.- Investigation process

The start of the investigation process will be notified to the importer and the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party, requiring the latter to provide additional information that allows it to clarify the situation, which must be delivered within a maximum period of 25 (twenty-five) calendar days. from the date of receipt of said notification. However, during the investigation process, the competent authority of the Signatory Parties, exporting or importing, may request or deliver new information or documentation that it considers of interest to clarify the case under investigation.

At the same time, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party may request the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party to authorize visits to the producer's facilities in order to examine the facilities and manufacturing processes of the merchandise in question, as well as as well as the information and documentation that justifies the originating character of the merchandise.

The competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party will forward to the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party, its pronouncement on the request for authorization to carry out the visit within a maximum period of 10 (ten) calendar days from the date of receipt of the the request for it. When the visit is authorized, the Signatory Parties, exporter and importer, will agree that it be carried out on a date within 20 (twenty) calendar days, following the date of receipt of the authorization.

For duly justified reasons, the Signatory Parties, exporting and importing, by mutual agreement, may postpone the authorized visit for a period not exceeding 15 (fifteen) calendar days.

The Signatory Parties involved may carry out other procedures by mutual agreement in order to resolve the specific case under investigation.

If the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party does not respond to the request for information within the stipulated period or the visit has not been authorized, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party will conclude the investigation, ignoring the originating nature of the the merchandise and proceed to execute the guarantees presented or to collect the value of the import liens, as appropriate.

The investigation process, including the possible realization of visits, may not exceed 80 (eighty) calendar days from the start thereof. If the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party has not ruled within this period, it will proceed to rrecognize the originating character of the merchandise, returning the guarantees presented or the value of the corresponding encumbrances.

If, as a result of this process, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party recognizes the originating character of the merchandise, it will conclude the investigation and proceed to return the guarantees presented or the value of the corresponding liens.

If, as a result of this process, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party concludes with the disqualification of the criterion of origin invoked in the certificate of origin of the merchandise, the guarantees presented will be executed or the value of the import duties will be collected according to corresponds, and the applicable sanctions will be applied, in accordance with this Regime and the national legislation of the exporting and importing Signatory Party.

If, as a result of this process, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party does not know the originating character of the merchandise or the authenticity of the certification, it will proceed to execute the guarantees presented or collect the value of the import taxes, as appropriate, and The applicable sanctions will be applied, in accordance with this Regime and the national legislation of the exporting and importing Signatory Party. In this case, the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party may deny the preferential tariff treatment of new imports of identical or similar merchandise from the same producer and/or exporter, until it is demonstrated that the production conditions were modified in such a way that the with the provisions of this Regime.

The conclusion of the investigation process will be notified to the importer and the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party, as well as the measure adopted in relation to the origin of the merchandise, stating the reasons that determined such decision.

Within 60 (sixty) calendar days from the date of receipt of the notification provided for in the preceding paragraph, in the event that the measure is considered inadequate, the exporting Signatory Party may resort to the Dispute Settlement procedure provided for in the Agreement.

Article 20.- Carrying out visits

The competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party will accompany the visit made by the competent authorities of the importing Signatory Party, which may include the participation of specialists who will act as observers. The specialists must be previously identified, they must be neutral and they must not have interests in the investigation. The exporting Signatory Party may deny the participation of such specialists when they represent the interests of the companies or entities involved in the investigation.

Once the visit is over, the participants will sign a Minute, in which it is stated that the visit took place in accordance with the conditions established in this Regime. The following information must also be included in the Minutes: date and place of the visit; identification of the certificates of origin that started the investigation process, identification of the merchandise specifically questioned, identification of the participants with an indication of the body or entity they represent and an account of the visit made.

Article 21.- Investigation processes on behalf of a third Signatory Party

A Signatory Party may request another Signatory Party to initiate an investigation process in order to determine the origin of goods imported by the latter from other Signatory Parties, when it has well-founded grounds to suspect that it is suffering competition from imported products with preferential treatment that do not comply with the Origin Regime of this Agreement.

For this purpose, the competent authority of the Signatory Party that requests the initiation of the investigation process will provide the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party with the information and documentation on which it supports its doubts within a period of 30 (thirty) calendar days. from the date of your request. Once this information and documentation has been received, the importing Signatory Party may initiate the procedures provided for in this Regime, informing the Signatory Party that requested the initiation of the investigation process of such circumstance.

Article 22.- Preventive measures

The customs authorities of the importing Signatory Party may adopt the preventive measures they deem necessary to prevent imports of goods identical or similar to those that are in consultation or investigation processes or that have been determined to be benefiting from preferential tariff treatment. do not qualify as originating as a result of the procedures established os in the present Regime.

Article 23.- Verification after dispatch or release of the goods

The customs authorities of the importing Signatory Party may verify compliance with the provisions of this Regime up to 4 (four) years after the issuance of the certificate of origin that covers the importation of merchandise.

In these cases, the control and verification procedures established in this Section will be followed.


Section V: Sanctions

Article 24.- To the producer or exporter

As a result of the control and verification processes established in Section IV of this Regime, the exporting Signatory Party will apply sanctions to the producer or exporter, as appropriate, in the following cases:

a) When you have omitted to notify alterations to the sworn declaration of origin in accordance with the provisions of Article 12 or have not responded to the requirements set forth in this Regime or have done so outside the established deadlines or have not provided the necessary information related to the production process;

b) When visits to the manufacturing site have been unjustifiably refused or when visits have been prevented from examining the facilities, processes, information or documentation related to the manufacture of the merchandise;

c) When the declaration of origin that has supported the issuance of the certificate of origin is not authentic or contains incorrect information or when the responsibility of the producer and/or exporter is verified in cases of inauthentic, adulterated or falsified certificates of origin.

In the event of the situations provided for in subparagraphs a) and b), the competent authorities of the Exporting Signatory Party will prohibit the issuance of new certificates of origin to the producer and/or exporter for a period of up to 18 (eighteen) months.

In case of recidivism, the prohibition will be for twice the term of the first sanction. The prohibition will be definitive when it gives rise to a third sanction.

In the case provided for in literal c), the prohibition will be for a period of up to 24 (twenty-four) months. In case of recidivism, the ban will be final.

Without prejudice to the situations provided for in the preceding paragraphs, the competent authorities will penalize any violation of the provisions of this Regime.

Notwithstanding the aforementioned sanctions, the competent authorities of the exporting Signatory Party may apply the measures and sanctions in accordance with their national legislation.

Article 25.- To certifying entities

As a result of the Control and Verification processes established in Section IV of this Regime, the competent authority will sanction the certifying entities in the following cases:

a) When they have not responded to the requirements requested by the competent authorities within the established deadlines;

b) When they have certified the origin with information other than the declaration of origin;

c) When they have certified the origin with a NALADISA item other than that determined by the competent authorities, provided that such determination has been known to them;

d) When they have certified with a date prior to that of the commercial invoice or the declaration of origin;

e) When at the date of the certification, the signature of the official has not been in handwriting or when it is different from those officially communicated;

f) When on the date of the certification, the seal of the entity is not officially communicated or the official who signed the certificate is not authorized;

g) When the falsity of the data consigned in the certificate of origin or in the declaration foreseen for its issuance is verified.

The sanction will be the suspension for the issuance of new certifications for a period of up to 12 (twelve) months. In case of recidivism, the suspension will be twice the term of the first sanction. The suspension will be definitive in case of a third sanction.

In the case of the situation provided for in literal g), the suspension will be for a period of up to 18 (eighteen) months. In case of recidivism, the suspension will be final.

Without prejudice to the situations provided for in the preceding paragraphs, the competent authorities will penalize any violation of the provisions of this Regime.

Notwithstanding the aforementioned sanctions, the competent authorities of the Signatory Parties may apply the measures and sanctions in accordance with their national legislation.

The certifying entities will be jointly responsible with the producer and/or exporter, regarding the authenticity of the data contained in the certificate of origin and the affidavit presented for its issuance.

This responsibility cannot be imputed when it is shown that the certifying entity issued a certificate of origin on the basis of false information provided by the producer and/or exporter and this was outside of the control practices under their responsibility.

Article 26.- To importers

When it is verified that the importer is responsible in cases of inauthentic, adulterated or falsified certificates of origin, or when he has misused them, he will be suspended for a period of up to 1 (one) year to benefit from preferential tariff treatment. provided for in the Agreement. In case of recidivism, the suspension will be final.

Notwithstanding the situations provided for in the preceding paragraph, the competent authorities will penalize any violation of the provisions of this Regime.

Notwithstanding the aforementioned sanctions, the competent authorities of the importing Signatory Party may apply the measures and sanctions in accordance with their national legislation.


Section VI: Functions and obligations

Article 27.- Of the competent authorities

The competent authorities of the Signatory Parties will have the following functions and obligations:

a) Issue the instructions and dictate the provisions that are necessary so that the certification of the origin of the goods conforms to the provisions of this Regime;

b) Periodically supervise the entities to which it has authorized the granting of certifications;

c) Carry out the necessary actions to facilitate the development of the control and verification processes established in Section IV of this Regime;

d) Apply the sanctions established in Section V of this Regime.

Article 28.- Of the certifying entities

The certifying entities will have the following functions and obligations:

a) Verify the veracity of the affidavits of origin that are submitted by the producer and/or exporter;

b) Respond to the requirements that are formulated by its competent authority for compliance with the provisions of this Regime;

c) Correlatively number the affidavits and certificates of origin;

d) Keep in its files for a period of 4 (four) years from the date of issuance of the certificates of origin, copies of the affidavits and certificates of origin, as well as the additional documents that served as the basis for its issuance;

e) Maintain a permanent record of all certificates of origin issued, which must contain at least the certificate number, the name of the applicant and the date of issue.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs, the certifying entities shall comply with the instructions and provisions issued by their competent authorities.

Article 29.- Of the producers and exporters

The exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate or affidavit of origin and has reason to believe that the certificate or affidavit of origin contains formal errors, shall notify the certifying entity and the importer, without delay and in writing, of any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate or affidavit of origin. In these cases, the exporter or producer may not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certification or affidavit of origin, provided that the case is not subject to an origin control and verification procedure established in Section IV of this Regime or to any instance of review or challenge in the territory of any of the Signatory Parties.

The certifying entity and the importer will notify the competent authorities of the Signatory Parties of the fact indicated in the preceding paragraph within a period not exceeding 5 (five) business days from the date of notification by the exporter or producer.

The producer and/or exporter, as appropriate, must notify the modifications that affect the validity of the affidavit of origin as provided in Article 12 of this Regime.

Exporters and producers will keep in their files, copies and supporting documents of the information contained in the certificates of origin issued and in the affidavits, for a period of 4 (four) years from the date of issue, including documents related to:

i) The purchase of merchandise that is exported from its territory;

ii) The purchase of all materials, including indirect materials, used for the production of the merchandise that is exported from its territory;

iii) The manufacturing process of the merchandise in the form in which it is exported from its territory;

iv) Other documents and records related to the origin of the merchandise.

The exporter or producer who has completed and signed an affidavit of origin, must respond to the request made by their competent authorities of the Signatory Parties, as well as deliver a copy of the affidavit. a of origin and the additional documents that support it when they are required by them within a period not exceeding 10 (ten) calendar days from the date of receipt of the request.

When the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or the producer of the merchandise, the exporter or producer of the goods may request the records and documents from the producer or supplier of the materials so that they may be delivered through him to the competent authority of the Exporting Signatory Party.

The producer must respond to the request for visits to the places of production of the merchandise, made by the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party within a period of no more than 10 (ten) calendar days from receipt of the request, and will provide the facilities so that said authorities carry out their verification work on the agreed date of visit.

Article 30.- Importers

The importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for merchandise that complies with the provisions of this Regime must:

a) Declare in the customs import document provided for in its legislation that the merchandise qualifies as originating, based on a duly issued Certificate of Origin;

b) Provide the original of the Certificate of Origin when requested by his customs authority; and

c) Provide the documentation that accredits the direct expedition referred to in Article 15 of this Regime, when requested by the customs authority thereof.

Once the customs import document has been accepted by the customs authorities, the Certificate of Origin may not be submitted after this time for the purpose of requesting preferential tariff treatment, unless a period of time is granted in accordance with the national legislation of the importing Signatory Party. for the presentation of the certificate of origin.

The importer may submit a correction to the import document ex officio and pay the corresponding customs duties, when he has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which his import declaration is based contains incorrect information, exempting himself from the application of sanctions for incorrect declaration of origin, provided that the merchandise is not subject to an origin control and verification procedure established in Section IV of this Regime or to any instance of review or challenge in the territory of any of the Signatory Parties.

Nationalized merchandise may be submitted to the control and verification process of Section IV of this Regime, not exempting the importer from the actions adopted as a result of said process.

The importer requesting preferential tariff treatment must keep a copy of the certificate of origin, commercial invoice, transport document and any additional documentation that supports said request for the term established by the customs legislation of the importing Signatory Party.


General disposition

First Provision

The competent authorities of the Signatory Parties will maintain, in accordance with the provisions of their national legislation, the confidentiality of the information of such nature obtained under this Regime and will protect it from any disclosure. Such information will be used exclusively by the competent authority of the importing Signatory Party to clarify the case in question.


Second Provision

The Signatory Parties will facilitate mutual assistance and cooperation and the exchange of information, in order to expedite the procedures established in this Regime. Likewise, they will train the different agents that intervene in the process of declaration, certification, control and verification of origin with a view to acquiring technical skills and the implementation of technologies.


__________

ANNEX VI


SAFEGUARDS REGIME
 
 
SAFEGUARDS REGIME


TITLE I

SCOPE OF APPLICATION OF THE MEASURES


Article 1.- The Parties may apply, exceptionally and under the conditions established in this Annex, safeguard measures to imports of products that benefit from the Trade Liberation Program established in this Agreement.

When MERCOSUR applies a safeguard measure, it may do so:

a) As a Contracting Party, in which case, the requirements for determining the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage will be based on the existing conditions in each and every one of the MERCOSUR States Parties;

b) On behalf of one of its State Parties, in which case, the requirements for determining the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage will be based on the existing conditions in the MERCOSUR State Party and the measure will be limited to the aforementioned State Party.

When Peru applies a measure, it may do so only on exports from the State or States Parties to MERCOSUR where the product subject to the aforementioned measure originates.

Article 2.- The provisions of this Annex shall not prevent the Parties from applying, when appropriate, the measures set forth in Article XIX of the GATT 1994, in accordance with the interpretation given by the Agreement on Safeguards of the World Trade Organization.


TITLE II

CONDITIONS

Article 3.- The Parties may apply safeguard measures to a product, after investigation, if as a result of unforeseen circumstances and particularly as a result of the agreed tariff concessions, the import into their territory of a good originating from another Party is increased in terms absolute or in relation to national production and in such conditions that imports of that good constitute a substantial cause of serious damage or a threat thereof to a branch of domestic production that produces a similar or directly competitive good.

Article 4.- The Parties shall apply a safeguard measure only to the extent necessary to prevent or repair serious damage or threat of serious damage and facilitate the adjustment of the domestic industry of the importing Party.




TITLE III

PROCEDURE RELATED TO THE INVESTIGATION

Article 5.- A Party may only adopt a safeguard measure on imports of a certain product from the other Party after an investigation carried out by the competent authorities in accordance with the procedure established in this Title.

Article 6.- Safeguard investigations may only be initiated based on a request from the domestic industry of the Party that imports the like or directly competitive product or ex officio, in the cases in which said Party deems it appropriate. In both cases, it must be proven that the interests of a significant proportion of the total production of the product in question are represented.

Article 7.- The petitioner will provide the following information in her request, indicating its sources, or, to the extent that the information is not available, her best estimates and the bases they support:

a) Description of the product: the name and description of the imported good in question, the tariff subheading in which it is classified (NALADISA and National Tariff) and the current tariff treatment, as well as the name and description of the similar or directly competitive national good ;

b) Representativeness:

i) the names and addresses of the entities and companies submitting the request;

ii) the percentage of domestic production of the similar or directly competitive good represented by such entities and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of an industry; and

iii) the names and location of other establishments where the similar or directly competitive good is produced;

c) Import figures: import data corresponding to no less than 3 (three) and no more than the most recent 5 (five) years;

d) Figures and data on domestic production of the similar or directly competitive good, corresponding to the period indicated in point (c) above;

e) Data that demonstrate serious injury or threat of serious injury or quantitative and objective indicators that denote the nature and scope of serious injury caused to the domestic industry in question, such as those that demonstrate changes in levels sales, prices, production, productivity, use of installed capacity, market share, profit or loss, and employment;

f) Cause of serious damage or threat of serious damage: the enumeration and description of the presumed causes of damage or threat thereof, and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports of that good, in terms of either absolute or relative with rrelation to domestic production and that the conditions in which they are carried out are the cause of serious damage or threat thereof, supported by pertinent information;

g) Causal relationship: quantitative and objective information that demonstrates the existence of a causal relationship in accordance with the provisions of Article 3;

h) Presentation of a proposal for an adjustment plan for the domestic industry.

Article 8.- All information that by its nature is confidential or that is provided confidentially, will be treated as such by the competent authorities, with prior justification in this regard. Such information will not be made public without the authorization of the interested party who submitted it.

Interested parties providing confidential information must provide non-confidential summaries thereof or, if they indicate that such information cannot be summarized, state the reasons why it is not possible to present them.

If the competent authorities conclude that a request that information be considered confidential is not justified, and if the interested party does not want to make it public or authorize its disclosure in general or summarized terms, the said authorities may not take that information into account, unless unless convincingly demonstrated to them, from an appropriate source, that the information is accurate.

Article 9.- The competent investigating authority will establish the term within which the interested parties may:

a) Present evidence and present their opinions, in writing, so that they can be taken into account during the investigation, and the period within which they will have the opportunity to respond to the communications of other parties and present their opinions;

b) Access the information contained in the administrative file of the investigation with the exception of confidential information;

c) Request the holding of hearings at the request of one party.

Article 10.- In the investigation that will be carried out to determine if the increase in imports and the conditions of such imports, under preferential tariffs established in this Agreement, have caused or threaten to cause serious damage to the industry domestic, the competent authorities of the Parties shall assess all relevant factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that have a bearing on the situation of that domestic industry, in particular the following:

a) The rate and amount of the increase in imports of the product in question, in absolute and relative terms; and the conditions under which imports are made;

b) The relationship between imports under preferential tariffs established in this agreement and non-preferential ones, as well as between their increases;

c) The part of the domestic market absorbed by imports;

d) Changes in the level of sales, production, productivity, capacity utilization, profit and loss, and employment.

Factors such as changes in prices and inventories should also be analysed, among others.

Article 11.- To determine the origin of the safeguard measures, the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage referred to in Article 3 of this Annex must be proven, through objective evidence that demonstrates the existence of a causal relationship between the increase in imports under preferential tariffs, of the product in question, and the conditions in which they are carried out, and the serious damage or the threat of serious damage to the domestic industry.


TITLE IV

APPLICATION OF THE MEASURES

Article 12.- The safeguard measures that are applied will consist of:

a) The suspension of the increase in the margin of preference established in the Agreement; either,

b) The reduction or suspension of the agreed margin of preference.

Article 13.- At the time of the adoption of the safeguard measure, the preference in force in the Trade Liberalization Program of the Agreement for the product object of said measure, will be maintained for a quota of imports that will be the average of the imports carried out in the 3 (three) years immediately prior to the period in which the existence or threat of serious damage was determined, unless a clear justification is given for the need to set a different level to prevent or repair the serious damage.

Article 14.- At the end of the period of application of the safeguard measure, the margin of preference established for that moment will be applied, in the Trade Liberalization Program of the Agreement for the product subject to it.


TITLE V

DURATION OF THE MEASURES

Article 15.- The safeguard measures will have a maximum duration of 2 (two) years including the term in which provisional measures would have been in force.

Article 16.- The safeguard measures may be extended by a once, for a maximum period of 1 (one) year when the competent authority determines, in accordance with the procedures established in this Annex, that they are still necessary to prevent or repair the serious damage and that there is evidence that the branch of domestic production is in the process of readjustment. During the extension period, the measures will not be more restrictive than the one originally applied.

Article 17.- No safeguard measures will be applied to products whose imports under preferential tariffs were subject to a safeguard measure, unless a period of 8n (one) year has elapsed since the end of the previous measure.

Article 18.- The safeguard measures that are applied in accordance with this Annex, will not affect imports that on the date of adoption of the measure are actually shipped to the importing Signatory Party or are in a primary customs zone, that are dispatched for consumption within a period not exceeding 20 (twenty) days from the adoption of the measure.


TITLE VI

PROVISIONAL SAFEGUARDS MEASURES

Article 19.- In critical circumstances, in which any delay entails damage that is difficult to repair, the Parties may adopt a provisional safeguard measure by virtue of a preliminary, but objective, determination of the existence of clear evidence that the increase in the imports under preferential tariffs, and the conditions under which they are carried out have caused or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry of the importing Party. Immediately after the provisional safeguard measure has been adopted, it will be notified and consulted in accordance with the provisions of the Notifications and Consultations Title of this Annex.

Article 20.- The duration of the provisional safeguard measure shall not exceed 180 (one hundred eighty) days and shall adopt one of the forms established in Article 12 of this Annex. If in the investigation it is determined that the increase in imports under preferential tariffs, or the conditions in which they are carried out, have not caused or threaten to cause serious damage to the domestic industry in question, the amount received in question will be promptly reimbursed. concept of provisional measures or will be released, if applicable, the guarantees guaranteed by said concept.


TITLE VII

TRANSPARENCY

Article 21.- The publication of the opening of the investigation for the adoption of safeguard measures will contain the following information:

a) The name of the applicant;

b) The indication of the imported product subject to the investigation, its NALADISA tariff classification and the national tariff classification;

c) The deadlines for requesting hearings and the place where, in principle, they will be held;

d) The deadline to conclude the investigation;

e) Deadlines for submitting reports, statements and other documents;

f) The place where the application and other documents presented during the investigation can be consulted;

g) The name, address and telephone number of the institution where more information can be obtained;

h) A summary of the facts on which the initiation of the investigation was based

Article 22.- The publication of the decision to apply a provisional safeguard measure will contain the following information:

a) The description of the products subject to the same, including their NALADISA classification and the national tariff classification;

b) The indication of the main characteristics of the facts, including the critical circumstances that generated the need for the provisional safeguard;

c) the description of the measure adopted;

d) The date of entry into force and the duration of the measure adopted.

Article 23.- The publication of the final decision on the application or not of a safeguard measure or its extension will contain the following information:

a) description of the product under investigation, its NALADISA tariff classification and the national tariff classification;

b) Information and evidence supporting the conclusions:

i) That imports under preferential tariffs have increased;

ii) That the domestic industry suffers or is threatened by serious damage; and

iii) That the increase in imports under preferential tariffs is causing or threatens to cause serious damage;

c) Other findings and substantiated conclusions reached on all relevant issues of fact and law;

d) The measure adopted, if applicable;

e) The date of its entry into force and its duration;

f) In cases of extension of a safeguard measure, information that demonstrates that the domestic industry is in the process of adjustment.

Article 24.- The publications referred to in this Annex shall be made in the official gazette of the importing Party, in a plano more than 15 (fifteen) days from the date of issuance of the corresponding rule.

Article 25.- The term between the date of publication of the initiation of the investigation and the publication of the final decision on the application or not of a safeguard measure shall not exceed 1 (one) year.


TITLE VIII

NOTIFICATIONS AND INQUIRIES

Article 26.- The importing Party must officially notify in writing, within a maximum period of 10 (ten) days from the date of issuance of the corresponding act:

a) The opening of the investigation process;

b) The application of a provisional safeguard measure;

c) The application or extension of a definitive safeguard measure.

Article 27.- During any stage of the procedure, the notified Contracting or Signatory Party may request additional information it deems necessary from the Party that has initiated an investigation or intends to extend a measure.

Article 28.- Once any of the notifications referred to in Article 26 has been made, the notified Party may request consultations, which must be carried out within 30 (thirty) days following the presentation of said request. Said consultations will have as their main objective the mutual knowledge of the facts and the exchange of opinions on the problem raised, as well as reaching an understanding on the maintenance of a level of concessions substantially equivalent to those existing under the Agreement that have been affected. for the imposition of the measure.


TITLE IX

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 29.- Differences between the Parties regarding the merits and justification of the application or extension of a safeguard measure, will be analyzed and resolved within the scope of the Administrative Commission, based on the information and evidence sent to it or other additional ones that it considers necessary for such evaluation. The differences that persist will be resolved by the Dispute Settlement Regime provided for in the Agreement.


TITLE X

DEFINITIONS

Article 30.- For the purposes of this Annex, it shall be understood as:

a) “Serious injury”: a significant general impairment of the conditions of a certain domestic industry of the importing Party;

b) “Threat of serious damage”: the clear imminence of serious damage. The determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury will be based on facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility;

c) "Domestic industry": the group of producers of similar or directly competitive products that operate within the territory of the importing Party or those whose joint production of similar or directly competitive products constitutes a significant proportion of domestic production total of those products in that importing Party;

d) “Competent Authority”: in the case of Argentina it is the Ministry of Economy and Production; In Brazil, the investigative authority is the Secretariat of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, and the Chamber of Foreign Trade (CAMEX) applies; In Paraguay, the investigative authority is the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and the Ministry of Finance for Application; for Uruguay it is the Ministry of Economy and Finance; of Peru is the National Directorate for Integration and International Trade Negotiations of the Vice Ministry of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism

e) "Deadlines": The deadlines referred to in this Annex are understood to be expressed in calendar days and will be counted from the day following the act or fact to which it refers.


__________ 
ANNEX VII


DISPUTE SETTLEMENT REGIME
 
 
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT REGIME

CHAPTER I

PARTS AND SCOPE OF APPLICATION


Article 1.- Controversies that arise in relation to the interpretation, application or breach of the provisions contained in the framework of this Agreement and of the instruments and protocols signed or signed within the framework of the same, will be submitted to the solution procedure. of disputes established in this Annex.

Article 2.- Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 1, the controversies that arise in relation to the provisions of this Agreement, in matters regulated by the Marrakech Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (hereinafter "Agreement WTO") and in the agreements negotiated in accordance with it, may be resolved in one or another forum, at the choice of the complaining party.

Once a dispute settlement procedure has been initiated under this Annex, or one under the WTO Agreement, the selected forum will be exclusive of the other.

For the purposes of this Article, dispute settlement procedures shall be considered initiated in accordance with the WTO Agreement when the complaining party requests the integration of a panel in accordance with Article 6 of the Understanding Related to the Rules and Procedures governing the Settlement. of Disputes that is part of the WTO Agreement.

Likewise, the dispute resolution procedures will be considered initiated in accordance with this Agreement, once the Administrative Commission has been convened in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.

Article 3.- For the purposes of this Annex, both Contracting Parties, that is, MERCOSUR and the Republic of Peru, as well as one or more MERCOSUR States Parties and the Republic of Peru, in their capacity as Signatory Parties.


CHAPTER II

DIRECT NEGOTIATIONS

Article 4.- The parties will try to resolve the controversies referred to in Article 1 through direct negotiations, which allow reaching a mutually satisfactory solution.

Direct negotiations will be conducted, in the case of MERCOSUR, through the Pro-Tempore Presidency or the National Coordinators of the Common Market Group, as appropriate, and in the case of the Republic of Peru, through the Vice Ministry of Foreign Trade of the Ministry Foreign Trade and Tourism.

Direct negotiations must be preceded by reciprocal consultations between the parties.

Article 5.- To initiate the procedure, either party will request, in writing, the other party to conduct direct negotiations, specifying the reasons and will notify the Signatory Parties, the MERCOSUR Pro-Tempore Presidency and the Vice-Ministry. of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism of Peru.

Article 6.- The party that receives the request to hold direct negotiations must respond to it within 10 (ten) days after the date of receipt.

The parties will exchange the necessary information to facilitate direct negotiations and will give this information confidential treatment.

These negotiations may not be extended for more than 30 (thirty) days, counted from the date of receipt of the formal request to initiate them, unless the parties agree to extend that term.


CHAPTER III

INTERVENTION OF THE ADMINISTRATING COMMITTEE

Article 7.- If within the period indicated in Article 6 a mutually satisfactory solution is not reached or if the dispute is only partially resolved, either party may request in writing that the Administrative Commission meet, hereinafter "Commission". to deal with the matter.

This request must contain the factual circumstances and legal grounds related to the dispute, indicating the provisions of the Agreement, Additional Protocols and instruments signed within its framework that are considered violated.

Article 8.- The Commission must meet within 30 (thirty) days, counted from the receipt by all the Signatory Parties of the request referred to in the previous Article.

For the purposes of calculating the period indicated in the preceding paragraph, the Signatory Parties shall immediately acknowledge receipt of the aforementioned request.

Article 9.- The Commission may accumulate, by consensus, two or more procedures related to the cases it hears only when, due to their nature or eventual thematic connection, it deems convenient to examine them jointly.

Article 10.- The Commission will evaluate the dispute and give the parties the opportunity to present their positions and, if necessary, provide additional information, with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution.

The Commission will formulate the recommendations actions that it deems pertinent, for which purposes it will have a period of 30 (thirty) days, counted from the date of its first meeting.


 

CHAPTER IV

FROM THE GROUP OF EXPERTS

Article 11.- If the Commission does not formulate recommendations or if the recommendations are not complied with by the parties within the term set for it, any of them may request the Commission to create an ad hoc Group of Experts made up of 3 (three) experts from the list referred to in Article 13.

Article 12.- For the purposes set forth in Article 11, each one of the Signatory Parties shall communicate to the Commission a list of 10 (ten) experts, 2 (two) of which shall not be nationals of any of the Signatory Parties, in within 30 (thirty) days from the entry into force of this Protocol.

The list will be made up of persons of recognized competence in matters related to the Agreement.

Article 13.- The Commission will establish the list of experts based on the designations of the Signatory Parties made through mutual communications. The list and its modifications will be notified to the General Secretariat of ALADI, for the purposes of its deposit.

Article 14.- The Group will be formed as follows:

a) Within 10 (ten) days after the request to form the Group, each party shall designate an expert chosen from among the persons that each of those parties have proposed for the list referred to in the preceding Article;

b) Within the same term, the parties will designate by mutual agreement a third expert from those that make up the aforementioned list, who will not be a national of any of the Signatory Parties and will coordinate the actions of the Group;

c) If the appointments referred to in literal a) are not made within the established period, they will be made by lottery by the ALADI General Secretariat, at the request of any of the parties, from among the experts designated by those parties. that make up the list mentioned in the previous Article;

d) If the designation referred to in literal b) is not made within the stipulated period, it will be made by lottery by the ALADI General Secretariat, at the request of any of the parties, from among the non-national experts of the Signatory Parties involved that make up the list mentioned in the previous Article;

e) The designations provided for in subparagraphs a), b), c) and d) of this Article, shall be communicated to the Contracting Parties.

Article 15.- Persons who have intervened in any way in the previous stages of the procedure or who do not have the necessary independence in relation to the positions of the parties may not act as experts.

In the exercise of their functions, the experts must act with technical independence and impartiality.

Article 16.- The expenses derived from the actions of the Group will be borne by the parties in equal amounts.

Said expenses include the fees of the experts and the expenses of passage, transfer costs, per diems and other expenses that their work demands.

The fees referred to in the preceding paragraph will be agreed upon by the parties and agreed upon with the experts within a period that may not exceed 5 (five) days following their appointment.

Article 17.- The Group of Experts will have a period of 90 (ninety) days from its integration to formulate a Report with its conclusions on whether the measure is incompatible with the provisions of this Agreement and submit it to the Commission.

Article 18.- The Commission will meet in 30 (thirty) days, counted from the date on which the Report of the Group of Experts was sent to it, to consider its adoption.

If the meeting of the Commission is not held, it will be understood that the Report is automatically adopted.

Article 19.- In the event that the Commission decides not to adopt the Report of the Group of Experts, it may issue, within a period of no more than thirty (30) days, the recommendations to reach a mutually satisfactory solution, including the term for compliance.

Article 20.- In the event that the defendant does not comply with the provisions of the Report of the Group of Experts adopted by the Commission or with its recommendations, or if said recommendations are not issued within the term established in the previous Article , the complaining party may proceed in accordance with the provisions of Article 22.

Article 21.- When the Report of the Group of Experts adopted by the Commission concludes that the measure is incompatible with this Agreement, the defendant Party shall refrain from executing the measure or render it ineffective.

Article 22.- In relation to monitoring the application of the conclusions included in the Report of the Group of Experts adopted by the Commission or of the Commission's recommendations:

a) The claiming party may suspend the application of benefits of equivalent effect to the defendant party, provided ia communication in writing, if the measure has been declared incompatible with the obligations of this Agreement and the defendant does not refrain from executing it or does not repeal it within a period of 60 (sixty) days from the adoption of the Report by the Commission;

b) Likewise, the complaining party may suspend benefits of equivalent effect when the defendant party does not comply with the recommendations of the Commission within the period established by the same;

c) The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant complies with the recommendation of the Commission or with the Report of the Group of Experts adopted by the Commission or until the parties reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute, as the case may be. ;

d) The complaining party will first try to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure;

e) The complaining party that considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, may suspend benefits in other sectors;

f) At the written request of any party, communicated to the Commission, a special Group of Experts will be set up to determine if the level of benefits that the complaining party has suspended in accordance with the provisions of this Article is excessive. To the extent possible, the special Group of Experts will be made up of the same members that were part of the Group of Experts that issued the Report referred to in Article 17;

g) The Special Group of Experts established for the purposes of the paragraph above, will present its Report within 60 (sixty) days following the appointment of the last member of the Special Group of Experts, or in any other term that the parties in the controversy agree.


CHAPTER V

GENERAL DISPOSITION

Article 23.- Communications made between MERCOSUR or its States Parties and the Republic of Peru must be sent, in the case of MERCOSUR, to the Pro-Tempore Presidency or to the National Coordinators of the Common Market Group, as appropriate, and in the case of the Republic of Peru, to the Vice Minister of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism.

Article 24.- The references made in this Annex to the communications addressed to the Commission imply communications to all the Signatory Parties.

Article 25.- The terms referred to in this Annex are understood to be expressed in calendar days and will be counted from the day following the act or fact to which it refers. When the term begins or expires on a Saturday or Sunday, it will begin to run or expire on the following Monday.

Article 26.- All documentation and actions related to the procedure established in this Annex will be reserved.

Article 27.- At any stage of the procedure, the party that filed the claim may withdraw from it, or the parties may reach a settlement, concluding the controversy in both cases. Withdrawals or transactions must be communicated to the Commission, so that the corresponding necessary measures may be adopted.


__________ ANNEX VIII


REGIME OF STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND
CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT

 

REGIME OF STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND
CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT

General disposition


Article 1.- The provisions of this Annex are intended to prevent technical standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, and metrology, adopted and applied by the Signatory Parties from constituting unnecessary technical obstacles to reciprocal trade. In this sense, the Signatory Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations before the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (OTC/WTO Agreement), the Framework Agreement for the Promotion of Trade by Overcoming Technical Barriers to Trade of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI ), and agree to the provisions of this Annex.

Paragraph 1 - The provisions of this Annex do not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the provision of services and government purchases.

Paragraph 2 - The definitions of Annex 1 of the TBT/WTO Agreement, of the International Vocabulary of Basic and General Metrology Terms -VIM- and the Legal Metrology Vocabulary shall apply to this Annex.

Paragraph 3 - The Signatory Parties undertake to observe the International System of Units (SI). For activities related to Legal Metrology, they will adopt the recommendations and documents of the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML).

Paragraph 4 - The Signatory Parties agree not to apply more rigorous conformity assessment procedures to products originating from other Signatory Parties than those applied to their originating products.

Article 2.- The Signatory Parties agree to strengthen their national systems of standardization, technical regulation, conformity assessment, and metrology, based on the pertinent or eminently formulated international standards. When these do not exist or are not an appropriate means to achieve the legitimate objectives pursued under the terms provided in the TBT/WTO Agreement, the regional standards of the organizations of which the Signatory Parties are members will be used, when appropriate.

Article 3.- The Signatory Parties may initiate negotiations to enter into Recognition Agreements between the competent bodies in the areas of metrology, standardization, technical regulation and conformity assessment following the principles of the OTC/WTO Agreement.

Paragraph 1.- With a view to facilitating this process, they may initiate prior negotiations for the assessment of equivalence between their standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.

Paragraph 2.- Within the framework of the recognition process, the Signatory Parties will facilitate access to their territories in order to demonstrate the implementation of their conformity assessment system.

Paragraph 3.- The terms of the Recognition Agreements entered into in the regulatory field must be defined in each case by the competent national authorities, who must set, among other things, the conditions and deadlines for compliance.


Technical Cooperation

Article 4.- The Signatory Parties agree to provide cooperation and technical assistance to each other, as well as to promote its provision through competent international or regional organizations, for the purposes of:

a) Promote the application of this Annex;

b) Promote the application of the OTC/WTO Agreement;

c) Strengthen their respective metrology, standardization, technical regulation, conformity assessment, and information and notification systems within the scope of the TBT/WTO Agreement;

d) Strengthen the technical trust between these organizations, mainly with a view to establishing Mutual Recognition Agreements of interest to the Parties;

e) Increase participation in international and regional organizations with standardization and conformity assessment activities;

f) Support the development and application of international and regional standards;

g) Increase the education and training of the human resources necessary for the purposes of this Annex;

h) Increase the development of joint activities between the technical organizations involved in the activities covered by this Annex.


Transparency

Article 5.- The Signatory Parties will give favorable consideration to adopting a mechanism to identify and seek concrete ways to overcome unnecessary technical obstacles to trade arising from the application of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.

Article 6.- The Signatory Parties agree that, if a Signatory Party finds that there are reasons to consider that a technical regulation or a conformity assessment procedure constitutes an unnecessary technical obstacle trade, this Signatory Party will request bilateral consultations, which must take place within a maximum period of 60 (sixty) days. If the problem persists, it will be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Title IX, on Dispute Resolution, of this Agreement.

Article 7.- The Signatory Parties undertake to notify new technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures, mandatory certifications and any other equivalent mandatory measure that they intend to adopt, at least 60 (sixty) days before their adoption. The Signatory Parties will seek to extend this term to 90 (ninety) days.

In urgent cases, the Signatory Parties may adopt technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures, mandatory certifications or other equivalent mandatory measures, without paying attention to the term referred to in the preceding paragraph. In these cases, the Signatory Party that adopts the measure must immediately notify said measure to the other Signatory Party.

In all cases, the Signatory Party that intends to adopt or adopts the measure must give the other Signatory Party, without discrimination, the possibility of making observations, holding consultations on said measure if so requested, and taking into account these observations and the results of the queries.

Article 8.- Once the pertinent clarifications have been made by the Signatory Party and once the measure has been adopted and if the other Signatory Party considers that there are reasons to qualify that the measure constitutes an unnecessary technical obstacle to trade, it may, based on the background information and exhausted the coordination between the competent authorities, to refer the case to the pertinent instance so that it is treated in accordance with the provisions of Title IX, on Dispute Resolution, of this Agreement.

Article 9.- The Signatory Parties agree that the period between the publication of technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures, mandatory certifications or other equivalent mandatory measures and their validity shall not be less than six months, except when it is not otherwise feasible to meet the legitimate objectives pursued.

Article 10.- The Signatory Parties undertake to:

a) Adopt information exchange mechanisms on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that may affect reciprocal trade.

When required, information on technical regulations and/or conformity assessment procedures of mandatory scope, it must include the corresponding competent authorities;

b) Promote the articulation between its focal points of information on technical obstacles to trade with a view to meeting the needs derived from the implementation of this Annex.


__________
ANNEX IX


REGIME OF SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

 
REGIME OF SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

General disposition


Article 1.- In the adoption and application of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the Signatory Parties will be governed by the provisions of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO (MSF/WTO) and by the provisions of this Annex. .

The definitions in Annex A of the SPS/WTO Agreement shall apply to this Annex.

Included in this Annex are the measures related to the registration or sanitary authorization of pharmaceutical products, cosmetics, pesticides for domestic use and public health pesticides.

Article 2.- The Signatory Parties will ensure that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures are only applied insofar as they are necessary to protect the health and life of people and animals or to preserve plants, that they are based on scientific principles. and that they are not maintained without sufficient scientific evidence, subject to the provisions of paragraph 7 of Article 5 of the SPS/WTO Agreement.

Article 3.- Sanitary and phytosanitary measures shall not be applied in such a way that they constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Signatory Parties.


Harmonization

Article 4.- The Signatory Parties shall use international standards, guidelines and recommendations as a basis for the adoption and application of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures and when these do not exist, the standards, guidelines and recommendations of the regional organizations of which the Signatory Parties are members, if applicable.

Article 5.- When the reference regulations mentioned in Article 4 do not exist, or when they are not adequate to achieve the level of protection required by the importing Signatory Party, the Signatory Parties may adopt the sanitary and phytosanitary measures they deem appropriate. , with due scientific justification.

Article 6.- The Signatory Parties undertake to coordinate, whenever possible, positions in regional and international forums in which standards, guidelines and recommendations on sanitary and phytosanitary matters are developed.


trading conditions

Article 7.- The exporting Signatory Party must:

- Comply with the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the importing Signatory Party; either

- Request the importing Signatory Party to recognize the equivalence of its measure, different from the one applied by the importing Signatory Party.


Equivalence

Article 8.- The Signatory Parties will endeavor to enter into agreements for the recognition of equivalence of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures, in order to facilitate trade in products subject to sanitary and phytosanitary measures and promote mutual trust between the respective competent authorities.

Article 9.- The equivalence agreements will be established in accordance with the regulations approved by the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Committee of the WTO (MSF/WTO Committee) and the norms, guidelines and recommendations approved by the competent international organizations; in the absence of these, by the rules, guidelines and recommendations of the regional organizations of which the Signatory Parties are members, if applicable; and when these do not exist, the conditions may be agreed between the Signatory Parties.

Article 10.- When entering into equivalence agreements, the Signatory Parties shall take into account that:

a) The recognition of equivalences shall be understood as the process by which the exporting Signatory Party demonstrates, on scientific or technical grounds, that its sanitary and phytosanitary measures achieve the adequate level of protection required by the importing Signatory Party;

b) The Signatory Parties may accept equivalence for a specific measure or for measures related to a determined product or a determined category of products, or at the system level;

c) The negotiation process for the evaluation of equivalence will be initiated by the exporting Signatory Party with the identification of the measures of the importing Signatory Party, requesting the latter to justify it. The exporting Signatory Party will send the regulations corresponding to its sanitary or phytosanitary measure to the importing Signatory Party with the pertinent scientific and technical information. The importing Signatory Party must notify the receipt of such information within a period of 15 (fifteen) days;

d) The importing Signatory Party must provide information on its adequate level of protection when requested by the exporting Signatory Party;

e) When examining a request for recognition of equivalence, the importing Signatory Party shall analyze the scientifically based and technical information provided by the exporting Signatory Party. information about its sanitary and phytosanitary measures, in order to determine whether those measures achieve the level of protection provided by its own corresponding sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

f) The Signatory Parties will implement previously agreed procedures to facilitate access to their territories, in order to present their infrastructure and demonstrate their control programs, including inspection, certification, testing and other relevant resources;

g) In order to evaluate equivalence, the Signatory Parties will consider, among others, the inspection procedures, certification and the sanitary or phytosanitary conditions in the place of origin of the product;

h) The importing Signatory Party must rule, within a term agreed between the Signatory Parties, on the request for recognition of equivalence made by the exporting Signatory Party;

i) With a view to simplifying the mechanisms for recognition of equivalences, the Signatory Parties must take into consideration the existence of fluid and regular trade in the products subject to equivalence agreements; as well as the available information and the sanitary and phytosanitary background.

Article 11.- When an equivalence agreement is being negotiated and until final approval is reached, the Signatory Parties may not apply more restrictive conditions than those in force in their reciprocal trade, except those derived from sanitary or phytosanitary emergencies.

Article 12.- In the cases in which the importing Signatory Party determines that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the exporting Signatory Party does not reach its adequate level of protection and therefore does not consider it equivalent, it must base its decision on scientific or technical principles. .


Risk assessment and determination of the appropriate level of
sanitary or phytosanitary protection

Article 13.- Sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be based on an evaluation, appropriate to the circumstances, of the existing risks for the life and health of people and animals or for the preservation of plants, taking into account the techniques risk assessment prepared by the competent international organizations, so that the measures adopted achieve the appropriate level of protection.

Article 14.- When there is a need to carry out a risk assessment of products or categories of products, the importing Signatory Party must report on the methodology and procedures for risk assessment, for which it may request reasonable information from the exporting Signatory Party. and necessary according to the conditions and terms agreed by the Signatory Parties for risk assessment.

Article 15.- When a Signatory Party decides to carry out a risk assessment of a product for which there is fluid and regular trade, said Signatory Party may not interrupt trade in the affected products except in the case of a health emergency or phytosanitary.

Article 16.- In cases of sanitary or phytosanitary emergency, it will correspond to the importing Signatory Party to immediately present to the exporting Signatory Party the justification of the adopted measure.

Recognition of free or low prevalence zones/areas

Article 17.- The Signatory Parties will automatically accept between them, as zones/areas free or of low prevalence of pests or diseases, those recognized by the competent international organizations; in the absence of such international recognition, the Signatory Parties may recognize them bilaterally, based on Article 6 of the SPS/WTO Agreement and international standards of reference.

Article 18.- When there is no international recognition, the exporting Signatory Party will be responsible for objectively demonstrating to the importing Signatory Party the status of zone/area free or of low prevalence of pests or diseases.

Article 19.- In the event that a zone/area is recognized as free or with a low prevalence of a certain pest or disease, the Party subject to recognition must ensure that it maintains its condition and that it will be subject to effective surveillance, control or eradication measures. of the pest or disease.

Article 20.- The importing Signatory Party will rule, within a term agreed between the Parties, on the request made by the exporting Signatory Party for recognition of its status as free or with low prevalence of pests and diseases.


Control, inspection and approval procedures

Article 21.- The application of control, inspection, and approval procedures shall not become disguised restrictions on trade between the Signatory Parties, and shall be carried out in accordance with Annex C of the SPS/WTO Agreement and with the standards, guidelines, and recommendations international s, set by the organizations considered in said Agreement. When these do not exist, the norms, guidelines and recommendations of the regional organizations of which the Signatory Parties are members will be used, if applicable, and in the absence of these, the importing Signatory Party will inform the procedure to be applied, which should not constitute a unjustified barrier to trade.

Article 22.- Any restriction to the access to the market of the importing Signatory Party derived from changes in the control and inspection procedures without due technical justification will be considered an unjustified barrier to trade.


Transparency

Article 23.- The Signatory Parties undertake to notify the projects of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures that they intend to adopt, at least 60 (sixty) days before their adoption by the Signatory Party. Any extension to this period will be immediately communicated to the other Party.

In urgent cases, the Signatory Parties may adopt sanitary and phytosanitary measures, regardless of the term referred to in the preceding paragraph. In these cases, the Signatory Party that adopts the measure must immediately notify said measure to the other Signatory Party.

In all cases, the Signatory Party that intends to adopt or adopts the measure must, without discrimination, give the other Signatory Party the opportunity to make observations, hold consultations on it if requested, and take into account these observations and the result of such inquiries.

Once the pertinent clarifications have been made by the Signatory Party and once the measure has been adopted, if the other Signatory Party considers that there are reasons to classify that the measure constitutes an unnecessary technical obstacle to trade, it may, based on the background information and once the coordination between the competent authorities has been exhausted. , raise the case to the pertinent instance so that it is treated in accordance with the provisions of Title IX, on Dispute Resolution, of this Agreement.

Article 24.- The Signatory Parties undertake to notify the draft regulations that establish the conditions for the commercialization of pharmaceutical products, cosmetics, pesticides for domestic use and public health, which they intend to adopt at least 60 (sixty) days before its adoption by the Signatory Party. Any extension to this period will be immediately communicated to the other Signatory Party.

In duly justified cases of urgency, the Signatory Parties may adopt the rules referred to in the preceding paragraph, without attending to the term indicated above. In these cases, the Signatory Party that adopts the rule must immediately notify said measure to the other Signatory Party.

In all cases, the Signatory Party that adopts or intends to adopt the standard shall give the other Signatory Party, without discrimination, the opportunity to make observations, hold consultations on it if requested, and take into account these observations and the result of such inquiries.

Once the pertinent clarifications have been made by the Signatory Party and once the standard has been adopted, if the other Signatory Party considers that there are reasons to qualify that it constitutes an unnecessary obstacle to trade, it may, based on the background information and coordination between the competent authorities , raise the case to the pertinent instance so that it is treated in accordance with the provisions of Title IX, on Dispute Resolution, of this Agreement.

Article 25.- The Signatory Parties will officially communicate the deadlines established in their legislation on sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as well as pharmaceutical products, cosmetics, pesticides for domestic use and public health, within 30 (thirty) days from the subscription of this Agreement.

At the request of one of the Signatory Parties, the requested Signatory Party will have 30 (thirty) days to clarify which are the terms or procedures applicable to the product of interest consulted.

In the cases in which the absence of deadlines in the national regulations are identified, at the request of a Signatory Party, consultations will be carried out in a term not exceeding 45 (forty-five) days, with the objective of setting them.

In the event of differences in the notified deadlines, the Signatory Parties will hold consultations within a period of no more than 45 (forty-five) days, in order to agree on duly substantiated, mutually acceptable deadlines.

Failure to comply with the terms provided for in national legislation, as well as those established in this Article, will empower the affected Signatory Party to request the pronouncement of the Administrative Commission, without prejudice to initiating the Dispute Resolution procedure.

Article 26.- The Signatory Parties will guarantee the reciprocal transparency of their sanitary measures and fito sanitary notifying them in the scope of the OMC or publishing the projects of measures and the measures adopted in free official websites and of public access, insofar as they exist or are implemented.

Article 27.- The Signatory Parties undertake to exchange their current general sanitary and phytosanitary legislation within a period of 60 (sixty) days from the entry into force of this Agreement.

In cases where specific legislation or information is required, the Signatory Parties agree to submit them within a period of 30 (thirty) days, which may be extended with prior justification from the reporting Signatory Party.


counter notifications

Article 28.- The Signatory Parties agree to implement the SPS counter-notification procedure, in order to facilitate the solution of problems related to SPS and prevent these measures from becoming unjustified obstacles to trade. The mechanism will work as follows:

1. Party A will counter-notify, in the format provided in Appendix I, an MSF from Party B, which will respond to Party A, in writing, within the next 90 (ninety) days and within 30 (thirty) days for perishable products. In this response, Party B will indicate whether the action:

a) It is in conformity with an international standard, guideline or recommendation and if so, Part B should identify it; either

b) It is based on international standards, guidelines or recommendations. In this case, Part B should provide the scientific justification and other information supporting the aspects that differ from international standards, guidelines or recommendations; either

c) Result in a higher level of protection in Part B than would be achieved by an international guideline, standard or recommendation. In this case, Part B should provide the scientific justification for the measure, including a description of the risks that the measure is intended to avoid and, where appropriate, the risk assessment; either

d) In the absence of an international guideline, standard or recommendation, Party B shall provide the scientific justification for the measure, including a description of the risks that the measure is intended to avoid and, where appropriate, the risk assessment.
 

2. Based on the exchange of information, the need for bilateral technical discussions to resolve problems related to the measure in question could arise. When such deliberations are requested, both Parties shall carry them out within a period of 30 (thirty) days from the request, unless the Signatory Parties involved have agreed otherwise.


Technical Cooperation

Article 29.- The Signatory Parties agree to provide cooperation and technical assistance to each other, as well as to promote its provision through competent international or regional organizations, in order to strengthen activities aimed at:

a) The application of this Annex;

b) The application of the SPS/WTO Agreement;

c) The most active participation in the competent international organizations and their subsidiary bodies;

d) Support for the development and application of international and regional standards, among others.

Article 30.- The competent bodies in sanitary and phytosanitary matters of the Signatory Parties may sign cooperation and coordination agreements to facilitate the exchange of goods without these presenting a sanitary or phytosanitary risk for the Signatory Parties.


Transitory dispositions

Article 31.- The Signatory Parties agree to find out about pending applications for authorizations, registrations and/or sanitary registries within 30 (thirty) days after the entry into force of this Agreement.

The requested Signatory Party must report on the status of the application, pending procedures and deadlines.

Likewise, within a period not exceeding 30 (thirty) days, the Signatory Parties must inform the interested Signatory Party about the status of the risk analyzes that are in process, and requests for sanitary and phytosanitary requirements that are in progress. in progress.


final provisions

Article 32.- Non-compliance with the provisions of this Annex, as well as with the conditions or deadlines agreed by the Signatory Parties by virtue thereof, without due justification, may be addressed initially through direct consultations.

Notwithstanding this, the affected Signatory Party may resort directly to the Dispute Settlement mechanism of this Agreement.

Article 33.- Within a period of 30 (thirty) calendar days from the entry into force of the Agreement, the Signatory Parties will accredit the competent authorities in charge of the implementation of this Annex.


__________
ANNEX X


SPECIAL MEASURES
 
 
SPECIAL MEASURES

TITLE I

AREA OF APPLICATION

Article 1.- The Signatory Parties may apply, exceptionally and under the conditions established in this Annex, Special Measures to the products listed in Appendices 1 and 2, which on the date of their application have begun the reduction in the framework of the Trade Liberalization Program of this Agreement.

Article 2.- The measures indicated in this Annex may not be applied to the same product, originating from the same Signatory Party, simultaneously with the safeguard measures referred to in Annex VI on the Safeguard Regime.


TITLE II

CONDITIONS

Article 3.- Special Measures may be applied in the cases indicated in Article 4, when imports of a specific product originating from a Signatory Party, carried out under preferential conditions, cause or threaten to cause damage to the domestic production of the importing Signatory Party. , in the terms established in this Annex.

Article 4.- A Signatory Party may apply the Special Measures, in any of the following cases:

a) Activation by Volume: When the total volume of imports of the product in question, in the last 12 (twelve) calendar months is equal to or greater than 20% of the annual average volume of imports of that product originating from the exporting Signatory Party , registered in the 36 (thirty-six) months prior to the last 12 (twelve) months, in which the indicator was activated and if imports of that product originating in the exporting Signatory Party exceed 20% of the total imported in said period . The products of Appendices 1 and 2 are included in this literal; either

b) Activation by Price: When the average price of imports of the original product of the exporting Signatory Party in question, during the last month for which information is available, is less than the activation price of said product by at least 15%.

This last level will increase to 20%, in a period of 5 (five) years, counted from the entry into force of the Agreement, as follows:

- 16%, at the beginning of the second year;

- 18%, at the beginning of the third year;

- 19%, at the beginning of the fourth year; and

- 20%, at the beginning of the fifth year.

The products of Appendix 1 are included in this literal. The products of Appendix 2 may be transferred to Appendix 1 when they are no longer subject to mechanisms that include price indicators, which will be notified to the Signatory Parties and the Administrative Commission, only to effects of the latter formalizing the modification made, which will not prevent its validity from the date of notification.

The activation price will be determined each year, based on the average of the relationship between the total value in CIF terms and the volume of imports that have been made within the 36 (thirty-six) calendar months prior to the year of validity. of the activation price. Said prices will be notified between the Signatory Parties, in the first 20 (twenty) days of the month of January and will be valid for one year.

The average price will be the result of the quotient between the total CIF value and the imported volume registered by the importing Signatory Party.

The amount collected as Special Measures activated by price, must be deducted for the purpose of calculating the antidumping or countervailing duties that were being applied or were applicable during the validity of the measure.

Article 5.- The configuration of the damage or threat of damage must be determined by the importing Signatory Party based on the analysis of indicators such as: production level, trade, market share and prices.

The damage or threat of damage will be presumed if the import exceeds the levels established in Article 4. Within 90 (ninety) days of applying the measure, the Signatory Party that adopted it must assess whether the imports subject to the same cause or threaten to cause damage to domestic production. If damage or threat of damage is verified, the Special Measure may continue to be applied for the period indicated in Article 10. If the importing Signatory Party determines that there is no damage or threat of damage to the domestic production of the product in question, it will suspend the application of the measure and, if applicable, the amount received will be reimbursed or the guarantees guaranteed for said concept will be released.

Article 6.- The Special Measures may not be applied under the grounds of Article 4 a) of this Annex, in the event that no imports of the product in question have been registered during any of the 24 (twenty-four) calendar months prior to the last 12 (twelve) months.

The Special Measures may not be applied under the grounds of Article 4 b) of this Annex, in the event that they have not been registered imports of the product in question in any of the 24 (twenty-four) calendar months prior to the date of determination of the annual trigger prices.


TITLE III

APPLICATION OF SPECIAL MEASURES

Article 7.- The Special Measures that are applied in accordance with this Annex will consist of:

a) The suspension of the increase in the margin of preference established in the Agreement; either

b) The reduction or suspension of the agreed margin of preference.

Article 8.- The application of the Special Measures provided for in paragraph a) of Article 4, will be conditioned to the maintenance of the preference in force at the time of its adoption for a quota of imports, which will be the average of the imports carried out in the 36 (thirty-six) months prior to the last 12 (twelve) months in which the measure was activated.

Article 9.- At the end of the validity period of the Special Measure, the margin of preference that corresponds to that moment will be applied, in the Trade Liberalization Program of the Agreement for the product object of the same.


TITLE IV

DURATION OF THE MEASURES

Article 10.- The Special Measures will have a maximum duration of 2 (two) years.

If the conditions that motivated the adopted measure persist, the Special Measure will be extendable for 1 (one) additional year. For this purpose, the Signatory Party that applies the measure will prepare a supported report that demonstrates that the conditions that gave rise to its application persist, which must be sent to the exporting Signatory Party.

Article 11.- Special Measures will not be applied to products whose imports under preferential tariffs have been subject to a Special Measure, unless a period of 1 (one) year has elapsed since the end of the previous measure.


TITLE V

NOTIFICATION AND INQUIRIES

Article 12.- The importing Signatory Party must notify the exporting Signatory Party of the adoption, application and extension of the Special Measure within a maximum period of 10 (ten) days, counted from the date of its application.

Article 13.- In the case of a Special Measure corresponding to literal a) of Article 4, the importing Signatory Party that applies a Special Measure must send, no later than 90 (ninety) days after the date on which the notification was made. , a report with the documentation that justifies the adoption or extension of the measure, which must contain relevant data in the terms of this Annex. In the case of a Special Measure corresponding to literal b) of Article 4, the conditions that gave rise to its application will be reported within the same term.

Article 14.- Together with the information referred to in Article 12, the importing Signatory Party must offer to carry out consultations, which must be carried out within the following 80 (eighty) days after the notification indicated in said Article. Said consultations will have as main objective the knowledge of the facts and the exchange of opinions on the problem raised. The information provided in the consultations will be taken into account for the purposes of evaluating the existence or not of damage or threat of damage.

Any of the Signatory Parties involved may resort to the Dispute Settlement mechanism.

Article 15.- The Special Measures referred to in paragraph a) of Article 4, which are adopted in accordance with this Annex, will not affect the imports that on the date of adoption of the measure are actually shipped with destination to the Importing Signatory Party or are in primary customs zone, which are dispatched for consumption within a period not exceeding 20 (twenty) days from the adoption of the measure.


__________