1
PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN 
THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS
AND 
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN
2
PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN THE ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN AND THE REPUBLIC
OF MAURITIUS 
PREAMBLE
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and
the Government of the Republic of Mauritius, hereinafter 
referred  to,  collectively as the  “Contracting Parties” and
individually as “Contracting Party”
,
Recalling their  longstanding friendship and common
cultural heritage;
Desiring the creation of a new climate for economic and
commercial cooperation between them;
Recognizing the­  huge potential  for  developing trade
relations  between the  two countries  and the desire to
promote mutually beneficial trade;
Considering that the expansion of their domestic markets, 
through commercial  cooperation constitutes  an important 
pre­requisite  for  accelerating their  progress  of economic 
development;
Convinced of the need to establish and promote 
preferential  trading arrangements  for  strengthening the
intra­regional economic cooperation and the development 
of their national economies;
Determined to liberalise trade between the two countries, 
while recognising their  existing and future  rights  and
3 
obligations  arising from other  bilateral, regional  and
multilateral  agreements,  particularly the World Trade 
Organization; 
Convinced that  progressive  elimination of obstacles to
trade through this preferential trade agreement (hereinafter 
referred  to as “Agreement”)  will  contribute  to the
expansion of bilateral  trade  leading to Free Trade 
Agreement between the Contracting Parties: 
HEREBY agree as follows: ­
ARTICLE 1
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this Agreement are to: 
(a)  strengthen the economic and commercial 
relationship between the Contracting Parties; 
(b) increase the volume of trade in goods and services 
between the Contracting Parties; 
(c) promote a more predictable and secure 
environment for the sustainable growth of trade 
between the Contracting Parties; 
(d) expand mutual trade through exploring new areas 
of cooperation;
(e) facilitate diversification of trade products 
between the Contracting Parties;
4 
(f) encourage further competition amongst the
enterprises of the Contracting Parties; 
(g) contribute by the removal of barriers to trade, to
the harmonious development / and expansion of 
bilateral trade, as well as world trade.
ARTICLE 2
GENERAL OBLIGATION
1 (a)  The provisions  of this  Agreement  shall be
interpreted in light of the objectives  set out under Article 
1, as well as, the decisions of the Joint Trade Committee
established under Article 19 of the Agreement.
(b)  In making its  decisions  The Committee shall 
observe applicable rules of international law. 
2.  The Contracting Parties affirm their  existing rights 
and obligations  with respect  to each other  under  the
Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade 
Organization and other  Treaties/Agreements  to which
such Contracting Parties are signatories.
ARTICLE 3
DEFINITIONS
For  the purpose of this  Agreement, unless  the context 
otherwise requires,:
5 
“critical  circumstances” mean the emergence of an
exceptional situation,  where massive preferential  imports 
are causing or threatening to cause “serious injury”
, which
is difficult to repair and which calls for immediate action; 
“dumping” means the introduction of a product into the
commerce of the  other Contracting Party at  less  than its 
normal  value  which is  the comparable price in the
ordinary course of trade for the like product  destined for 
consumption  in the  exporting country,  or, in the absence
of such domestic  price,  is either  the highest  comparable
price for the like product for export to any third country in
the ordinary course of trade, or the cost production of the
product in the  country of origin plus reasonable  addition
for selling cost and profit; 
“non­tariff barriers”  (NTBs)  means  any measure, 
regulation,  or  practice other  than  tariffs  and para­tariffs, 
the effect of which is to restrict imports or to significantly
distort trade between the Contracting Parties; 
“para­tariffs” mean border  charges  and fees  other  than
tariffs  on foreign trade  transactions  with a tariff­like
effect, which are levied solely on imports  but  not  those
indirect  taxes and charges,  which are  levied in the same
manner  on like domestic  products.  Import  charges 
corresponding to specific services rendered, shall not  be
considered as para­tariff measures; 
“preferential treatment” means any concession or privilege
granted under  this  Agreement by a Contracting Party
6 
through the reduction of tariffs  and elimination of NTBs 
on the movement of goods and services; 
“products” means  all  products including manufactured 
products  and commodities in their  raw,  semi­processed
and processed forms; 
“serious  injury”  means  significant  impairment  of  the
domestic industry of like or directly competitive products 
due to a surge in preferential imports  causing substantial 
losses  in terms  of  earnings,  production or  employment 
unsustainable in the short terms; 
“subsidies”  shall  have  the  meaning as  in the General 
Agreement on Tariffs  and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994) and
the relevant WTO Agreements; 
“tariffs” means  customs  duties included in the national 
schedules of the Contracting Parties; 
“The Committee”  means  the  Joint  Trade  Committee
established under Article 19; 
“threat  of serious  injury”  means  a situation in which a
substantial increase of preferential import is of a nature so
as  to cause serious injury to domestic  producer/industry
and that such injury,  although not  yet  existing, is  clearly
imminent. A determination of threat of serious injury shall 
be based on facts and not on mere allegation, conjecture, 
or remote of hypothetical possibility.
7
ARTICLE 4
SCOPE AND COVERAGE
This  Agreement shall  apply to trade between the
Contracting Parties relating to the products  specified in
Annexes A and B to this Agreement, including the extent 
of tariff preferences  indicated against  each tariff line.  These annexes shall  form an  integral  part  of this 
Agreement.
ARTICLE 5
TARIFF LIBERALIZATION
1.  The Contracting Parties,  hereby,  agree to initially
establish a Preferential Trade  Agreement for the purpose
of free movement of goods  between their  countries
through reduction and/or  elimination of tariffs  in
accordance with the provisions of Annexes A and B.
2.  On the request  of either  Contracting Party,  the
Contracting Parties shall  consider  accelerating the
elimination and/or reduction of tariffs set out in Annex A 
and/or B, or to include new products to these Annexes. 
3.  An agreement between the  Contracting Parties  to
accelerate the elimination/reduction of tariff on a good or 
to include  new products for  elimination of tariffs  shall
supersede  any duty rate or staging category specified in
Annexes A and/or B for such  good as  approved by each
Contracting Party,  in accordance with the provisions  of 
this Agreement and its applicable legal procedures.
8
ARTICLE 6
PARA­TARIFFS AND NON­TARIFF BARRIERS
1.  The Contracting Parties agree to identify measures, 
exchange  information and negotiate  with a  view to
eliminate  all  para­tariff and non­tariff barriers  and any
other  equivalent  measures on the  movement of goods, 
other than those imposed in accordance with Articles 13
and 14,  or after  consultations  under  Article  20 of this 
Agreement,  immediately after coming into force of this 
Agreement. 
2.  The Contracting parties also agree not to increase the
existing para­tariffs, or introduce new or  additional para­ 
tariffs without mutual consent as from the date of coming
into force of this Agreement. 
3.  The Contracting Parties shall  consider  further 
liberalization of their  bilateral  trade through future 
consultations.
ARTICLE 7
NON­APPLICATION
The provisions  of this  Agreement shall not  apply to
preferences  already granted  or  to be granted by any
Contracting Party to other  parties  and to third countries
through bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral  trade
agreements  or  similar  arrangements,  and falling outside
the framework of this Agreement.
9
ARTICLE 8
NATIONAL TREATMENT
1.  The Contracting Parties shall  ensure  that  domestic 
laws,  regulations  and all  other  measures and formalities 
applicable  to imports  from the  other  Contracting Party
shall not be applied in such manner so as to afford undue
protection to domestic production. 
2.  Subject to other  provisions  of this  Agreement, the
Contracting Parties shall  accord treatment  to products 
originating from the  territory of the other  Contracting
Party no less  favourable  than that  accorded to the like
domestic products.
ARTICLE 9
TRANSPARENCY
1.  The Contracting Parties shall  ensure  transparency
with regard  to their  relevant regulations  and practices 
through publication.
2.  The Contracting Parties shall notify each other  the 
existing and new measures, which pertain to or may affect 
the operation of this Agreement.
3. Where  any regulation,  practice or  notification has 
been made by a Contracting Party in a language other than
in the English language, an English translation of the text 
shall be provided to the other Contracting Party.
10
ARTICLE 10
EXCEPTIONS
1.  The Contracting Parties shall  not  apply measures in
such manner  as to constitute  arbitrary or  unjustifiable 
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between
them. 
2.  Subject to paragraph (1), nothing in this Agreement 
shall preclude  prohibitions  and/or restrictions  on imports 
or exports of products, which are justified on grounds of­ 
(a)  public morality; 
(b)  religious values; 
(c)  national security; 
(d)  the protection  of human, animal and plant life
and health; 
(e)  the protection  of national  treasures possessing
artistic, historic or archeological value; 
(f)  the protection  of exhaustible  natural  resources 
and genetic reserves; or 
(g)  regulatory restrictions on trade in gold or silver. 
3.  Nothing in this  Agreement shall  be understood to
require either Contracting Party to furnish any information
the disclosure of which is contrary to its essential security
interests.
11 
4.  Where  a  Contracting Party intends  to apply an 
exception provided for  in this  Article,  it shall forthwith
notify the  other  party of its  intention,  and shall accord
sympathetic  consideration to any representation that may
be made by the other Contracting Party.
ARTICLE 11
RULES OF ORIGIN
Products  covered  by the  provisions  of this  Agreement 
shall be eligible  for  preferential  treatment  provided they
satisfy the Rules of Origin as set  out in Annex C to this 
Agreement,  which shall  form an integral  part  of this 
Agreement.
ARTICLE 12
CUSTOMS VALUATION
Matters relating to customs valuation shall be governed by
Article  VII  of GATT 1994 and the WTO  Agreement  on
the Implementation of Article VII of GATT 1994.
12
ARTICLE 13
SAFEGUARD MEASURES
1.  Where any product is imported into the territory of a
Contracting Party in such a manner or in such quantities as 
to cause or threaten to cause serious injury in the territory
of that  Contracting Party,  such Contracting Party may
after prior consultations with the other Contracting Party, 
except in critical circumstances, suspend provisionally the
preferential treatment accorded to that product under this 
Agreement.
2. Any suspension of preferential treatment pursuant to
paragraph 1 shall forthwith be notified to the other 
Contracting Party .
3. The Contracting Parties,  through The Committee, 
shall enter into consultations and shall endeavor to reach a
mutually acceptable agreement and to remedy the situation
in accordance with the provisions of Articles 20 and 21 of 
this Agreement.
ARTICLE 14
ANTIDUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING
MEASURES
1.  Where  either  Contracting Party determines  that 
dumping is  taking place  in its  territory from products 
emanating from the  other Contracting Party,  it may levy
an anti­dumping duty on the importation of the products 
dumped,  where it determines that  the effect  of the
13 
dumping is such as to cause, or threaten to cause, material 
injury to domestic  industry,  or  to retard materially the
establishment of a domestic industry.
2. Either  Contracting Party shall  be free to apply
countervailing measures in case where prices  are 
influenced  by unfair  trade  practices  like subsidies,  in
accordance with the  provisions  of the relevant  WTO 
Agreements.
ARTICLE 15
PROHIBITION & SHORTAGE CLAUSE
1.  Any Contracting Party may prohibit the importation
of product  containing any inputs  originating from any
third country not covered by its diplomatic recognition or 
trade policy.  Where a Contracting Party has  prohibited
the importation of a product under this paragraph, it shall
forthwith notify the  other  Contracting Party of its 
decision. 
2.  Nothing in this  Agreement shall preclude the
maintenance or  adoption by either Contracting Party of 
any trade restrictive measures necessary to remove or to
forestall a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product 
essential to the exporting Contracting Party.
14
ARTICLE 16
STATE TRADING ENTERPRISES
1.  Nothing in this  Agreement shall prevent  a
Contracting Party maintaining or  establishing a state 
trading enterprise as provided for  in Article  XVII  of 
GATT 1994. 
2.  Each Contracting Party shall  ensure  that  a state 
trading enterprise falling under its jurisdiction acts in a
manner  consistent with the provisions of this Agreement 
and accords  non­discriminatory treatment in the  import 
from and export to the other Contracting Party.
ARTICLE 17
STANDARDS AND TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
The Contracting Parties shall  ensure  that standards  or 
technical regulations are not prepared, adopted or applied
so as to create unnecessary obstacles to mutual trade or to
protect domestic production, but are prepared, adopted and
applied with a view to fulfill legitimate objectives taking
into account any risk factor, including available scientific 
and technical information as well as the intended end uses 
of products.
15
ARTICLE 18
SPS MEASURES
1.  The Contracting Parties shall ensure that any sanitary
or phytosanitary measure is applied to the extent necessary
to protect  human, animal  or  plant  life or  health and not 
prepared,  adopted  or  applied so as to create unnecessary
obstacles to mutual  trade  or  to protect  domestic 
production. 
2.  Sanitary and phytosanitary measures applied pursuant 
to paragraph (1) shall  be  based on internationally
established  scientific  principles  and supported by
sufficient evidence, taking into account the availability of 
relevant scientific information and regional conditions.
ARTICLE 19
JOINT TRADE COMMITTEE
1.  A Joint Trade Committee,  consisting of Officials  of 
the Contracting Parties,  shall be established.  The
Committee shall meet initially within three months of the
entry into force of  the  Agreement  and thereafter  at  least 
once a year. 
2.  The Committee shall review the progress made in the
implementation of this Agreement including the review of 
notified para­tarrif and non tarrif barriers,  and undertake
such function as is vested into it by this Agreement.
16 
3.  The Committee shall set  out  its rules of procedures
during the its first meeting. 
4.  The Committee  may set  up any Sub­Committee(s) 
and /or Working Group(s)for such specific purposes as it 
may consider necessary.
ARTICLE 20
CONSULTATIONS
1.  Each Contracting Party shall  accord sympathetic
consideration and shall  afford adequate  opportunity for 
consultations  regarding such  representations  as  may be
made by the  other Contracting Party with respect to any
matter affecting the operation of this Agreement.
2.  The Committee shall  meet  at  the request  of either 
Contracting Party to consider any matter falling within the
ambit of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 21
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
1.  Any dispute that may arise between the Contracting
Parties regarding the interpretation and application of the
provisions  of this  Agreement or  any instrument  adopted
within its framework concerning the rights and obligation
of the Contracting Parties shall be amicably settled
through consultations.
17 
2.  Any request for consultation, which shall specify the
measure  in dispute,  by a Contracting Party shall  be
sympathetically and favorably considered  by the other 
Contracting Party. 
3.  Where a request for consultation is made pursuant to
this Article, the Contracting Party shall: 
(a)  unless otherwise mutually agreed, reply to the
request  within 15 days  after  the  date  of its  receipt;
and
(b)  enter into consultations, in good faith, within
a period of no more than 30 days after date of receipt 
of the request, or  such  other period as  may be
mutually agreed with a view to reaching a mutually
satisfactory solution.
4.  Where  a  Contracting Party does not  respond to a
request  for  consultation or enter  into consultations  as 
provided for  in paragraph (3),  the matter  shall be dealt
with in accordance with working procedures drawn up by
the Committee. 
5.  Consultations  shall  be  confidential  and without 
prejudice to the  rights  of any Contracting Party in any
further conciliatory proceedings. 
6.  Any dispute not settled within 30 days, or such other 
period as may be  agreed,  of consultations  being
undertaken under  this  Article shall  be referred  to The
Committee.
18 
7.  The Committee shall resolve  any dispute referred to
it  under  this  Article in accordance with working
procedures drawn up by it.
ARTICLE 22
TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT
Either Contracting Party may terminate this Agreement by
means  of a  written notification through diplomatic
channels to the other Contracting Party, which shall take
effect 6 months after the date of such notification.
ARTICLE 23
AMENDMENTS
The Contracting Parties may amend and develop the
provisions  of this  Agreement through mutual  consent,
taking into account  the  experience gained in its 
application.
ARTICLE 24
ANNEXES
An annex  to this  Agreement shall  be constituted as an 
integral part of this Agreement.
19
ARTICLE 26
ENTRY INTO FORCE
This  Agreement shall  enter  into force not  later  than  30
November 2007. 
In witness  thereof,  the  undersigned,  duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this 
agreement.
Done in two duplicates at Port Louis, Mauritius on the 30
th 
Day of July 2007. 
Hon. Humayun Akhtar 
Khan ,
Minister for Commerce, 
Government of the 
Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan
Hon. Madan Murlidhar 
Dulloo, 
Minister of Foreign
Affairs, International 
Trade and Cooperation
Government of 
the Republic of 
Mauritius