Free Trade Agreement  between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras

PREAMBLE
The United Mexican States, the Republic of El Salvador, the Republic of Guatemala and the Republic of Honduras.
RESOLVED TO:
STRENGTHEN the bonds of friendship and the existing spirit of cooperation between their peoples:
ACCELERATE and promote the revitalization of American integration schemes;
ACHIEVE a better balance in your business relationships;
CONTRIBUTE to harmonious development, the expansion of world trade and the expansion of international cooperation;
PROMOTE a more extensive and secure market for the goods produced and the reciprocal exchange of services in their territories;
INCREASE the competitiveness of the services sector, to consolidate the competitiveness of the countries in the free trade zone;
REDUCE the provisions in your reciprocal trade;
ESTABLISH a legal framework with clear and mutually beneficial rules for the promotion and protection of investments, as well as to facilitate the commercial exchange of their goods and services;
ENSURE a predictable commercial framework for the planning of productive activities and investment;
DEVELOP the provisions of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), as well as other bilateral and multilateral integration and cooperation instruments;
STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their companies in world markets;
PROTECT intellectual property rights;
CREATE employment opportunities and improve living standards in their respective territories;  PROMOTE economic development consistent with the protection and conservation of the environment, as well as sustainable development;
PRESERVE its ability to safeguard the public welfare; Y
PROMOTE the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening their economic relations;
CELEBRATE THIS FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
Chapter I INITIAL PROVISIONS
Article 1-01 Establishment of the free trade zone. The Parties establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the GATS.
Article 1-02 Objectives.
1. The objectives of this treaty, specifically developed through its principles and rules, are the following:
a) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade in goods and services between the Parties;
b) promote conditions of free competition within the free trade zone;
c) eliminate barriers to trade and facilitate the circulation of originating goods and services between the Parties;
d) remove barriers to the movement of capital and business persons between the territories of the Parties;
e) increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;
f) protect and enforce, adequately and effectively, intellectual property rights in the territory of the Parties;
g) establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this treaty; Y
h) create effective procedures for the application and compliance of this treaty, for its joint administration and for the settlement of disputes.
2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.
Article 1-03 Relationship with other international treaties and agreements.
1. The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them under the WTO Agreement and other treaties and agreements to which they are party.
2. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this treaty, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 1-04 Scope of application.
The provisions of this treaty apply between Mexico and El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras. This treaty does not apply between El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras.
Article 1-05 Observance of the treaty.
Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional norms, compliance with the provisions of this treaty in its territory, at the federal or central, state or departmental and municipal level, except in cases where this treaty provides otherwise.
Article 1-06 Succession of treaties.
Any reference to any other international treaty or agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms to a successor treaty or agreement to which the Parties are party.
Article 1-07 Annexes.
The annexes to this treaty constitute an integral part of it.
Chapter II GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Article 2-0 Definitions of General Application.
For the purposes of this treaty, unless otherwise provided, it shall be understood as:
TRIPS Agreement : the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, which is part of the WTO Agreement;
GATS : the General Agreement on Trade in Services, which is part of the WTO Agreement;
WTO Agreement: the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, dated April 15, 1994;
customs duty : any import tax, duty or tribute and any charge of any kind applied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except:
a) any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, with respect to like goods, direct competitors or substitutes of the Party, or with respect to goods from which it has been manufactured or produced all or part of the imported good;
b) any countervailing duty;
c) any duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered; Y
d) any premium offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariffs-quota or tariff preference quotas;
good : products or merchandise as understood in the GATT 1994, whether originating or not;
good of a Party : national products as understood in the GATT 1994, those goods that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating goods. A good of a Party may incorporate materials from other countries;
originating good or originating material : a good or a material that qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI;
Customs Valuation Code : the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, including its interpretative notes, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;
Commission : the Administrative Commission established in accordance with article 18-01; countervailing duty: "countervailing duty" as defined in Chapter IX; days: calendar or calendar days;
business : an entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and privately or government owned, including companies, foundations, partnerships, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, or other associations;
State enterprise : an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through equity participation;
enterprise of a Party : an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party;
existing : in force at the entry into force of this treaty;
tariff fraction : the breakdown of a Harmonized System tariff classification code to more than six digits;
GATT 1994 : the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;
measure : any law, regulation, procedure, provision or administrative practice, among others;
national : a natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with its applicable law;  Party : any State for which this treaty has entered into force;  Exporting Party : the Party from whose territory a good or service is exported;  Importing Party : the Party into whose territory a good or service is imported;
heading : a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the four-digit level;
person : a physical or natural person, or a company;
person of a Party : a national or company of a Party;
Tariff Reduction Program : the one established in paragraph 5 of article 3-04 and in paragraph 1 of article 4-04;
Secretariat : the Secretariat established in accordance with article 18-02;
SAC : the Central American Tariff System used by the member countries of the General Treaty of Central American Economic Integration, based on the Harmonized System of Designation and Coding of Goods;  Harmonized System : the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System in force, including its general rules and its section, chapter and subheading legal notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted it in their respective legislations; subheading: a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the six-digit level;
territory : for each Party, as defined in Annex 2-01.
Annex 2-01 Country Specific Definitions
For the purposes of this treaty, unless otherwise provided, it shall be understood as:
territory :
a) with respect to Mexico:
i) the states of the Federation and the Federal District;
ii) islands, including reefs and cays in adjacent seas;
iii) the islands of Guadalupe and Revillagigedo, located in the Pacific Ocean;
iv) the continental platform and the submarine bases of the islands, cays and reefs;
v) the waters of the territorial seas, to the extent and terms established by international law, and internal maritime waters;
vi) the space located on the national territory, with the extension and modalities established by international law itself; Y
vii) any area beyond the territorial seas of Mexico within which Mexico may exercise rights over the seabed and subsoil and over the natural resources they contain, in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as with its internal legislation; Y
b) with respect to El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras: the terrestrial, maritime and air space of each Party, as well as their exclusive economic zones and their continental shelves, over which they exercise sovereign rights and jurisdiction, in accordance with their legislation and the law international.
Chapter III
NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS OF GOODS
Article 3-01
Definitions .
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
industrial goods : a good that is not considered as agricultural, according to the definition of chapter IV;
consumed :
a) actually consumed; either
b) processed or manufactured in such a way that it gives rise to a substantial change in the value, form or use of a good or to the production of another good;
material : "material" as defined in Chapter VI;
samples without commercial value :
a) raw materials and goods whose dimensions, quantities, weight, volume or presentation are such as to indicate, without a doubt, that they are not usable for anything other than demonstration or proof;
b) the objects of common materials fixed on cards, supports or clearly presented as samples according to the uses of the trade;
c) raw materials and goods, as well as the leftovers in these raw materials or goods, which have been rendered useless for anything other than demonstration, by laceration, perforation, placement of indelible marks or any other effective means to avoid any possibility to be commercialized; Y
d) Goods that cannot be conditioned in the form of samples without commercial value, according to the provisions of subparagraphs a) to c), consisting of:
i) non-consumable goods, with a unit value not greater than 10 United States dollars, which are made up of unique specimens of each series or quality; Y
ii) consumable goods with a unit value of no more than 10 United States dollars, even composed totally or partially of specimens of the same type or quality, provided that the quantity and manner of presentation of said samples exclude any possibility of commercialization .
Article 3-02 Scope of application .
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties.
Article 3-03 National Treatment .
1. Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of another Party, in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this treaty and are an integral part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 mean, with respect to a state, department or municipality, a treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that that state, department or municipality grants to any similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes, as the case may be. of the Party of which they are members.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the measures indicated in annex 3-03 and 3-09.
Article 3-04 Tariff relief .
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on originating goods subject to the Tariff Elimination Program.1 ,2
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, with respect to goods excluded from the Tariff Elimination Program, any Party may maintain or adopt a prohibition or restriction, or a customs duty on the importation of those goods, in accordance with its rights and obligations derived from the WTO Agreement.
3. Once a year from the entry into force of this treaty, the Parties will examine, through the Committee, the possibility of incorporating the goods excluded from it into the Tariff Reduction Program. The agreements through which these goods are incorporated into the Tariff Elimination Program will be adopted by the Parties in accordance with their legal procedures.
4. Paragraph 1 is not intended to prevent a Party from creating a new tariff item, provided that the customs duty applicable to the corresponding originating goods is not greater than that applicable to the item item itemized.
5. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate its customs duties on originating goods, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 3-04(5).3  6. At the request of any of the Parties, consultations will be held to examine the possibility of accelerating the elimination of customs duties provided for in the Tariff Elimination Program.
7. Once approved by the Parties, in accordance with their legal procedures, the agreement adopted based on paragraph 6, regarding the accelerated elimination of the customs duty on an originating good, shall prevail over any customs duty or category of relief applicable in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program for that good.
8. The Parties agree to set customs duties on industrial goods contained in the Tariff Elimination Program in terms of ad-valorem taxes.
Article 3-05 Customs duty refund programs on exported goods, customs duty deferral programs, and customs duty exemption programs applied to exported goods.
1. Regarding refunds and exemption from customs duties, the Parties shall retain their rights and obligations in accordance with their legislation and the WTO Agreement.
2. When 25% of the domestic industry of a Party considers itself affected by the refund and tariff exemption mechanisms established in another Party, they shall hold consultations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.
Article 3-06 Temporary importation of goods .
1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary importation without payment of customs duty of the goods listed below and that are imported from the territory of another Party into its territory, regardless of their origin and that are available in the territory of that Party. similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes:
a) professional equipment necessary for the exercise of the activity, trade or profession of a business person;
b) equipment for the press or for the broadcast of radio or television signals and cinematographic equipment;
c) goods for sporting purposes or intended for exhibition or demonstration, including components, auxiliary devices and accessories; Y
d) commercial samples and publicity films.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation without payment of customs duty, of a good of the type indicated in subparagraphs a), b) or c) of paragraph 1 to any of the following conditions, without the possibility of adopting additional conditions, when:
a) the good is imported by a national or resident of another Party;
b) the property is used exclusively by the visiting person, or under his personal supervision, in the performance of his activity, trade or profession;
c) the good is not subject to sale, lease or assignment in any other way while it remains in its territory under the temporary importation regime;
d) the good is accompanied by a bond or guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be owed, as the case may be, for the final entry or importation, or by another form of guarantee, refundable at the time of re-exportation of the good , except that no bond or guarantee may be required for customs duties on an originating good;
e) the good is susceptible to identification by any reasonable means established by the customs legislation of each Party;
f) the good is re-exported upon the departure of that person or within the period corresponding to the purpose of temporary importation;
g) the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use and in accordance with the customs legislation of each Party;
h) the good does not undergo any transformation or modification during the authorized import term, except for wear and tear due to normal use of the good; Y
i) the good complies with the sanitary and phytosanitary measures and with the applicable standardization measures, in accordance with the provisions of chapters V and XV, respectively.
3. Except as otherwise provided in this agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation without payment of the customs duty plus other charges that are charged due to importation, of a good of the type indicated in literal d) of paragraph 1, to any of the following conditions, without additional conditions being able to be adopted when:
a) the good is imported only for the purposes of placing orders for goods or services that are supplied from the territory of another Party or from a non-Party country;
b) the property is not subject to sale, lease or assignment in any other way, and is used only for demonstration or exhibition while it remains in its territory;
c) the good is accompanied by a bond or guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be owed in its case for the definitive entry or importation, or of another form of guarantee, refundable at the time of export of the good, except that no bond or guarantee may be required for customs duties on an originating good;
d) the good is susceptible to identification by any reasonable means established by the customs legislation of each Party;
e) the good is re-exported within a term that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of temporary importation, in accordance with the terms established by the customs legislation of each Party;
f) the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use and in accordance with the customs legislation of each Party;
g) the good does not undergo any transformation or modification during the authorized import period, except for wear and tear due to the normal use of the good; Y
h) the good complies with the sanitary and phytosanitary measures and with the applicable standardization measures, in accordance with the provisions of chapters V and XV, respectively.
4. When a good is temporarily imported and does not comply with any of the conditions that a Party imposes in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, that Party may apply the customs duties and any other charges that would be due for final entry or importation. of the same.
Article 3-07 Free import of customs duty for samples without commercial value.
Each Party shall authorize the free import of samples with no commercial value from the territory of another Party.
Article 3-08 Customs valuation .
1. Upon the entry into force of this treaty, the customs value of an imported good shall be determined in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code.
2. Pursuant to Article 13 of the Customs Valuation Code, if in the course of determining the customs value of imported goods it is necessary to delay the final determination of that value, the importer may remove them from customs if, when so required, provide a deposit or other form of security provided by the law of the Party. This form will cover the payment of the taxes to which the assets would ultimately be subject.
3. Each Party shall establish the appropriate documentation to prove that the customs value is correct, which shall not be greater than what can reasonably be requested to comply with Article VII of the GATT 1994.
4. When a Party uses or applies estimated prices, it shall establish exemption mechanisms from the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3. Likewise, it shall establish the measures that facilitate the administration of said scheme.
5. Before a Party adopts or modifies the estimated price referred to in this article, it shall communicate to the other Parties the description of the good, its tariff fraction, and the estimated price that it intends to establish.
6. The Parties shall hold consultations with each other, so that the foregoing does not hinder trade.
7. The Parties understand that the estimated price referred to in paragraph 4 will serve only as a reference for valuation cases, and may not be considered as the base price for the determination of the internal taxes of each Party or for the application of duties or customs duties.
Article 3-09 Import and export restrictions.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the import of any good of another Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of another Party, except as provided for in Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this treaty and are an integral part thereof.
2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated in paragraph 1, prohibit export price requirements and, except as permitted for the application of resolutions and commitments regarding countervailing duties, import price requirements. .
3. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit, among others, but not limited to:
a) quantitative restrictions on imports, according to the parameters of paragraph 1;
b) prices or minimum values;
c) voluntary export restraints when they do not result from an agreement consistent with the Agreement on the Application of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which forms part of the WTO Agreement;
d) the granting of import licenses with the condition that the importer acquires national production;
e) the granting of import licenses on the condition that the importer exports; Y
f) the granting of import licenses on the condition that the good to be imported includes a certain percentage of content from the importing Party.
4. In cases where a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import or export of goods from or to a non-Party, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent it from:
a) limit or prohibit the importation of the goods of the non-Party country, from the territory of another Party; either
b) require as a condition for the export of those goods from the Party to the territory of another Party, that they not be re-exported to the non-Party country, directly or indirectly, without being consumed in the territory of another Party.
5. In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import of a good from a non-Party country, at the request of any of them, the Parties shall consult in order to avoid interference or undue distortion in the mechanisms pricing, marketing and distribution in another Party.
6. Paragraphs 1 to 4 do not apply to the measures set out in Annex 3-03 and 3-09.
Article 3-10 Registration of importers.
If, as a result of the application and administration of a registry of importers, a Party considers that the access of a good of that Party to the territory of the Party that applies the measure is hindered or prevented, both Parties shall hold consultations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.
Article 3-11 Customs measures.
Each Party shall ensure that the application, administration, and publication of customs measures are in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, its legislation, and the WTO Agreement.
Article 3-12 Establishment of specific customs.
1. When a Party contemplates the establishment of limitations on the customs clearance of certain types of goods to specific customs, it will consult with the other Parties to avoid that they could affect its interests in accordance with this treaty.
2. The Party that establishes such limitations will allow the entry of the goods into its territory, through any of the legally established border posts, so that the goods reach the specific customs office for the respective clearance, provided they comply with the corresponding customs formalities. .
Article 3-13 Customs processing fees.
No Party shall increase or establish any customs duty for the service rendered by customs and shall eliminate such duties on originating goods upon the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 3-14 Export taxes.
1. Except as provided in this Article and in Annex 3-14, no Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, customs duty, or charge on the export of any good destined for consumption in the territory of another Party, unless they are adopted or keep on said good when it is destined for internal consumption.
2. For the purposes of this paragraph, "temporarily" shall be understood to mean up to one year, or a longer period agreed by the Parties. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party may adopt or maintain a tax, levy or charge on exports to the territory of another Party if such tax, levy or charge is applied temporarily for:
a) alleviate a critical shortage of a food item; either
b) ensure to a national transformation industry the supply of the essential quantities of raw materials during the periods in which the national price is maintained at a level lower than the world price in execution of a governmental stabilization plan, provided that such taxes, liens or charges:
i) do not have the consequence of increasing the exports of that national industry;
ii) do not have the effect of increasing the protection granted to said national industry;
iii) do not go against the provisions of this treaty relating to non-discrimination; Y
iv) are sustained only for the period necessary to maintain the integrity of the stabilization plan.
3. The Parties may hold consultations in relation to the application of the provisions of this article, tending to the application of measures that seek to avoid unwanted effects in the application of a domestic food aid program.
Article 3-15 Country of Origin Marking.
Annex 3-15 applies to measures related to country of origin marking.
Article 3-16 Distinctive products.
Regarding distinctive products, the Parties shall be subject to the provisions of Annex 3-16.
Article 3-17 Publication and notification.
1. Neither Party shall apply before its official publication any measure of a general nature adopted by that Party that has the effect of increasing a customs duty or other charge on the importation of goods of another Party, or that imposes a new or more onerous measure, restriction or prohibition for imports, or that establishes or increases non-tariff type restrictions and prohibitions on imports of goods from another Party or for transfers of funds related to them.
2. Each Party shall identify, in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them in accordance with their respective rates, the measures, restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of goods for reasons of national security, public health, preservation of the flora or fauna, the environment, sanitary and phytosanitary regulations, standards, labels, technical regulations, international commitments, public order requirements or any other regulations.
Article 3-18 Committee on Trade in Goods.
1. The Parties establish the Committee on Trade in Goods, made up of a principal representative and an alternate designated by each Party. The representatives designated by the Parties must be officials in charge of handling matters related to this chapter.
2. The Committee will be integrated upon the entry into force of the treaty and at the request of any Party, it will hold its first meeting within a period not exceeding 60 days after its integration. The Committee will meet ordinarily once a year, and extraordinarily at the request of any Party.
3. Except in the case of extraordinary meetings, for ordinary meetings the Committee will be successively chaired by each Party, with the Party holding the presidency making the call at least 30 days in advance and proposing the agenda of the topics. to treat. It will also have the role of rapporteur.
4. When one of the Parties considers that another Party contravenes the provisions of may request in writing an extraordinary meeting of the Committee, which must be notified to the other Parties. The request must contain the specific measure and provision that the Party considers to be in violation of the treaty. The extraordinary meeting may be held when attended by at least the representatives of the requesting Party and the requested Party and it will take place in the country to which the request for consultations was made. The results derived from the extraordinary meeting do not prejudge, nor will they affect the rights of any Party that did not participate in said meeting.
5. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the extraordinary meeting may be considered consultations under Article 19-05. Likewise, in the event that a Party does not respond within the five days following the date on which the request for the extraordinary meeting was received, it does not hold or does not intend to hold the extraordinary meeting within a Within a period of no more than 15 days, or another mutually agreed period, counted from the date of receipt of the request, said Party may request a meeting of the Commission, in accordance with Article 19-06.
Article 3-19 Levels of temporary flexibility.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-04, preferential tariff treatment shall be granted in accordance with Annex 3-19.
Annex 3-03 and 3-09 Exceptions to articles 3-03 and 3-09 
Section A Measures of El Salvador
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, El Salvador, consistent with its obligations in the WTO, may adopt prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of the following goods:
a) used and retreaded tires included in tariff heading 40.12;
b) Used vehicles, automobiles, tractors, cycles and other land vehicles, together with their parts and accessories included in Chapter 87;
c) used clothing items included in tariff headings 63.09 and 63.10; Y
d) sacks (bags) and sacks used for packaging, made of jute or other textile fibers, classified in tariff subheading 6305.10.
Section B Guatemala Measures
1. Notwithstanding what is established in Article 3-09, Guatemala may adopt or maintain measures related to the export of round or carved logs and sawn wood with dimensions greater than eleven centimeters thick, in accordance with the provisions of the Forest Law, Legislative Decree number 101-96.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, Guatemala may adopt or maintain measures related to the export of coffee, in accordance with the provisions of the Coffee Law, Legislative Decree number 19-69.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3-09, Guatemala may adopt or maintain import price requirements for the importation of used goods described in the following headings and subheadings:  (Descriptions are provided for reference purposes.)
Annex 3-14 Export Taxes
The provisions of paragraph 1 of article 3-14 will not apply to Honduras for bananas, which will be progressively deducted until reaching 0.04 United States dollars per box exported, subjecting the rest of the tariff universe to the provisions of this article.
Annex 3 -15 Country of Origin Marking
1. For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
final buyer : the last person who, in the territory of the importing Party, acquires a good in the form in which it is imported. This buyer is not necessarily the final user of the good;
container : a container, packaging, packaging or wrapping, among others;
common container : the container in which the good will usually arrive at the final purchaser; legible: capable of being read easily;
Sufficient permanence : that the mark will remain on the good until it reaches the final purchaser, unless it is intentionally removed;
customs value : the value of a good for the purpose of imposing import taxes on an imported good; Y
visible : that can be seen with the ordinary handling of the good or container.
2. Each Party shall apply the provisions relating to country of origin marking in accordance with Article IX of the GATT 1994.
3. Each Party may require that a good from another Party imported into its territory bear a country of origin mark that indicates the name of the latter to the final buyer of the good.
4. Each Party may require, among its general consumer information measures, that an imported good bear the country of origin mark in the manner prescribed for goods of the importing Party.
5. Each Party, when adopting, maintaining and applying any country of origin marking measure, shall minimize the difficulties and costs that such measure may cause to the trade and industry of another Party.
6. Each Party:
a) accept any reasonable method of marking a good of another Party, such as the use of adhesive or pressure labels, tags or paint, which ensures that the mark is visible, legible and of sufficient permanence; Y
b) exempt from the country of origin marking requirement of a good of another Party that:
i) is not capable of being marked;
ii) cannot be marked prior to export to the territory of another Party without damaging it;
iii) cannot be marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, so as to discourage its export to the territory of another Party;
iv) cannot be marked without material impairment of its operation or substantial deterioration of its appearance;
v) is in a container marked in such a way as to reasonably indicate the origin of the good to the final buyer;
vi) is raw material;
vii) will be produced in the territory of the importing Party, by the importer or on its behalf, in such a way that the good becomes the good of the importing Party;
viii) due to its nature or the circumstances of its importation, the final buyer can reasonably know its country of origin, even if it is not marked;
ix) has been produced 20 years or more before importation;
x) has been imported without the required marking and cannot be subsequently marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, provided that the omission of marking was not for the purpose of circumventing the country of origin marking requirements ;
xi) is in transit, in guarantee or at the disposal of the customs authority, for purposes of temporary importation without payment of customs duties; either
xii) is an original work of art.
7. With the exception of the goods described in subparagraphs vi), vii), viii), ix), xi), and xii), of subparagraph b) of paragraph 6, a Party may provide that when a good is exempt from the requirement country of origin marking, in accordance with subparagraph b) of paragraph 6, the common outer container is marked so as to indicate the country of origin of the good it contains.
8. Each Party shall provide that:
a) a common container that is imported empty, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but the container in which it is imported may be required to be marked with the country of origin of its content; Y
b) a full common container, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but may be required to be marked with the name of the country of origin of its contents, unless its contents are already marked and the container can be easily opened for inspection, or the marking of the contents is clearly visible through the container.
9. Whenever administratively and legally feasible, each Party shall allow the importer to mark a good of another Party after importing it, but before releasing it from the control or custody of customs authorities, unless the importer has committed repeated violations of the country of origin marking requirements of the Party and has been previously notified in writing that the good must be marked prior to importation.
10. Each Party shall provide that, except for importers who have been notified in accordance with paragraph 8, no special assessment or penalty shall be imposed for failure to comply with that Party's country of origin marking requirements, unless that the goods are withdrawn from the control or custody of the customs authorities without having been adequately marked, or they have been affixed marks that lead to error.
11. The Parties shall cooperate and consult with each other on matters related to this Annex, including additional exemptions from the country of origin marking requirement.
Exhibit 3-16 Distinctive Products
El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras will recognize tequila and mezcal as distinctive products of Mexico for the purposes of standards and labeling. Consequently, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras will not allow the sale of any product such as tequila or mezcal, unless they have been made in Mexico in accordance with their laws and regulations, related to the production of tequila and mezcal.
Annex 3-19 Levels of Temporary Flexibility between Mexico and El Salvador and Guatemala
1. Mexico will grant to the threads and fabrics classified in Chapters 52, 54 to 56 and 58 to 60 of the Harmonized System, produced in the territory of El Salvador or Guatemala in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 and imported into their territory, the preferential tariff treatment established in the Tariff Elimination Program corresponding to originating goods up to the amounts and terms specified below:
a) for Guatemala: 7,500,000 United States dollars per year for a period of four years from the entry into force of the treaty; Y
b) for El Salvador: 2,500,000 United States dollars per year for a period of four years from the entry into force of the treaty.
2. Mexico will grant artificial or synthetic fiber sweaters classified in subheading 6110.30 of the Harmonized System; to pantyhose-stockings classified under heading 61.15 of the Harmonized System and to 100% viscose rayon tablecloths, classified under subheading 6302.53 of the Harmonized System, produced in the territory of El Salvador or Guatemala in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 and imported into its territory, the preferential tariff treatment established in the Tariff Elimination Program corresponding to originating goods up to the amounts and terms specified below:
a) for Guatemala: 500,000 United States dollars per year for a period of four years from the entry into force of the treaty; Y
b) for El Salvador: 500,000 United States dollars per year for a period of four years from the entry into force of the treaty.
3. Guatemala will grant threads and fabrics classified in chapters 52, 54 to 56 and 58 to 60 of the Harmonized System, produced in the territory of Mexico in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 and imported into its territory, the preferential tariff treatment established in the Tariff Reduction Program corresponding to original goods up to 7,500,000 United States dollars per year or its equivalent in quetzales for a period of four years from the entry into force of the treaty.
4. For the purposes of the amounts established in this annex, the applicable rules of origin will be those that appear in annex 6-26.
5. The annual amounts established in this annex will be allocated as follows:
a) in the case of El Salvador, they may not be assigned to assets classified in a certain heading, in an amount that exceeds 25% of the total annual amount, except for heading 55.13, which will not exceed 45%;
b) in the case of Guatemala, they may not be assigned to assets classified in a certain heading, in an amount that exceeds 20% of the total annual amount, except for heading 52.08 which will not exceed 45%; Y
c) For imports from Guatemala from Mexico, they may not be assigned to goods classified in a certain heading, in an amount that exceeds 25% of the total annual amount.
6. The Party into whose territory the goods indicated in this annex are imported, shall administer the amounts indicated therein in accordance with its legislation.
7. The assets indicated in this annex and in annex 6-26 will be subject to the provisions of chapter VII.
Chapter IV  AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
Article 4-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
MFN tariff : the most favored nation tariff;
agricultural good : a good classified in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System:
(Descriptions are provided for reference purposes)
export subsidies: those subsidies or subsidies contingent on export performance, including those listed in Article 9 of the Agreement on Agriculture, which is part of the WTO Agreement;  Customs rate for imports under quota : the customs duty that is paid within the volume negotiated as a quota; and  tariff rate for non-quota imports : the tariff rate applied to quantities in excess of the amount specified in a quota tariff.
Article 4-02 Scope of application .
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by any Party related to trade in agricultural goods.
2. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of this treaty, the provisions of this chapter shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 4-03 International obligations.
A Party, before adopting a measure pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement on goods, in accordance with subparagraph h) of Article XX of the GATT 1994 that may affect trade in agricultural goods between the Parties, must consult through the Committee on Agricultural Trade, established in Article 4-10, with another Party, to avoid the annulment or impairment of a concession granted by that Party in its list of the Tariff Elimination Program.
Article 4-04 Access to markets.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 4-02 and unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Parties shall progressively eliminate their customs duties on originating agricultural goods, in accordance with the provisions of Annex 3-04(5).
2. The Parties, at the request of any of them, will carry out consultations through the Committee, to examine the possibility of accelerating the elimination of customs duties provided for in the Tariff Elimination Program.
3. Once approved by the Parties, in accordance with their legal procedures, the agreement on the accelerated elimination of the customs duty on an originating good that is reached between the Parties, shall prevail over any customs duty or category of relief indicated in accordance with the Tariff Reduction Program for that good.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, with respect to goods excluded from the Tariff Elimination Program, any Party may maintain or adopt a prohibition or restriction, or a customs duty on the importation of those goods, in accordance with its rights and obligations derived from the WTO Agreement.
5. Once a year from the entry into force of this agreement, the Parties will examine, through the Committee, the possibility of incorporating the goods excluded from it into the Tariff Reduction Program. The agreements through which these goods are incorporated into the Tariff Elimination Program will be adopted by the Parties in accordance with their legal procedures.
Article 4-05 Non-tariff measures.
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the import and export of any agricultural good, or measures of the type set forth in Article 4.2 of the Agreement on Agriculture, which forms part of the Agreement. Agreement on the WTO, it has been prescribed that they be converted into ordinary customs duties, such as minimum import prices or values, discretionary import licensing regimes, quantitative restrictions on imports and similar measures applied at the border that do not are customs duties proper, in agricultural trade between the Parties.
Article 4-06 Internal aid.
1. The Parties recognize that domestic support measures can be important for their agricultural sectors, but that they can also distort trade and affect production. In this regard, the Parties will apply domestic support as established in the multilateral agricultural negotiations within the framework of the WTO Agreement and when a Party decides to support its agricultural producers, it will strive to move towards domestic support measures that:
a) have minimal or no distorting effects on trade or production; Y
b) are in full compliance with the provisions of Annex 2 of the Agreement on Agriculture, which is part of the WTO Agreement.
2. To guarantee transparency, the Committee will analyze, at least once a year, the status of all domestic support measures in the Parties, as well as any modification to these measures, seeking to assess compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1. Likewise, the Parties will exchange public information in a timely manner or at the request of the Party.
3. The application of any type of domestic support measures on an agricultural good, to the extent that they cause or threaten to cause damage to the production or trade of the other Party, may be subject to an investigation regarding unfair practices. of international trade and, where appropriate, be subject to the application of countervailing duties in accordance with Chapter IX.
Article 4-07 Domestic Food Aid.
1. The Party that establishes a domestic food aid program, in accordance with paragraph 4 of Annex 2 of the Agreement on Agriculture, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO, shall ensure, through the instruments it deems necessary, that the benefits of this program are received only by consumers of that Party.
2. At the request of a Party, consultations will be held to ensure compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1.
3. If no agreement is reached, the Parties shall refer to paragraph 3 of Article 4-06.
Article 4-08 Export subsidies.
Five years from the entry into force of this agreement, neither Party may maintain or adopt export subsidies on agricultural goods in their reciprocal trade.
Article 4-09 Special agricultural safeguard.
The Parties, with respect to the special agricultural safeguard, shall be subject to the provisions of Annex 4-09.
Article 4-10 Committee on Agricultural Trade.
1. The Parties establish the Committee on Agricultural Trade, made up of representatives of each of them, in accordance with Annex 4-10. The term for the integration of the Committee will not be greater than 90 days from the entry into force of this treaty and will be chaired by a representative of the country hosting the meeting.
2. The Committee may invite representatives of the private or academic sectors and officials of regional and sub-regional organizations to participate, depending on the topic dealt with in the meeting.
3. The Committee will ordinarily meet twice a year and extraordinarily as many times as necessary at the request of a Party. The resolutions of the Committee will be taken by consensus.
4. For the purpose of ordinary meetings, the host Party will convene the other Parties 30 days in advance, and they must acknowledge receipt thereof. For extraordinary meetings, the call time will depend on the urgency of the topic to be discussed.
5. The functions of the Committee include:
a) monitor compliance, application and correct interpretation of the provisions of this chapter;
b) serve as a discussion forum for the Parties to consult and resolve on aspects related to this chapter in coordination with the other committees, subcommittees, working groups or any other instance established in the treaty;
c) make pertinent recommendations to the Commission on matters within its competence;
d) coordinate the exchange of information on trade in agricultural goods between the Parties;
e) carry out an annual assessment of trade in agricultural goods between the Parties and present a report to the Commission;
f) promote cooperation for the application and administration of this chapter; Y
g) Any other functions entrusted to it by the Commission.
Article 4-11 Trade in sugar.
The Parties agree to establish a Sugar Analysis Committee, in accordance with Annex 4-11.
Annex 4-09 Special Agricultural Safeguard
Section A Special Agricultural Safeguard between El Salvador and Mexico
1. El Salvador, notwithstanding what is established in its List contained in annex 3-04(5), may adopt or maintain a bilateral special agricultural safeguard (SAE) in the form of a quota, on an agricultural good listed in this annex, with based on the following:
a) the tariff rate for imports under quota will be the result of applying the Tariff Reduction Program for the good in question, in accordance with the provisions of annex 3-04(5); Y
b) the tariff rate for non-quota imports will be the lower of the base rate and the prevailing MFN rate at the time of importation. 
2. No Party may, with respect to the same good, apply at the same time an SAE and a bilateral safeguard contemplated in Chapter VIII.  3. The application period of an SAE will be until the end of the calendar year.  4. This mechanism will be applied until the end of the Tariff Elimination Program.  5. The amount of the quota for the following goods will be:
Section B Special Agricultural Safeguard between Guatemala and Mexico
1. Guatemala may apply to the goods contained in literal a) of the appendix to this section, as of the second year of validity of the treaty, at the request of the interested party, a special agricultural safeguard (SAE) when all of the following three conditions are met:
a) the volume of imports of a good from Mexico has a weighted average share of Guatemala's total imports of that good in the last three calendar years, greater than that described in the appendix to this section;
b) Guatemala's imports from Mexico of the good in question have exceeded 10% of their average annual growth rate of the last three calendar years; Y
c) the average annual growth rate of the last three calendar years of Guatemala's imports from Mexico in said good is greater than 5%.
2. Mexico may apply for the goods contained in literal b) of the appendix to this section, from the second year of validity of the treaty, at the request of the interested party, an SAE when all of the following three conditions are met:
a) the volume of imports of a good from Guatemala has a weighted average share of total imports from Mexico of that good in the last three calendar years, greater than 5%;
b) the imports that Mexico makes from all over the world of the good in question have exceeded 10% of its average annual growth of the last three calendar years; Y
c) the average annual growth of the last three calendar years of imports that Mexico makes from all over the world of the good in question is greater than 5%.
3. The application of the SAE will consist of an increase in the tariff resulting from applying the Tariff Elimination Program, at the lower tariff between the MFN in force at the time of importation and the base rate indicated for said good in the Tariff Elimination Program.
4. The application of the SAE will not be subject to any compensation.
5. The duration of the SAE will be up to 12 months, extendable for up to 12 more months. The importing Party shall notify the other Party of its intention to extend said measure at least 30 days prior to its expiration.
6. Once an SAE has been applied, the importing Party may apply it again until a period equal to the duration of the measure in accordance with paragraph 5 has elapsed. This new measure may not last longer than 12 months.
7. Once the mechanism described in paragraphs 5 and 6 has been applied, neither Party may apply it again. Consequently, no Party may apply a SAE to a good in the appendix to this section for more than 24 months if the first time this mechanism was activated there was no extension pursuant to paragraph 5 or for more than 36 months if the SAE was applied. again according to paragraph 6.
8. A Party may apply an SAE during the reduction period established in the Tariff Reduction Program for each good, and up to three years after the respective reduction has ended.
9. Notwithstanding what is established in paragraphs 7 and 8, a Party may adopt and apply an SAE for the goods included in the appendix to this section, with the consent of the other.
10. A Party may not simultaneously adopt and apply an SAE and a bilateral safeguard, in accordance with Chapter VIII, with respect to the same good.
11. The SAE adopted by the importing Party will take effect from the day the measure is published in the dissemination body provided for in the legislation of the importing Party, incorporating the pertinent information that justifies its implementation.
12. Notwithstanding the application of the SAE, the Parties may hold consultations to exchange information and to try to reach mutually beneficial agreements.
13. Goods excluded from the Tariff Reduction Program will have the right to use this mechanism when they are incorporated into it. The terms for the application of the SAE to these assets will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
Section C  Special Agricultural Safeguard between Honduras and Mexico
1. Honduras may apply for the goods contained in literal a) of the appendix to this section, as of the second year of validity of the treaty, at the request of the interested party, a special agricultural safeguard (SAE) when all of the following three conditions are met:
a) the volume of imports of a good from Mexico has a weighted average participation greater than 30% of the total imports of Honduras of that good in the last three calendar years;
b) Honduras imports from Mexico of the good in question have exceeded 10% of their average annual growth rate of the last three calendar years; Y
c) the average annual growth rate of the last three calendar years of imports of Honduras from Mexico in said good is greater than 5%.
2. Mexico may apply for the goods contained in literal b) of the appendix to this section, from the second year of validity of the treaty, at the request of the interested party, an SAE when all of the following three conditions are met:
a) the volume of imports of a good from Honduras has a weighted average participation greater than 3% of the total imports of that good from Mexico in the last three calendar years;
b) the imports that Mexico makes from all over the world of the good in question have exceeded 10% of its average annual growth rate of the last three calendar years; Y
c) the average annual growth rate of the last three calendar years of the imports that Mexico makes from all over the world of the good in question is greater than 5%.
3. The application of the SAE will consist of an increase in the tariff resulting from applying the Tariff Elimination Program, at the lower tariff between the MFN in force at the time of importation or the base rate indicated for said good in the Tariff Elimination Program.
4. The application of the SAE measure will not be subject to any compensation.
5. The duration of the SAE will be up to 12 months, extendable for up to 12 more months. The importing Party shall notify the other Party of its intention to extend said measure at least 30 days prior to its expiration.
6. Once an SAE measure has been applied, the importing Party may apply it again until a period equal to the duration of the measure has elapsed in accordance with paragraph 5. This new measure may not last longer than 12 months.
7. Once the mechanism described in paragraphs 5 and 6 has been applied, neither Party may apply it again. Consequently, no Party may apply a SAE to a good in the appendix to this section for more than 24 months if the first time this mechanism was activated there was no extension pursuant to paragraph 5 or for more than 36 months if the SAE was applied. again according to paragraph 6.
8. A Party may apply an SAE during the reduction period established in the Tariff Reduction Program for each good, and up to three years after the respective reduction has ended.
9. Notwithstanding what is established in paragraphs 7 and 8, a Party may adopt and apply an SAE for the goods included in the appendix to this section, with the consent of the other.
10. A Party may not simultaneously adopt and apply an SAE and a bilateral safeguard, in accordance with Chapter VIII, with respect to the same good.
11. The SAE adopted by the importing Party will take effect from the day the measure is published in the dissemination body provided for in the legislation of the importing Party, incorporating the pertinent information that justifies its implementation.
12. Notwithstanding the application of the SAE, the Parties may hold consultations to exchange information and to try to reach mutually beneficial agreements.
13. Goods excluded from the Tariff Reduction Program will have the right to use this mechanism when they are incorporated into it. The terms for the application of the SAE to these assets will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
Annex 4-10 Committee on Agricultural Trade
Pursuant to Article 4-10, the Committee on Agricultural Trade will be made up of:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Ministry of Economy, or its successor;
b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Economy, or its successor;
c) in the case of Honduras: the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, or its successor; Y
d) in the case of Mexico: the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Rural Development, or their successors.
Annex 4-11 Sugar trade between Guatemala and Mexico
1. The Parties agree to establish a Sugar Analysis Committee made up of representatives of each of them.
2. The Committee will review, on a case-by-case basis, to determine the preferential conditions of trade in sugar, when a Party requests preferential access to the good in a particular year. In the event that a Party has been an exporter of sugar in a particular year, in the following year there will be no concession of preferential access for the other Party.
3. For the goods specified in paragraphs 4 and 5, the Parties maintain their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement with respect to tariff and non-tariff measures, except as otherwise agreed by the Committee.
4. For the purposes of this annex, sugar will be understood, for imports to Mexico, as the following subheadings or tariff fractions described in the Mexican General Import Tax Tariff: 1701.11.01, 1701.11.99, 1701.12.01, 1701.12. 99, 1701.91, 1701.99.01 (except those containing flavorings), and 1701.99.99.
5. For the purposes of this annex, sugar shall be understood, for imports to Guatemala, as the following subheadings or tariff fractions described in the SAC: 1701.11.00, 1701.12.00, 1701.91.00, and 1701.99.00 (except those containing flavorings).
Chapter V SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
Article 5-01 Definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, the Parties shall apply as a reference the definitions and terms established:
a) in the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO (Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures);
b) by the International Office of Epizootics (OIE);
c) in the International Plant Protection Convention; Y
d) by the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
2. Additionally, for the purposes of this chapter, the Parties will understand by:
food additive : any substance that by itself is not normally consumed as food, nor is it used as a basic ingredient in food, whether or not it has nutritional value, and whose addition to food in its production, manufacturing, processing, preparation, treatment phase , packaging, packaging, transport or storage, results (or can reasonably be expected to result) directly or indirectly by itself or its by-products, a component of the food or affects its characteristics. This definition does not include "contaminants" or substances added to food to maintain or improve nutritional qualities;
food : any processed, semi-processed or raw substance intended for human consumption, including beverages, chewing gum and any other substances used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of food, but does not include cosmetics, tobacco, nor substances used solely as medicines;  pollutant: any substance or living organism not intentionally added to food, which is present in said food as a result of production (including operations carried out in agriculture, animal husbandry and veterinary medicine), manufacturing, processing, preparation, treatment, packaging, packaging, transportation or storage of said food or as a result of environmental contamination. This term includes physical contaminants;  food safety : quality that ensures that food does not present any risk to human health;  approval procedure: any registration, certification, notification or any other mandatory administrative procedure to approve the use of an additive or establish a tolerance of a contaminant for defined purposes or under agreed conditions in a food, drink or feed, prior to allowing its use or commercialization when any of these contains the additive or contaminant;  control or inspection procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine whether a sanitary or phytosanitary measure is being met, including sampling, testing, inspection, verification, monitoring, auditing, accreditation, or other procedures that involve the physical examination of a good, the packaging of the good, or equipment or facilities directly related to the production, marketing or use of a good, but does not mean an approval procedure;  pesticide: any substance intended to prevent, destroy, attract, repel or control any pest, including unwanted species of plants or animals, during the production, storage, transport, distribution and processing of food, agricultural products or animal feed, or that may administered to animals to combat ectoparasites. The term includes substances intended for use as plant growth regulators, defoliants, desiccants, agents to reduce fruit density or sprout inhibitors and substances applied to crops before or after harvest to protect the product against deterioration during storage and transport. The term does not normally include fertilizers, nutrients of vegetable or animal origin, feed additives or drugs for animals; Y  pesticide residue : any specified substance present in food, agricultural products, or animal feed as a consequence of the use of a pesticide. The term includes any derivative of a pesticide, such as conversion products, metabolites and reaction products, and impurities considered to be of toxicological importance.
Article 5-02 Scope of application.
1. This Chapter is applicable to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures that may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods between the Parties.
2. The framework of rules and disciplines that regulate the adoption and compliance with said measures will be compatible with the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
3. The Parties shall consider as competent authorities those that have the legal responsibility to guarantee compliance with the sanitary and phytosanitary requirements contemplated in this chapter.
Article 5-03 Rights and obligations.
1. Each Party may establish, adopt, maintain or apply any sanitary or phytosanitary measure that regulates the protection of life, human or animal health and plant health, including food safety and the importation of any good from the territory of the Parties, when they do not comply with the applicable requirements, or do not satisfy the approval procedures defined in these measures.
2. Each Party may establish, adopt, maintain or apply sanitary and phytosanitary measures that represent a higher level of protection than that which would be achieved by means of those based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that there is scientific justification to justify it.
3. Each Party shall ensure that its sanitary or phytosanitary measures:
a) are based on scientific principles, taking into account, where appropriate, both relevant factors and different geographical and technological conditions;
b) are maintained only when there is a scientific basis to support them; Y
c) are based on a risk assessment appropriate to the circumstances.
4. Each Party shall ensure that its sanitary or phytosanitary measures do not arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminate between its goods and similar goods of another Party, or between the goods of the latter and similar goods of any other non-Party, when sanitary conditions exist. or similar or identical phytosanitary.
5. The sanitary or phytosanitary measures of each Party shall not constitute a disguised restriction on trade, nor shall they have the object or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties. In this sense, they will ensure that their measures are put into practice only to the degree necessary to achieve their adequate level of protection, taking into account technical, economic and scientific feasibility.  6. Each Party shall have the right to set its appropriate levels to protect life, human or animal health, and plant health, in accordance with the provisions of Article 5-06.
7. Each Party shall ensure that any non-governmental body that it relies on for the development or application of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure acts in a manner consistent with this Chapter.
8. In order to expeditiously apply sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the territory of the Parties and thus facilitate trade flows, the general procedures for the adoption and application of said measures shall be governed by the provisions of Annex 5. -03.
Article 5-04 International standards and harmonization.
1. Each Party shall use, as a frame of reference, the international standards, guidelines or recommendations, for the establishment of its sanitary and phytosanitary measures, except when these do not constitute an effective or adequate means to protect life, human or animal health and plant health, due to factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature, or for scientifically justified reasons or because the level of protection considered appropriate is not obtained.
2. The sanitary or phytosanitary measure of a Party that conforms to an international standard, guideline or recommendation shall be presumed compatible with paragraphs 1 to 5 of Article 5-03.
3. When a Party has reason to believe that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of another Party affects or may adversely affect its exports, and the measure is not based on relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, it may request that Party to inform it by written and within a period not exceeding 30 days, on the reasons for the measure.
4. In order to promote the development and periodic review of international standards, guidelines and recommendations, as well as to achieve a greater degree of harmonization, each Party shall participate, according to its possibilities, in the competent international standardization organizations, in particular the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the International Office of Epizootics and the International Convention for the Protection of Plants.
5. The Parties shall develop criteria and procedures for the harmonization of methods for sampling, diagnosis, inspection and certification of animals, plants, their products and by-products, as well as matters relating to food safety.
Article 5-05 Equivalence.
1. Without reducing the level of protection of life, human or animal health and plant health established in their legislation and in order to facilitate trade, the Parties shall recognize the equivalence of their respective sanitary or phytosanitary measures, without prejudice to the rights conferred on them by this chapter and taking into account the guidelines and recommendations of the competent international standardization organizations.
2. The importing Party will accept a sanitary or phytosanitary measure established, applied or maintained by the exporting Party as equivalent, even when it differs from its own, provided that it objectively demonstrates with scientific information and with risk assessment methods based on agreed international standards. by them, that the measure achieves the appropriate level of protection required by the importing Party.
3. For the purposes of establishing the equivalence between the measures, access for inspections, tests and other applicable procedures will be provided to the importing Party that requests it.
4. Each Party will accept the results of the sanitary and phytosanitary control procedures that are carried out in the territory of another Party, as long as they satisfactorily guarantee that the good complies with the sanitary or phytosanitary measures that are established or maintained in the territory of that part.
5. Upon request, a Party shall consult with another Party, aimed at the recognition of the equivalence of specific sanitary or phytosanitary measures.
6. When developing a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, each Party shall consider the sanitary or phytosanitary measures, in force in or proposed by the other Parties.
Article 5-06 Risk assessment and adequate level of sanitary and phytosanitary protection.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its sanitary and phytosanitary measures are based on an assessment, appropriate to the circumstances, of the existing risks to life, human or animal health, and plant health, taking into account risk assessment techniques. prepared by the competent standardization organizations agreed by the Parties.
2. When carrying out a risk assessment on a good, including food additives and physical, chemical and biological contaminants, each Party shall take into account the following factors:
a) available scientific and technical information;
b) the existence of pests and diseases that must be taken into account, including the existence of areas free or of low prevalence of pests and diseases recognized by the Parties;
c) the epidemiology of risky diseases and pests;
d) the critical control points in the production, handling, packaging, packing and transportation processes;
e) ecological conditions and other environmental conditions to be considered;
f) relevant methods of inspection, sampling and testing; Y
g) the quarantine measures and applicable treatments that satisfy the importing country in terms of risk mitigation.
3. In addition to paragraph 2, when establishing the appropriate level of protection, each Party shall take into account the risk associated with the introduction, establishment and spread of a pest or disease; and when evaluating the risk, it will also take into account, when appropriate, the following economic factors:
a) the loss of production or sales in the event of the entry, establishment or spread of a pest or disease;
b) the costs of control or eradication of the pest or disease in its territory; Y
c) the cost-effectiveness of other possible methods to limit the risk.
4. In establishing its appropriate level of protection, each Party shall take into account the objective of minimizing negative effects on trade, and in order to achieve consistency in such levels of protection, shall avoid making arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions that may cause discrimination or constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 and subparagraph c) of paragraph 3 of Article 5-03, when a Party carries out a risk assessment and concludes that the scientific knowledge or other available information is insufficient to complete the evaluation, it may provisionally adopt a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, basing it on the available information.
6. Once the exporting Party has submitted sufficient information to the importing Party to complete the risk assessment, both Parties shall agree on a time frame for the risk assessment to be completed and, where appropriate, immediately modify the provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure.
7. When a Party is able to achieve its appropriate level of protection, through the gradual application of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, it may, at the request of another Party and, in accordance with this Chapter, allow such gradual application or grant specific exceptions for the extent, during established periods, taking into account the export interests of the requesting Party.
Article 5-07 Recognition of areas free of pests or diseases and areas of low prevalence of pests or diseases.
1. Each Party shall ensure that its sanitary or phytosanitary measures are adapted to the sanitary or phytosanitary characteristics of the areas of origin and destination of the good, whether it is the entire territory of a Party, part of the territory of a Party, or of all or parts of the territories of several Parties.
2. When evaluating the sanitary or phytosanitary characteristics of an area, the Parties shall take into account, among others, the level of prevalence of specific diseases or pests, the existence of eradication or control programs, and the criteria or guidelines developed by the competent international organizations agreed by the Parties.
3. The Parties will recognize the concepts of free zones and zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases. The determination of such zones will be based on factors such as geographic location, ecosystems, epidemiological surveillance and the effectiveness of sanitary or phytosanitary controls.
4. The Party that declares an area of its territory free of a certain pest or disease must demonstrate said condition to another Party with scientific information and grant the assurance that it will remain as such, based on the protection measures adopted by the Parties. authorities responsible for sanitary and phytosanitary services.
5. The Party interested in obtaining recognition of a zone free of any pest or disease must make the request and provide the corresponding scientific and technical information to another Party.
6. The Party that receives the request for recognition indicated in paragraph 5, will pronounce itself within a term agreed with the requesting Party, being able to carry out verifications in the territory of the latter for inspection, tests and other procedures. In case of non-acceptance, it will indicate in writing the technical basis of its decision.
7. The Parties will establish agreements on specific requirements whose fulfillment allows a good produced in an area of low prevalence of pests or diseases to be imported if it achieves the required level of protection.  Article 5-08 Control, inspection and approval procedures.
1. The Parties, in accordance with this chapter, shall apply the provisions contained in Annex C of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, with regard to control, inspection and approval procedures, including the approval systems of the use of additives or establishment of tolerances for contaminants in food products, beverages or feed.
2. When the importing Party requires carrying out a control or inspection procedure at the production stage, the exporting Party shall adopt, at the request of the importing Party, the measures that facilitate access to its territory and provide it with the necessary assistance to the execution of the control or inspection procedure.
3. To ensure the safety of food, beverages and feed, each Party may establish, in its approval procedures and in accordance with its current legislation, authorization requirements for the use of a food additive, or the establishment of a level of tolerance for a contaminant in them, before granting access to their market. When that Party so requires, it may adopt a relevant international standard, guideline or recommendation, as a basis for granting access to these goods, until a final determination is made.
Article 5-09 Transparency.
Each Party, when proposing the adoption or modification of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure applicable in its territory, shall notify through its competent authorities:
a) the adoptions and modifications of said measures and will provide the information on them, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and will make the pertinent adaptations;
b) additionally, it will notify:
i) changes or modifications to sanitary or phytosanitary measures that have a significant effect on trade between the Parties, at least 60 days before the entry into force of the new provision, to allow observations by either Party or persons interested. Emergency situations will be exempt from the term indicated above, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures;
ii) changes that occur in the field of animal health, such as the appearance of exotic diseases and those on list A of the International Office of Epizootics, within 24 hours after the diagnostic detection of the problem;
iii) changes that occur in the phytosanitary field, such as the appearance of quarantine pests or spread of pests under official control, within 72 hours after their verification;
iv) findings of epidemiological importance and significant changes in relation to diseases and pests not included in subparagraphs ii) and iii) that may affect trade between the Parties, within a maximum period of 10 days; v) disease outbreaks in which the consumption of imported natural or processed foods is scientifically proven to be the cause; and vi) the causes or reasons why a good of the exporting Party is rejected, within a period of seven days;
c) The Parties shall use the notification and information centers established before the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures as a communication channel; Y
d) each Party will ensure that there is an information center, capable of responding to the reasonable requests of any Party, and will provide the relevant documentation, in accordance with the principles established in point 3 of Annex B of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
Article 5-10 Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
1. The Parties establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, made up of representatives of each of them and with responsibilities in sanitary and phytosanitary matters. The deadline for its installation will be within 90 days from the entry into force of this treaty.
2. The Committee will have the following functions:
a) except as provided in article 18-01, monitor compliance and correct application of the provisions of this chapter;
b) facilitate agricultural trade between the Parties;
c) promote the improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary conditions in the territory of the Parties;
d) facilitate consultations and issue expedited recommendations on specific sanitary and phytosanitary matters;
e) serve as a discussion forum for the Parties to consult and resolve on aspects related to this chapter and, when required, in coordination with the other committees, subcommittees, technical working groups or any other instance established in the treaty;
f) establish technical working groups or subgroups in the areas of animal health, plant health and food safety, among others, and determine their mandates, objectives and functions in accordance with the provisions of article 5-11;
g) coordinate the exchange of information on sanitary and phytosanitary measures between the Parties;
h) carry out an annual evaluation of the inventory of sanitary and phytosanitary measures between the Parties, and keep it updated;
i) to annually self-evaluate its performance for the purposes of its adequacy in accordance with the needs of trade between the Parties;
j) carry out technical consultations with the support of the competent regional or subregional organizations;
k) establish and monitor the process of harmonization of sanitary and phytosanitary measures in coordination with the competent regional and subregional organizations;
l) carry out the necessary actions for the training and specialization of technical personnel;
m) promote cooperation and exchange of technicians, including cooperation in the development, application and observance of sanitary and phytosanitary measures;
n) submit recommendations to the Commission on matters within its competence;
o) report annually to the Commission on the application of this chapter; Y
p) any other function in relation to this chapter.
3. The organizational structure, functions and general procedures of the Committee will be those set forth in Annex 5-10.
Article 5-11 Technical working groups.
The functions of the technical working groups will be:
a) prepare the terms of reference and its work program within the scope of its competence and report its results to the Committee;
b) develop procedures to achieve a higher degree of harmonization and recognition of equivalences;
c) agree on processes and methodologies for the use of equivalent risk assessment techniques, both in the fields of food safety and plant health and animal health;
d) exchange information on laboratories for the analyzes that need to be carried out on animals, plants, products and by-products that enter the territory of one of the Parties;
e) identify and give priority to technical cooperation actions in matters of common interest, to achieve better control of existing pests and diseases and thus facilitate trade between the Parties;
f) coordinate actions to prevent the introduction of pests or diseases subject to quarantine;
g) exchange information on legislation and the sanitary and phytosanitary situation, as well as pest and disease control methods, diagnostic techniques, handling and processing of agricultural products;
h) propose sanitary and phytosanitary programs and treatments that streamline procedures for trade between the Parties;
i) promote reciprocal collaboration of a technical nature in the aspects of recognition, diagnosis and prevention measures of sanitary and phytosanitary risks;
j) propose to the Committee specific sanitary or phytosanitary protocols that involve greater technical-operational detail; and k) the other functions proposed by the technical working groups and approved by the Committee.
Article 5-12 Technical cooperation.
1. The Parties:
a) facilitate the provision of technical assistance, under mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen their sanitary and phytosanitary measures and their related activities, including research, process technology, infrastructure, and the establishment of standardization bodies; Y
b) provide information on their technical assistance programs related to sanitary or phytosanitary measures in areas of particular interest.
2. The expenses derived from the technical assistance activities will be subject to the availability of funds and priorities in the matter for each Party and the expenses derived from the control or inspection and approval procedures will be borne by the interested parties.
Article 5-13 Technical Consultations.
1. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a Party, when in doubt about the application or interpretation of its content, from initiating consultations with another Party.
2. When a Party considers that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the other Party is interpreted or applied in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, it shall have the obligation to demonstrate the inconsistency.
3. When a Party requests consultations and so notifies the Committee, the latter must facilitate the consultations, being able to refer them to an ad-hoc working group or to another forum, for non-obligatory technical advice or recommendation.
4. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with this article, without satisfactory results, these consultations shall constitute the consultations provided for in article 19-05.
Article 5-14 Settlement of disputes.
1. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a Party, when in doubt about the application or interpretation of any of its provisions, from initiating consultations with another Party, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XIX.
2. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 5-13, these shall constitute those provided for in Article 19-05, if so agreed by the Parties.
Annex 5-03 General Procedures for the Adoption and Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
The general procedures for the adoption and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be adjusted to the following:
1. Harmonization.
The Parties will make use of regional forums specialized in the matter, in order to harmonize their sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
2. Methodology for the recognition of equivalences.
In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of Article 5-05, in the process of recognition of equivalences for their sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the Parties shall address, through bilateral consultations, aspects related to the effectiveness of the measure, impact on the commerce, minimization of the cost of application and adequacy of the technological levels.
3. Methodologies for risk assessment and determination of the appropriate level of protection.
In the risk assessment process, the Parties will apply, in the first instance and whenever they are available, the risk assessment methodologies harmonized at the regional level within the framework of the International Regional Organization for Agricultural Health (OIRSA) in the case of animal health and plant health; and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in the case of food safety.
In the second instance, the methodologies harmonized by the competent international standardization organizations indicated in paragraph 4 of article 5-04 will be used.
4. Methodologies for the recognition of areas free of pests or diseases and areas of low prevalence of pests or diseases.
In the process of recognition of areas free of pests or diseases and areas of low prevalence of pests or diseases, the Parties shall apply, in the first instance, the regionally harmonized methodologies within the framework of OIRSA and, in the second instance, the harmonized methodologies by the competent international standardization organizations.
If necessary, the Parties will establish specific bilateral protocols for particular cases.
5. Accreditation of professionals and institutions in the field of application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, and granting of mutual recognition.
The Parties will seek to standardize their accreditation processes for professionals and institutions in order to grant mutual recognition of the capacity to provide services by their responsible institutions.
6. Procedures to ensure transparency.
In order to ensure transparency in the adoption and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, notification centers and information centers will use the same or similar formats to those designed and used by the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
7. Sanitary and phytosanitary status.
The Parties recognize the sanitary and phytosanitary status recorded in the FAO and OIE database for plant health and animal health, respectively. If reasonable doubt is raised by one of the Parties, by mutual agreement, access will be allowed for inspections, tests and other procedures in order to verify said status.
Annex 5-10 Organizational Structure of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Committee will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties from the Ministries or Secretariats of Agriculture, Public Health and Economy or Commerce, or their equivalent institutions.
2. The Committee will have a presidency and a technical secretary, who will alternate each year. The first year, the presidency will be represented by Mexico and the Technical Secretariat by El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras. In the case of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, the appointments will be made on a rotating basis.
3. The Committee will meet ordinarily once a year and extraordinarily as many times as necessary at the request of a Party. The meetings will be held at the OIRSA headquarters.
4. The president of the Committee will make the calls, in the case of ordinary meetings, thirty days in advance, and receipt must be acknowledged. For extraordinary meetings, the call time will depend on the urgency of the matter to be discussed.
5. The call for the installation meeting will be carried out in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of article 5-10.
6. The meetings will be governed by internal regulations, which will be approved at the installation meeting of the Committee.
7. The resolutions of the Committee will be taken by consensus.
8. The technical secretariat will follow up on the commitments agreed by the Committee and by the technical working groups.
9. The Committee may invite, in a strictly consultative manner, academics, researchers and officials from regional and sub-regional organizations, depending on the topic being discussed at the meeting.
Chapter VI RULES OF ORIGIN
Article 6-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
good : any merchandise, product, article or matter;
fungible goods : those that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical and that it is not possible to differentiate them by simple visual examination;
identical goods : those that are the same in everything, including their physical characteristics, quality and commercial prestige; where small differences in appearance do not prevent goods that otherwise conform to their definition from being considered identical;
similar goods : those that, although they are not the same in everything, have similar characteristics and composition, which allows them to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable. In order to determine if the goods are similar, their quality, commercial prestige and the existence of a commercial brand must be considered, among other factors;
goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties :
a) minerals extracted in the territory of one or more of the Parties;
b) vegetables harvested in the territory of one or more of the Parties;
c) live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or more of the Parties;
d) goods obtained from hunting or fishing in the territory of one or more of the Parties;
e) fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained from the sea by vessels registered or enrolled by a Party and flying the flag of that Party;
f) goods produced on board factory ships from the goods identified in subparagraph e), provided that these factory ships are registered or enrolled by one of the Parties and carry the flag of that Party;
g) property obtained by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;
h) waste1 and waste derived from:
i) production in the territory of one or more of the Parties; either
ii) goods used or collected in the territory of one or more of the Parties, provided that such goods are used only for the recovery of raw materials; either
i) goods produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties exclusively from the goods mentioned in subparagraphs a) to h) or their derivatives, at any stage of production;
shipping containers and packaging materials : goods that are used to protect a good during transportation, other than retail packaging and materials;
total cost : the sum of the following elements in accordance with the provisions of annex 6-01:
a) the costs or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;
b) the costs of direct labor used in the production of the good; Y
c) an amount for direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the good, reasonably assigned to it, except for the following concepts:
i) the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to that good;
ii) the costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the producer's company, which constitutes a discontinued operation;
iii) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of accounting principles;
iv) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good;
v) costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure;
vi) the profits obtained by the producer of the good, regardless of whether they were retained by the producer or paid to others as dividends, nor the taxes paid on those profits, including taxes on capital gains; neither
vii) the interest costs that have been agreed between related parties and that exceed those interests that are paid at market interest rates;
FOB .: free on board, regardless of the means of transport;
place where the producer is located : in relation to a good, the production plant of that good;
material : a good used in the production of another good;
self-manufactured material : that produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;
fungible materials : those that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical and that it is not possible to differentiate them by simple visual examination;
indirect material – a good used in the production, testing, or inspection of a good, but not physically incorporated into the good; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of a good, including:
a) fuel and power;
b) tools, dies and molds;
c) spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;
d) lubricants, greases, compound materials and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;
e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;
f) equipment, devices and attachments used for the verification or inspection of the goods;
g) catalysts and solvents; either
h) any other good that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be part of that production;
intermediate materials : self-manufactured materials used in the production of a good, and designated in accordance with article 6-07;
related person : a person who is related to another person, as follows:
a) one of them holds positions of responsibility or direction in a company of the other;
b) are legally recognized as business associates;
c) are in an employer-employee relationship;
d) a person has, directly or indirectly, ownership, control or possession of 25% or more of the outstanding shares or titles and with voting rights of both;
e) one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;
f) both persons are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;
g) together directly or indirectly control a third party; either
h) are from the same family and include only children, siblings, parents, grandparents or spouses;
generally accepted accounting principles : those on which there is a recognized consensus or that enjoy substantial and authorized support in the territory of a Party, regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements and that are applied in the territory of that Party. These standards can be broad guidelines of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;
production : the growing, extracting, harvesting, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or assembling of a good;
producer : a person who grows, mines, harvests, fishes, hunts, manufactures, processes, or assembles a good;
used : used or consumed in the production of goods;
transaction value of a good : the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the good is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good; Y
transaction value of a material : the price actually paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the material is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the supplier of the material and the buyer referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good.
Article 6-02 Instruments of application and interpretation.
1. For purposes of this chapter:
a) the basis of tariff classification is the Harmonized System;
b) the determination of the transaction value of a good or a material will be made in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code; Y 
c) all costs referred to in this chapter shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, when applying the Customs Valuation Code to determine the origin of a good:
a) the principles of that code will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications that the circumstances require, as they would be applied to international ones; Y
b) The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over those of that code in that in which they are incompatible.
Article 6-03 Original goods.
1. A good will be originating when:
a) is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties, as defined in Article 6-01;
b) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in one or more of the Parties in accordance with this Chapter;
c) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in Annex 6-03 and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;
d) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification and other requirements, and the good meets a regional value content requirement, as specified in the annex 6-03, and with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;
e) is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties and meets a regional value content requirement, as specified in Annex 6-03, and meets the other applicable provisions of this chapter; either
f) except for goods included in Chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the good is produced in the territory of one or more of the Parties, but one or more of the non-originating materials used in the production of the good do not comply with a change in tariff classification because:
i) the good has been imported into the territory of one of the Parties without assembly or disassembly, but it has been classified as an assembled good in accordance with General Rule 2 a) of the Harmonized System; either
(ii) the heading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and that heading is not divided into subheadings or the subheading is the same for both the good and its parts; provided that the regional value content of the good, determined in accordance with article 6-04, is not less than 50%, unless otherwise provided in annex 6-03 and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter .
2. For the purposes of this chapter, the production of a good from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in annex 6-03, must be made entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties and any regional value content requirement of a good must be fully satisfied in the territory of one or more of the Parties.
Article 6-04 Regional value content.
1. Each Party shall provide that the regional value content of a good be calculated, by the exporter or producer of the good, in accordance with the transaction value method provided in paragraph 2.
2. To calculate the regional content value of a good based on the transaction value method, the following formula will be applied:
VT - VMN VCR= ----------------- x 100 VT
where:
RVC : regional value content expressed as a percentage;
VT : transaction value of a good adjusted on an FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 3; Y
VNM : value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the determined good in accordance with the provisions of article 6-05.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, when the producer of the good does not export it directly, the transaction value will be adjusted up to the point in which the buyer receives the good within the territory where the producer is located.
4. Each Party shall provide that in the event that there is no transaction value or the transaction value of the good cannot be determined in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6, the transaction value may be calculated in accordance with the principles of Articles 2 to 5 of the Customs Valuation Code. In case of not being able to determine the value in accordance with any of the Articles 2 to 5 of the Customs Valuation Code, optionally, the producer or exporter may choose to calculate the transaction value in accordance with the principles of Articles 6 or 7 of the Code Customs Valuation.
5. For the purposes of paragraph 4, there will be no transaction value when the good is not the object of a sale.
6. For the purposes of paragraph 4, the transaction value of the asset cannot be determined when:
a) there are restrictions on the transfer or use of the asset by the buyer, except for those that:
i) imposed or required by the law or the authorities of the Party in which the buyer of the good is located;
ii) limit the geographic territory where the good can be resold; either
iii) do not significantly affect the value of the property;
b) the sale or the price depend on some condition or consideration whose value cannot be determined in relation to the good;
c) reverts directly or indirectly to the seller any part of the proceeds of the resale or of any subsequent assignment or use of the good by the buyer, unless the due adjustment can be made in accordance with the provisions of Article 8 of the Customs Valuation Code ;
d) the buyer and seller are related persons and the relationship between them influences the price, except as provided in Article 1.2 of the Customs Valuation Code; either
e) the good is sold by the producer to a related person and the volume of sales, in units of quantity of identical or similar goods, sold to related persons, during a period of six months immediately preceding the month in which the producer sold that good, exceeds 85% of the total sales of the producer of those goods during that period.
7. Except for goods covered by Article 6-15, a producer may average the regional value content of one or all of the goods covered by the same subheading, which are produced in the same plant or in different plants within the territory of a Party, either on the basis of all the goods produced by the producer or only the goods that are exported to the other Party:
a) in its fiscal year or period; either
b) in any monthly, bimonthly, quarterly, four-monthly or semi-annual period.
Article 6-05 Value of materials .
1. The value of a material:
a) will be the transaction value of the material; either
b) in the event that there is no transaction value or the transaction value of the material cannot be determined in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6 of article 6-04, it will be calculated in accordance with the principles of Articles 2 to 5 of the Code of Customs Valuation. In case of not being able to determine the value in accordance with any of the Articles 2 to 5 of the Customs Valuation Code, optionally, the producer or exporter may choose to calculate the transaction value in accordance with the principles of Articles 6 or 7 of the Code Customs Valuation.
2. When they are not considered in literals a) or b) of paragraph 1, the value of a material will include:
a) freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the port of importation in the Party where the producer of the good is located, except as provided in paragraph 3; Y
b) the cost of scrap and scrap resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less any recovery of these costs, provided that the recovery does not exceed 30% of the value of the material, determined in accordance with paragraph 1.
3. When the producer of the good acquires a non-originating material within the territory of the Party where it is located, the value of the non-originating material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in the transportation of the material. from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located.
4. For purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with Article 6-04, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used by:
a) another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either
b) the producer of the good in the production of an originating material of own manufacture and that is designated by the producer as intermediate material in accordance with article 6-07.
Article 6-06 De minimis.
1. A good shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good that do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 6-03 does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the good. adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 6-04.
2. When the good indicated in paragraph 1 is additionally subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of those non-originating materials shall be taken into account in the calculation of the regional value content of the good and it must satisfy the other requirements. applicable to this chapter.
3. A good that is subject to a regional value content requirement established in Annex 6-03 will not have to satisfy it if the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 7% of the adjusted transaction value of the good on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 6-04.
4. Paragraph 1 does not apply to:
a) goods included in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System; neither
b) a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods included in Chapters 01 to 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material is included in a different subheading than that of the good for which the origin is being determined in accordance with this article.
5. A good included in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System that is not originating because the fibers and yarns used in the production of the material that determines the tariff classification of that good do not comply with the change in tariff classification provided in Annex 6 -03, it will nevertheless be considered as originating if the total weight of those fibers and yarns of that material does not exceed 7% of the total weight of that material.
Article 6-07 Intermediate materials.
1. For purposes of calculating the regional content value in accordance with article 6-04, the producer of a good may designate as an intermediate material, any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good, provided that this material complies with the provisions in article 6-03.
2. When an intermediate material is designated and subject to a regional value content requirement, for purposes of calculating the regional value content of the intermediate material, the transaction value of the intermediate material referred to in Article 6-04 may be determined from accordance with the principles of Articles 2 to 5 of the Customs Valuation Code. In case of not being able to determine the value in accordance with any of the Articles 2 to 5 of the Customs Valuation Code, optionally, the producer or exporter may choose to calculate said value in accordance with the principles of Articles 6 or 7 of the Valuation Code customs.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, where an intermediate material is designated and is subject to a regional value content requirement, for purposes of calculating the regional value content of the intermediate material, the transaction value of the referenced intermediate material in article 6-04 may be:
a) the total cost incurred with respect to all goods produced by the producer of the good, which can be reasonably allocated to that intermediate material in accordance with the provisions of Annex 6-01; either
b) the sum of each cost that is part of the total cost incurred with respect to the intermediate material, that can be reasonably assigned to that intermediate material, in accordance with the provisions of annex 6-01.
4. If a material designated as an intermediate material is subject to a regional value content requirement, no other self-produced material subject to a regional value content requirement used in the production of that intermediate material may, in turn, be designated by the producer as intermediate material.
Article 6-08 Accumulation.
For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, an exporter or producer may accumulate its production with that of one or more producers, in the territory of one or more of the Parties, of materials that are incorporated into the good, so that the production of the materials is considered to be carried out by that exporter or producer, provided that the provisions of article 6-03 are complied with.
Article 6-09 Expendable goods and materials.
1. For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined in inventory are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined by one of the inventory management methods. set out in paragraph 3.
2. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory, and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of another Party, the origin of the good may be determined based on one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3.
3. The inventory management methods applicable to materials or fungible goods will be the following:
a) "PEPS" (first in, first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were first received in inventory is considered as the origin in equal number of units of the materials or consumables that first come out of inventory;
b) "LUEP" (last in-first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were received last in inventory is considered as the origin in equal number of units of the materials or consumables first removed from inventory; either
c) "averages" is the inventory management method by which, except as provided in paragraph 4, the determination as to whether the materials or consumables are originating will be made through the application of the following formula:
OMT PMO = ------------- x 100 TMOYN
where:
PMO : average originating materials or consumables;
TMO : total units of originating materials or consumables that are part of the inventory prior to departure; Y
TMOYN : total sum of units of originating and non-originating materials or consumables that are part of the pre-departure inventory.
4. In the event that the good is subject to a regional content value requirement, the determination of non-originating fungible materials will be made through the application of the following formula:
TMN PMN =-------------- x 100 TMOYN
where:
PMN : average of non-originating materials;
TMN : total value of non-originating fungible materials that are part of the inventory prior to departure; Y
TMOYN : total value of originating and non-originating fungible materials that are part of the pre-departure inventory.
5. Once one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3 has been selected, it must be used throughout the fiscal year or period.
Article 6-10 Games or assortments.
1. The sets or assortments of goods that are classified according to the provisions of General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, as well as the goods whose description according to the nomenclature of the Harmonized System is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in the game or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of the goods in this chapter.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the set or Assortment adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 6-04.
3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in annex 6-03.
Article 6-11 Indirect materials.
Indirect materials will be considered as originating without taking into account the place of their production and the value of these materials will be their cost that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.
Article 6-12 Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools.
1. The accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools delivered with the good as part of the usual accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools of the good, will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 6-03, provided that:
a) the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the good, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately in the invoice itself; Y
b) the quantity and value of said accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the good.
2. When the good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools will be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, when calculating the regional value content of the good
Article 6-13 Containers and packaging materials for retail sale.
1. When the good is subject to a change in tariff classification, the containers and packaging materials in which a good is presented for retail sale, when they are classified with the good they contain, will not be taken into account to decide if all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 6-03.
2. When the good is subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of the containers and packaging materials for retail sale will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good. .
Article 6-14 Containers and packing materials for shipment.
1. Containers and packaging materials for transporting the good will not be taken into account for the purposes of establishing whether all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 6-03.
2. When the good is subject to the regional value content requirement, the value of the packaging materials for transporting the good will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good and the value of that material will be the cost of the same that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.
Article 6-15 Goods of the automotive industry.
1. For the purposes of this article, it shall be understood as:
frame – the bottom plate of a motor vehicle;
motor vehicle class : any of the following categories of motor vehicles:
a) motor vehicles included in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 16 persons or more, or in subheading 8701.20, 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90, or in heading 87.05 or 87.06;
b) motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.10 or in 8701.30 to 8701.90;
c) motor vehicles included in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 15 people or less, or in subheading 8704.21 or 8704.31; either
d) motor vehicles included in subheading 8703.21 to 8703.90;
model line – a group of motor vehicles having the same platform or model name;
model name : the word or group of words, letter or letters, number or numbers, or similar designation assigned to a motor vehicle by a marketing division of a motor vehicle assembler for:
a) differentiate the motor vehicle from other motor vehicles using the same platform design;
b) associate the motor vehicle with other motor vehicles using a different platform design; either
c) indicate a platform design;
plant : a building or buildings near but not necessarily contiguous, machinery, apparatus and accessories that are under the control of a producer and are used for the production of motor vehicles;
bed - The primary assembly of a load-carrying structural assembly of a motor vehicle that determines the basic size of that vehicle and forms the structural base that supports the powertrain, and serves as a attachment to the motor vehicle in various types of frames, such as for assembly of bodywork, dimensional frame and unitary bodywork; Y
motor vehicle : a good included in heading 87.01, 87.02, 87.03, 87.04, 87.05 or 87.06.
2. To calculate the regional content value of a motor vehicle, the producer may average the calculation in its exercise or fiscal period, using any of the following categories, either taking as a base all the motor vehicles of that category, or only those motor vehicles of that category that are exported to the territory of the other Party:
a) the same model line of the same class of motor vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;
b) the same class of motor vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;
c) the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party; either
d) the same class of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party.
Article 6-16 Operations and practices that do not confer origin.
1. A good will not be considered as originating solely because:
a) dilution in water;
b) simple operations intended to ensure the conservation of goods during transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, freezing, damaged parts, drying or addition of substances;
c) dusting, screening, husking, shelling, division, painting, classification, selection, washing, cutting;
d) packaging, repackaging, packaging, repackaging and packaging, or repackaging for retail sale or conditioning for transport;
e) the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;
f) cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings; Y
g) the assembly of non-originating parts and components to form a completely disassembled good that are classified as a good in accordance with General Rule 2 (a) of the Harmonized System. The foregoing will not apply to goods that had already been assembled, and later disassembled for convenience of packaging, handling or transportation.
2. The modification of the price of the same, whose purpose is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter, does not confer origin to a good.
3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in annex 6-03.
Article 6-17 Transhipment and direct dispatch.
A good shall not be considered as originating, even if it has been produced in accordance with the requirements of Article 6-03 if, subsequent to that production, outside the territories of the Parties, the good:
a) undergoes further processing, is subject to another production process, or any other operation outside the territories of the Parties, except unloading, reloading or any other operation necessary to keep the good in good condition or to transport it to the territory of The other part; either
b) does not remain under the control or surveillance of the customs authority in the territory of a non-Party country.
Article 6-18 Determination of the origin of the goods when there are different rates of tariff reduction.
The determination of the origin of goods with different rates of tariff reduction shall be subject to the provisions of Annex 3-04(5).
Article 6-19 Regional Inputs Integration Committee.
1. The Parties establish the Committee for the Regional Integration of Inputs (CIRI).
2. Each Party shall designate two representatives of the public sector and two representatives of the private sector to integrate the CIRI.
3. The CIRI will operate for a period of 10 years from the entry into force of this treaty. This period may be extended by consensus between the Parties.
Article 6-20 Functions of the CIRI.
1. The CIRI will evaluate the inability of a real and documented supply of a producer of goods in the territory of the Parties, to dispose of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 used by the producer in conditions of opportunity, volume, quality and price. the production of a good.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, producer means a producer of goods for export to the territory of another Party under preferential tariff treatment.
3. In relation to materials used in the production of a good referred to in paragraph 1:
a) are those used by the producer in the production of a good classified in the Harmonized System listed in annex 6-20; Y
b) its use is required by the rule of origin established in annex 6-03, for that good.
4. Annex 6-20 may be modified at any time by consensus between the Parties.
Article 6-21 Procedure.
1. For the purposes of Article 6-20, the CIRI will carry out an investigation procedure that it will initiate at the request of a Party or the Commission. This procedure will begin within five days of receipt of the request and supporting documentation.
2. During this procedure, the CIRI will evaluate the evidence presented to it.
Article 6-22 Deadlines, opinion and notification of the CIRI.
1. The CIRI will issue an opinion to the Commission within the following periods, counted from the date of initiation of the investigation procedure:
a) within 30 days in the event of an unjustified interruption in the supply of materials; either
b) within 60 days in all other cases.
2. The CIRI will rule:
a) on the inability of the producer to dispose of materials in the terms indicated in paragraph 1 of article 6-20; Y
b) when the incapacity referred to in subparagraph a) is established, regarding the terms and conditions of the waiver required in the use of the materials referred to in paragraph 3 of article 6-20, so that a good can receive tariff treatment preference.
3. The CIRI will forward its opinion to the Commission within five days of its issuance.
Article 6-23 Resolution of the Commission.
1. If the CIRI issues an opinion under the terms of article 6-22, the Commission will issue a resolution within a period of no more than 10 days from the receipt of the opinion, unless a different period is agreed upon.
2. When the disability referred to in paragraph 1 of article 6-20 is established, the resolution of the Commission will establish a waiver, under the terms and conditions agreed upon by the CIRI in its opinion, for the use of the materials referred to paragraph 3 of article 6-20, with the modifications it deems appropriate.
3. If the Commission has not ruled within the period indicated in paragraph 1, the opinion of the CIRI will be considered ratified and the case resolved.
4. The resolution referred to in paragraph 2 will be valid for a maximum of one year from its issuance, depending on the causes of shortages for which it was issued.
At the request of the interested Party and within 90 days prior to its expiration, the Commission may extend, after review by the CIRI, its resolution for an equal term if the causes that gave rise to it persist.
5. The resolution referred to in paragraph 4 may:
a) deny the granting of the waiver; or
b) grant a waiver in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2.
6. Any Party may request, at any time during its validity, the review of the resolution of the Commission.
Article 6-24 Referral to the Commission.
1. If the CIRI does not issue the opinion referred to in article 6-22 within the terms established therein, because there is no consensus on the case in question, the consultations referred to in article 19 will be considered concluded. -05 and will forward the case to the attention of the Commission within the five days following the expiration of that term.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Commission shall issue a resolution under the terms of article 6-23. If the Commission does not issue a resolution, the provisions of articles 19-07 to 19-12 and 19-14 to 19-16 shall apply, in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 3 to 17 of this article.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the term for the installation of the arbitral tribunal referred to in article 19-09 will be 20 days, counted from the day after the request for installation of the arbitral tribunal was submitted; and the term for issuing the final resolution referred to in article 19-14 will be 40 days, counted from the day following the installation of the arbitral tribunal.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 2, it will be understood that the mission of the arbitral tribunal will be to issue a decision under the terms of subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 of article 6-22.
5. The final decision of the arbitral tribunal will be binding on the Parties and, if it decides on the waiver referred to in subparagraph b) of paragraph 2 of article 6-22, it will be valid for a maximum of one year. At the request of the interested Party, within 90 days prior to its expiration and prior review by the CIRI, the Commission may extend, depending on the cause of shortage for which the waiver was issued, the resolution of the arbitral tribunal for a term the same, if the causes that gave rise to it persist.
6 The complaining Party may invoke the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 of article 19-16, if the arbitral tribunal rules in its favor and the defendant Party does not comply with the final resolution within the term that the arbitral tribunal has set.
7. The Party complained against may invoke the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5 of Article 19-16.
Article 6-25 Regulation of operation.
The application and administration of the provisions of articles 6-19 to 6-25 will be developed in the Regulations adopted by the Commission.
Article 6-26 Rules of Origin Applicable to Temporary Flexibility Levels.
The rule of origin applicable to the levels of temporary flexibility will be determined in accordance with Annex 6-26.
Annex 6-01 Total Cost Calculation
1. For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
allocation base – any of the following allocation bases used by the producer to calculate the percentage of cost in relation to the good:
a) the sum of the direct labor cost and the direct material cost or value of the good;
b) the sum of the cost of direct labor, the cost or value of the direct material and the direct costs and expenses of manufacturing the good;
c) direct labor hours or costs;
d) units produced;
e) machine hours;
f) amount of sales;
g) plant area; either
h) any other bases that are considered reasonable and quantifiable;
direct manufacturing costs and expenses : those incurred in a period, directly related to the good, other than the cost or value of direct materials and direct labor costs;
indirect manufacturing costs and expenses : those incurred in a period, other than direct manufacturing costs and expenses, direct labor costs, and direct cost or value of materials; Y
for internal management purposes : any allocation procedure used for tax filing, financial statements or reports, internal control, financial planning, decision making, pricing, cost recovery, cost control management, or performance measurement.
2. When the producer of a good uses a cost and expense allocation method for internal management purposes to calculate the total cost for the good to allocate direct material costs to the good, the costs of direct labor or manufacturing direct and overhead costs and expenses, or a portion thereof, and that method reasonably reflects direct material costs, direct labor costs, or manufacturing direct and overhead costs and expenses incurred in the production of the good, that method shall be considered a method of reasonable allocation of costs and expenses and may be used to allocate costs to the good.
3. For purposes of calculating the total cost, the producer of the good may determine a reasonable amount for costs and expenses that have not been assigned to the good, as follows:
a) for the cost or value of direct materials and direct labor costs, based on any method that reasonably reflects the direct material and direct labor used in the production of the good; Y
b) in relation to the direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, the producer of the good may choose one or more allocation bases that reflect a relationship between the direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses and the good, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 6.
4. Any method of reasonable allocation of costs and expenses that a producer chooses for the purposes of this chapter, will be used during their entire financial year or fiscal period.
5. The following concepts will not be assigned to a good and these concepts will be considered as excluded costs and expenses:
a) the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to the good;
b) the costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the producer's company, which constitutes a discontinued operation;
c) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of accounting principles;
d) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good;
e) costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure;
f) the profits obtained by the producer of the good, regardless of whether they were retained by the producer or paid to others as dividends, nor the taxes paid on those profits, including taxes on capital gains; neither
g) Interest costs that have been agreed between related parties and that exceed those interests that are paid at market interest rates.
6. In order to allocate direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, the producer may choose one or more allocation bases that reflect a relationship between direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses and the good.
7. In relation to each base chosen, the producer may calculate a percentage of the cost for each good produced, in accordance with the following formula:
BA PC = ----------- x100 BTA
where:
PC : percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good;
BA : allocation base for the good; Y
BTA : total allocation base for all goods produced by the producer of the good.
8. The costs or expenses for which an allocation base is chosen are allocated to a good according to the following formula:
CAB = AC x PC
where:
CAB : costs or expenses assigned to the good;
CA : costs or expenses that will be assigned; Y
PC : percentage of the cost or expense related to the good.
9. When the costs or expenses mentioned in paragraph 5 are included in the costs or expenses assigned to the good, the percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good used to assign that cost or expense to the good will be used to determine the amount of the excluded costs or expenses that will be subtracted from the costs or expenses that were assigned to the good.
10. Any cost or expense assigned in accordance with any method of reasonable allocation of costs that is used for purposes of internal administration, will not be considered reasonably assigned when it can be demonstrated based on sufficient evidence that its purpose is to evade compliance with the provisions. of this chapter.
Annex 6-18 Determination of Origin of Goods with Different Rates of Tariff Reduction
1. Mexico will apply to El Salvador the customs duty rate established in the Tariff Elimination Program, in accordance with annex 3-04(5), provided that:
a) If the good has a rate of tax relief different from that which Mexico has with Guatemala or Honduras, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, in determining the origin of said good, the materials obtained or the operations carried out in Guatemala or Honduras shall be shall be considered as having been obtained or made in a non-Party country; either
b) if the good has a tax reduction rate identical to the one that Mexico has with Guatemala and Honduras, the determination of origin will be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Mexico will apply to Guatemala the customs duty rate established in the Tariff Elimination Program, in accordance with Annex 3-04(5), provided that:
a) If the good has a rate of relief different from that which Mexico has with El Salvador or Honduras, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, in determining the origin of said good, the materials obtained or the operations carried out in Honduras or El Salvador will be considered as if they had been obtained or made in a non-Party country; either
b) if the good has a tax reduction rate identical to the one that Mexico has with El Salvador and Honduras, the determination of origin will be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
3. Mexico will apply to Honduras the customs duty rate established in the Tariff Elimination Program, in accordance with annex 3-04(5), provided that:
a) If the good has a rate of tax relief different from that which Mexico has with El Salvador or Guatemala, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, in determining the origin of said good, the materials obtained or the operations carried out in Guatemala or El Salvador will be considered as if they had been obtained or made in a non-Party country; either
b) If the good has a tax reduction rate identical to the one that Mexico has with El Salvador and Guatemala, the determination of origin will be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Annex 6-20 Scope of Work of the Regional Inputs Integration Committee
The goods classified in the following tariff classification codes of the Harmonized System will constitute the scope of work of the Regional Inputs Integration Committee.
Chapter VII CUSTOMS PROCEDURES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE ORIGIN OF MERCHANDISE
Article 7-01 Definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
competent authority : the authority responsible for the application of the provisions of this chapter, as provided in Annex 7-01;
identical goods : those that are the same in everything, including their physical characteristics, quality and commercial prestige; where small differences in appearance do not prevent goods that otherwise conform to their definition from being considered identical; and that they are not relevant to the determination of their origin in accordance with Chapter VI;
advance judgment : a resolution issued by the competent authority, in accordance with article 7-10;
exporter : a person located in the territory of a Party from which the good is exported, who in accordance with this chapter, is obliged to keep in the territory of that Party, the records referred to in subparagraph a) of paragraph 1 of article 7 -06;
commercial importation : the importation of a good into the territory of a Party for the purpose of selling it or using it for commercial, industrial or similar purposes;
importer : a person located in the territory of a Party into which the good is imported, who in accordance with this chapter, is obliged to keep in the territory of that Party, the records referred to in subparagraph c) of paragraph 1 of article 7 -06;
producer : a producer, according to article 6-01, located in the territory of a Party, who in accordance with this chapter, is obliged to keep in the territory of that Party, the records referred to in subparagraph a) of paragraph 1 of article 7-06;
origin determination resolution : a resolution issued by the competent authority as a result of a verification that establishes whether a good qualifies as originating, in accordance with chapter VI;
preferential tariff treatment : the application of the rate or tariff duty corresponding to an originating good, in accordance with the Tariff Reduction Program agreed between the Parties;
value : the value of a good or a material for purposes of the application of chapter VI; Y
customs value : the value of a good to calculate customs duties in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
2. In addition to the definitions contemplated in this article, the definitions established in Chapter VI will be applicable as pertinent.
Article 7-02 Declaration and certification of origin.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, the Parties will prepare a single format for the certificate of origin and a single format for the declaration of origin, which will enter into force together with this agreement, and may be subsequently modified by agreement between the Parties.
2. The certificate of origin will serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party qualifies as originating.
3. It shall be considered that a certificate of origin is valid when it is prepared in the format referred to in this article and when it is completed and signed by the exporter of the good in the territory of a Party, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with the provisions of its filling instructions.
4. Each Party shall provide that its exporters complete and sign a certificate of origin in respect of the export of a good for which an importer may claim preferential tariff treatment, except as provided in Article 7-05.
5. Each Party shall provide that when an exporter is not the producer of the good, complete and sign the certificate of origin based on:
a) its knowledge that the good qualifies as originating; either
b) the declaration of origin that covers the good object of export. This must be filled out and signed by the producer of the good and provided voluntarily to the exporter.
6. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin filled out and signed by the exporter, cover:
a) a single importation of one or more goods; either
b) several imports of identical goods to be carried out within a period indicated by the exporter in the certificate of origin, which shall not exceed the period established in paragraph 7.
7. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin be accepted by the competent authority of the importing Party for a period of one year from the date of its signature.
Article 7-03 Obligations regarding imports.
1. Each Party shall require the importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into its territory from the territory of another Party, that:
a) Declare in writing, in the import declaration provided for in its legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin in the terms of paragraph 3 of Article 7-02, that the good qualifies as originating;
b) have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time of making that declaration; Y
c) provide a copy of the certificate of origin when requested by your competent authority.
2. Each Party shall provide that, when the importer who has requested preferential tariff treatment has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which his import declaration is based contains incorrect information, he must present a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding customs duties. The importer will not be penalized when he voluntarily submits the aforementioned declaration, before the competent authority has begun the exercise of its verification powers.
3. Each Party shall provide that, when its importer does not comply with any of the requirements established in paragraphs 1 and 2, preferential tariff treatment shall be denied to the good imported from the territory of another Party for which preference has been requested.
4. Each Party shall provide that, when no preferential tariff treatment has been requested for a good imported into its territory and it is subsequently determined that the good qualifies as originating, the importer of the good, within a period of one year from the date of the importation, may request the return of the tariffs paid in excess for not having granted preferential tariff treatment to the good, provided that the request is accompanied by:
a) a document in which it is declared that the good qualified as originating at the time of importation;
b) a copy of the certificate of origin; Y
c) the documentation related to the importation of the good, as required by the legislation of that Party.
Article 7-04 Obligations regarding exports.
1. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer, who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin, deliver a copy of the certificate or declaration of origin, if any, to its competent authority when requested.
2. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin and has reason to believe that said certificate or declaration contains incorrect information, notify, without delay and in writing, any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate or declaration of origin to all persons to whom the certificate or declaration has been delivered, as well as in accordance with its legislation, to its competent authority, in which case you may not be penalized for having presented a certification or wrong statement.
3. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall inform the competent authority of the importing Party in writing of the notification of the exporter or producer referred to in paragraph 2.
4. Each Party shall provide that the false certification or declaration of origin made by its exporter or producer in the sense that a good to be exported to the territory of another Party qualifies as originating, has the legal consequences determined by the legislation of each Party. Part, that those that would apply to its importer who makes false declarations or manifestations in contravention of its internal laws and regulations.
Article 7-05 Exceptions.
Provided that it is not part of two or more imports that are made or planned with the purpose of evading compliance with the requirements indicated in Articles 7-02 and 7-03, the Parties shall not require the certificate of origin when:
a) the importation for commercial purposes of goods whose customs value does not exceed 1000 United States dollars or its equivalent in national currency or an amount greater than any Party establishes, but it may be required that the invoice contain a declaration that the good qualifies as originating;
b) the importation for non-commercial purposes of goods whose customs value does not exceed 1,000 United States dollars or its equivalent in national currency or a greater amount established by any Party; Y
c) the importation of a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement to present the certificate of origin.
Article 7-06 Accounting Records.
1. Each Party shall provide that:
a) its exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate or declaration of origin keeps, for a minimum of five years after the date of signing that certificate or declaration, all records and documents related to the origin of the good, including those relating to a:
i) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the good that is exported from its territory;
ii) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials used in the production of the good that is exported from its territory; Y
iii) the costs and production value of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory;
b) For the purposes of the verification procedure established in Article 7-07, the exporter or producer provides the competent authority of the importing Party with the records and documents referred to in subparagraph a). When the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or the producer, the exporter or producer may request the records and documents from the producer or supplier of the materials so that they are delivered through him to the competent authority that performs the verification; Y
c) an importer who obtained preferential tariff treatment for a good that has been imported into its territory from the territory of another Party, keep, for a minimum of five years from the date of importation, the certificate of origin and all the other documentation related to the importation required by the importing Party.
Article 7-07 Procedures to verify origin.
1. The importing Party may request information regarding the origin of a good from the exporting Party through its competent authority.
2. To determine whether a good imported into the territory of a Party from the territory of another Party under preferential tariff treatment qualifies as originating, the importing Party may, through its competent authority, verify the origin of the good by:
a) written questionnaires addressed to exporters or producers in the territory of another Party;
b) verification visits to an exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, with the purpose of examining the records and documents that prove compliance with the rules of origin in accordance with Article 7-06, and inspecting the facilities used in the production of the good and, where appropriate, those used in the production of the materials; or
c) other procedures that the Parties agree.
The verification process referred to in this paragraph must be made known to the competent authority of the exporting Party.
3. For the purposes of this article, the shipments and notifications made by the competent authority of the importing Party, which carries out the verification of origin to the exporters or producers of another Party, may be made through the competent authority of the Party exporter or directly by any of the following means:
a) certified mail with acknowledgment of receipt;
b) any other means that confirms the receipt of said document by the exporter or producer; either
c) any other means that the Parties agree.
In the event that the shipments and notifications have been sent through the competent authority of the exporting Party, the latter must send to the competent authority of the importing Party, the acknowledgment of receipt or any other document that certifies receipt by the exporter or producer of such shipments and notices.
4. For the purposes of the provisions of this article, the shipments or notifications that are made in the place that has been declared as the domicile of the exporter or producer in the certificate of origin will be considered valid.
5. The provisions of paragraph 2 shall be done without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of verification of the competent authorities of the importing Party, in relation to compliance with other obligations, on their own importers, exporters or producers.
6. The exporter or producer who receives a questionnaire in accordance with subparagraph a) of paragraph 2, will answer and return it within a period not exceeding 30 days from the date it was received. During this term, the exporter or producer may request an extension in writing to the competent authority of the importing Party, which in its case may not be greater than 30 days. This request will not result in the denial of preferential tariff treatment.
7. Each Party will provide that when it has received the questionnaire referred to in subparagraph a) of paragraph 2, answered within the corresponding term, and considers that VII - 8 requires more information to decide on the origin of the goods subject to verification may, through its competent authority, request additional information from the exporter or producer, through a subsequent questionnaire, in which case, the exporter or producer must answer and return it within a period not exceeding 30 days, counted from the date on that you have received it.
8. In the event that the exporter or producer does not respond in accordance with the information requested, or does not return any of the questionnaires, within the corresponding term, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the good or goods that would have been subject to verification. , by means of a written resolution addressed to the exporter or producer, which must include the conclusions of fact and the legal basis of the resolution.
9. Before carrying out a verification visit in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph b) of paragraph 2, the importing Party shall be obliged, through its competent authority, to notify in writing its intention to carry out the visit. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer to be visited, to the competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit will take place and, if requested by the latter, to the embassy of this Party in the territory of the importing Party. . The competent authority of the importing Party shall request the written consent of the exporter or the producer whom he intends to visit.
10. The notification referred to in paragraph 9 will contain:
a) identification of the competent authority making the notification;
b) the name of the exporter or producer to be visited;
c) the date and place of the proposed verification visit;
d) the purpose and scope of the proposed verification visit, making specific mention of the good or goods subject to verification to which the certificate(s) of origin refer;
e) the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; Y
f) the legal basis of the verification visit.
11. Any modification to the information referred to in subparagraphs a), c) and e) of paragraph 10, shall be notified in writing to the exporter or producer and to the competent authority of the exporting Party before the verification visit. When the information referred to in subparagraphs b), d) and f) of paragraph 10 is modified, said modification must comply with the terms established in paragraph 9.
12. If within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notification of the proposed verification visit pursuant to paragraph 9, the exporter or producer does not give its written consent for the verification visit, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the good or goods that would have been the object of the verification visit, by means of a written resolution addressed to the exporter or producer, which must include the conclusions of fact and the legal basis of the resolution.
13. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority receives a notification pursuant to paragraph 9, within 15 days of the date of receipt of the notification, it has the power to postpone the proposed verification visit for a period not greater than 60 days from the date on which the notification was received, or for a longer term agreed by the Parties.
14. A Party may not deny preferential tariff treatment based solely on the postponement of the verification visit pursuant to paragraph 13.
15. Each Party shall permit the exporter or producer, whose good or goods are the subject of a verification visit, to designate two observers to be present during the visit, provided that the observers are only involved in that capacity. If there is no appointment of observers by the exporter or producer, this omission will not have the consequence of postponing the visit.
16. The competent authority of the importing Party will draw up a record of the visit that will contain the facts verified by it. Said act may be signed in accordance by the producer or exporter and the observers they have designated.
17. If the exporter or producer has determined the regional value content of a good or goods, based on the transaction value method established in paragraph 2 of Article 6-04, and the competent authority of the importing Party notifies it , during the course of an origin verification, that the transaction value of the good or goods used is not admissible in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6 of article 6-04, the exporter or the producer may present to said authority the additional information that it deems necessary to demonstrate the transaction value within 30 days of receipt of the notification.
18. If, after analyzing the information provided in accordance with paragraph 17, the competent authority of the importing Party does not accept the regional content value thus determined, it may recalculate this value in accordance with the provisions of Articles 2 to 5 of the Code. Customs Valuation. In the event that the value cannot be determined in accordance with said articles, the competent authority of the importing Party will question the producer or exporter if they want the value to be recalculated based on Articles 6 or 7 of the Customs Valuation Code, in which case the producer or exporter must expressly and in writing express their acceptance for the value to be recalculated, within 60 days following the date on which the corresponding notification is made, or within a longer term than the same competent authority expressly determines; in case of not accepting it, the competent authority of the importing Party may deny the preferential tariff treatment to the good or goods object of the verification.
19. Each Party shall provide that:
a) In the event that the exporter or producer does not provide the records and documents referred to in paragraph b) of Article 7-06, during the verification visit in the exporting Party, the competent authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the good or goods subject to verification, through a resolution addressed to the exporter or producer in which it is determined that preferential tariff treatment is denied with respect to said good or goods, which will include the conclusions of fact and the legal basis for the determination; either  b) when in the course of a verification of origin, carried out in accordance with the provisions of this article, it is not verified that a material used in the production of a good is originating, said material will be considered non-originating, for the determination of the origin of the good .
20. Each Party shall verify compliance with the regional value content requirements through its competent authority, in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles that apply in the territory of the Party from which the good has been exported.
21. When the competent authority of the importing Party determines, based on the information obtained as a result of a verification of origin, that a good or goods object of the verification does not qualify as originating, said authority will send the producer or exporter, a letter duly founded and motivated with the intention of denying preferential tariff treatment with respect to said good or goods, in which they will record the facts or omissions that had been known and that are grounds for denial of preferential tariff treatment, and will grant a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of said document, to provide the documents or records that distort the facts or omissions established in the document.
22. When the competent authority of the importing Party determines, based on the information obtained as a result of a verification of origin, that the good or goods object of the verification qualifies as originating, said authority will send to the producer or exporter, a document duly founded and motivated, notifying you that the verification has concluded.
23. Within 120 days from the date on which the 30-day period referred to in paragraph 21 ends or from the date on which the document referred to in paragraph 22 is notified, the competent authority shall issue a written resolution to the exporter or producer, whose good or goods have been subject to verification, in which it is determined whether or not the good qualifies as originating, which will include the conclusions of fact and the legal basis of the determination, a copy of which will be forwarded to the importer. For the issuance of said resolution, the authority must take into consideration the documents or records provided by the exporter or producer within the period of 30 days referred to in paragraph 21.
24. Each Party shall provide that when its competent authority determines that a certain good imported into its territory does not qualify as originating in accordance with the tariff classification or the value applied by that Party to one or more materials used in the production of the good, and This differs from the tariff classification or the value applied to the materials by the Party from whose territory the good has been exported, the decision of that Party will take effect until it notifies the importer of the good and the person who has completed and signed it in writing. the certificate of origin that protects it.
25. The resolution referred to in paragraph 24 will not be applicable to imports made prior to the date on which said resolution takes effect, when:
a) the competent authority of the importing Party has issued an advance judgment pursuant to Article 7-10, or the competent authority of either Party has issued any other ruling on the tariff classification or value of materials on which it is entitled to rely a person; Y
b) the anticipated criterion or resolution mentioned in literal a), is prior to the beginning of the verification of origin.
26. When the verification carried out by a Party establishes that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, the importing Party shall suspend preferential tariff treatment to identical goods that that person exports or produces, until the same proves that it complies with the provisions of Chapter VI.
Article 7-8 Confidentiality.
1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with the provisions of its legislation, the confidentiality of the information obtained pursuant to this chapter and shall protect it from any disclosure that could harm the person who provides it.
2. The confidential information obtained in accordance with this chapter may only be made known to the authorities responsible for the administration and application of the determination of origin resolutions and customs and tax matters.
Article 7-9 Penalties.
Each Party shall establish or maintain criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this chapter.
Article 7-10 Advance Criteria.
1. Each Party shall provide that, through its competent authority, prior written criteria be granted expeditiously, prior to the importation of a good into its territory. The anticipated criteria will be issued by the competent authority of the territory of the importing Party, at the request of its importer or of the exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by them, regarding the origin of the goods. .
2. The anticipated criteria do not constitute necessary and indispensable requirements for the importation of goods under preferential tariff treatment.
3. The anticipated criteria will deal with:
a) if the good qualifies as originating, in accordance with Chapter VI;
b) if the non-originating materials used in the production of a good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification indicated in Annex 6-03;
c) if the good meets the regional content value requirement established in Chapter VI;
d) if the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of another Party, in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code, to calculate the transaction value of the good or of the materials used in the production of a good with respect to the which advance judgment is requested is adequate, to determine if the good meets the regional content value requirement in accordance with Chapter VI;
e) if the country of origin marking carried out or proposed for a good satisfies the provisions of article 3-15; Y
f) other matters that the Parties agree.
4. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance criteria upon official publication, including at least:
a) the information that is reasonably required to process the request;
b) the power of its competent authority to request, at any time, additional information from the person requesting the advance judgment during the application evaluation process;
c) a period of 120 days for its competent authority to issue the advance judgment, once it has obtained all the necessary information from the person requesting it; Y
d) the obligation to fully explain, founded and motivated, the reasons for the anticipated judgment when it is unfavorable for the applicant.
5. Each Party shall apply the advance criteria to imports into its territory, from the date of issuance of the criterion, or from a later date indicated therein, unless the advance criterion is modified or revoked in accordance with the provisions in paragraph 7.
6. Each Party shall grant to any person who requests an advance judgment, the same treatment, the same interpretation and application of the provisions of Chapter VI regarding the determination of origin, that it has granted to any other person to whom it has issued a judgment. anticipated, when the facts and circumstances are identical in all material respects.
7. The anticipated judgment may be modified or revoked by the competent authority in the following cases:
a) when the advance judgment was based on an error:
i) in fact;
ii) in the tariff classification of the good or materials subject to the criterion; either
iii) in the application of the regional content value requirement, in accordance with Chapter VI;
b) when it is not in accordance with an interpretation agreed between the Parties or a modification with respect to Article 3-15 or Chapter VI;
c) when the circumstances or facts that support it change; either
d) in order to comply with an administrative or judicial decision.
8. Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance ruling takes effect on the date it is issued or on a later date established therein, and may not be applied to imports of a good made before those dates, unless unless the person to whom it has been issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 8, the Party that issues the advance judgment shall postpone the effective date of the modification or revocation for a period of not less than 45 days, when the person to whom the advance judgment has been issued advance judgment has relied on that judgment in good faith.
10. Each Party shall provide that, when considering the regional value content of a good for which an advance judgment has been issued, its competent authority shall assess whether:
a) the exporter or producer complies with the terms and conditions of the advance judgment;
b) the exporter's or producer's operations are consistent with the circumstances and substantial facts that support that criterion; Y
c) the supporting data and calculations used in applying the criterion or method for calculating value or allocating cost are correct in all material respects.
11. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority determines that any of the requirements set forth in paragraph 10 has not been met, the competent authority may modify or revoke the advance judgment, as the circumstances warrant.
12. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority decides that the advance judgment has been based on incorrect information, the person to whom it was issued shall not be penalized, if he demonstrates that he acted with reasonable care and in good faith in stating the facts and circumstances that gave rise to the advance judgment.
13. Each Party shall provide that, when an advance judgment is issued to a person who has falsely stated or omitted material circumstances or facts on which the advance judgment is based, or has not acted in accordance with the terms and conditions thereof, the authority authority that issues the advance judgment can apply the measures established in the legislation of each Party.
14. Each Party shall provide that the holder of an advance judgment may not use it if there is a substantial change in the facts and circumstances on which the competent authority relied to issue it.
Article 7-11 Review and challenge.
1. Each Party shall grant rights to review and challenge resolutions for determination of origin and anticipated criteria provided for in its legislation for its importers, exporters or producers of another Party that:
a) fill out and sign a certificate or declaration of origin that covers a good that has been the subject of a determination of origin resolution, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 21 of article 7-07; either
b) have received early judgment in accordance with the provisions of article 7-10.
2. The rights referred to in paragraph 1 include:
a) access to at least one instance of administrative review, independent of the official or agency responsible for the resolution or advance judgment subject to review, in accordance with the legislation of each Party; Y
b) access to an instance of judicial review of the resolution or decision made in the last instance of administrative review, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 7-12 Committee of Origin
1. The Parties establish the Committee of Origin, made up of representatives of each of them. The term for its installation will be within 30 days from the entry into force of this treaty.
2. The Origin Committee will meet in ordinary session twice a year and in extraordinary session as many times as necessary at the request of any Party.
3. The functions of the Committee of Origin are:
a) prepare, no later than 90 days after the entry into force of the treaty, the corresponding regulation;
b) ensure the effective application and administration of chapters VI and VII;
c) address issues regarding the interpretation, application and administration of chapters VI and VII;
d) try to reach agreements on:
i) tariff classification and customs value matters related to origin determination resolutions;
ii) the modifications to the certificate or declaration of origin referred to in article 7-02; Y
iii) the notification made by the countries on changes in their nomenclature or internal provisions on rules of origin and customs procedures for handling the origin of merchandise that affect this treaty; Y
e) attend to any other matter agreed upon by the Parties.
4. Any Party that considers that chapters VI and VII need to be modified, due to changes in the development of production processes, cases in which a waiver is granted in accordance with article 6-23 or other matters, may submit to the Committee of Origin a modification proposal for your consideration and the reasons and studies that support it.
The Committee of Origin will submit a report to the Commission within a period of no more than 90 days, counted from the receipt of the proposal.
Annex 7-01 Competent Authorities
For the purposes of article 7-01, the competent authority will be:
a) in the case of El Salvador, the Ministry of Economy, or its successor;
b) in the case of Guatemala, the Ministry of Economy, or its successor;
c) in the case of Honduras, the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, or its successor; Y
d) in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, or its successor.
Chapter VIII SAFEGUARD MEASURES
Article 8-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
threat of serious harm : the clear imminence of serious harm, determined pursuant to paragraph 8 of Article 8-05, based on the facts and not merely on pleading, conjecture or remote possibility;
competent authority means the "competent authority" in accordance with Annex 8-01; directly competitive good: one that, not being similar to the one being compared, is essentially equivalent for commercial purposes because it is dedicated to the same use and is interchangeable with it;
originating good means an "originating good" of a Party, as set out in Chapter VI;  similar good : the good that, although it is not exactly the same as the good with which it is compared, has similar characteristics and composition, which allows it to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable with it;  Serious Injury: a general and significant impairment of a domestic industry, determined pursuant to paragraph 8 of Article 8-05; and  domestic industry: the group of producers of similar or directly competitive goods that operate within the territory of a Party or those whose joint production of similar or directly competitive goods constitutes a significant proportion of the total national production of those goods.
Article 8-02 General Provisions.
1. Except as provided in this chapter, the Parties shall be governed in accordance with their legislation and the provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards, which is part of the WTO Agreement.
2. Each Party may apply to imports of goods originating in the territory of another Party carried out under the Tariff Elimination Program, safeguard measures, based on clear, strict criteria and with a defined temporality. Each Party may adopt bilateral or global safeguard measures.
Article 8-03 Bilateral safeguard measures.
1. Each Party may adopt and apply bilateral safeguard measures if, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty stipulated in this Agreement, the volume of imports of one or more goods benefiting from the Tariff Elimination Program increases by one pace and under such conditions as to cause serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry as follows:
a) each Party may maintain bilateral safeguard measures during and up to three years after the end of the Tariff Elimination Program. After this period, said Party may adopt and apply a bilateral safeguard measure against the same good, only with the consent of the affected Party;
b) bilateral safeguard measures may only be adopted when strictly necessary to counteract serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by imports of goods originating in the territory of another Party;
c) The bilateral safeguard measures will be of a tariff type and may consist of the suspension of future tax relief on the good in question. Likewise, they may consist of an increase in the customs duty applicable to the good to a level that does not exceed the lower of the current most favored nation customs duty applicable to that good on the day the bilateral safeguard measure is adopted, and the tariff most favored nation customs applicable on that good the day before the entry into force of this treaty;
d) The Parties may apply bilateral safeguard measures for a period of up to four years, extendable for a period of one year. The established deadlines will be determined at the stage of prior consultations, by mutual agreement, according to the needs of the affected national industry;
e) The Parties may adopt a bilateral safeguard only once for the same asset when the measure has lasted more than two years and has been extended;
f) The Parties may adopt a bilateral safeguard for the same good once more when the measure has lasted for more than two years, has not been extended, a period equal to that of the measure previously imposed has elapsed, and has the consent of the Party against whose property the measure will be applied;
g) The Parties may adopt a bilateral safeguard for the second time for the same asset when the measure has lasted up to two years and has been extended by one year provided that a period equal to the previously imposed measure has elapsed; Y
h) Upon concluding the application of the bilateral measure, the tariff rate that will apply to the good in question will be the one that corresponds to that date according to the Tariff Elimination Program.
2. The Party that decides to initiate a procedure that could result in the adoption of a bilateral safeguard measure, must notify the exporting Party in writing and, at the same time, request prior consultations in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 4 to 7 of article 8-05.
3. Unless the Parties involved agree otherwise, the Party that intends to adopt a bilateral safeguard measure shall grant the Party affected by that measure, mutually agreed compensation, in accordance with the following:
a) the compensation will consist of additional tariff concessions, whose effects on the trade of the exporting Party are equivalent to the impact of the bilateral safeguard measure;
b) the compensation will be determined in the consultation stage referred to in paragraph 11 of article 8-05;
c) if the Parties do not reach an agreement regarding compensation, the Party that intends to adopt the bilateral safeguard measure shall be empowered to do so and the Party affected by it may impose tariff measures that have trade effects equivalent to those of the measure bilateral safeguard adopted; Y
d) The compensation referred to in this article may only be made with goods included in the Tariff Elimination Program.
4. In the case of a bilateral safeguard measure for perishable or seasonal agricultural goods, the investigation periods established for the adoption of the measure will be reduced by half unless the Parties by mutual agreement decide to reduce them further.
Article 8-04 Global Safeguard Measures.
1. The Parties retain their rights and obligations to apply global safeguard measures under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards, which is part of the WTO Agreement, except those referring to compensation or retaliation and exclusion of a measure global safeguard insofar as they are incompatible with the provisions of this article.
2. When a Party decides to adopt a global safeguard measure in accordance with paragraph 1, it may only apply it to another Party when it determines that imports of goods originating in that Party, considered individually, represent a substantial part of total imports and contribute materially to serious injury or threat of serious injury to the importing Party.
3. For this determination, the following criteria will be taken into account, among others:
a) imports of goods originating in another Party shall not be considered to be substantial if they are not included in the imports of the main supplying countries of the good subject to the procedure, whose exports together represent 80% of the total imports of that good in the importing Party;
b) normally it will not be considered that imports of goods originating in a Party contribute significantly to serious injury or threat of serious injury, if their growth rate during the period in which the detrimental increase occurred is substantially lower than the growth rate of total imports from all sources, during the same period; Y
c) In order to determine the significant contribution to the serious injury or threat of serious injury, changes in the Party's participation in total imports and their volume will be taken into account.
4. The Party that applies the global safeguard measure, and has initially excluded from it a good of another Party, shall have the right to include it, when the competent authority determines that a sudden increase in imports of such good reduces the effectiveness of the global safeguard measure.
5. In no case may the importing Party apply the global safeguard measures provided for in paragraph 2, without prior written notification to the other Party and without having carried out consultations. For this purpose, all procedural requirements set forth in this chapter shall be complied with.
6. The Party that intends to adopt a global safeguard measure shall grant the Party affected by that measure mutually agreed compensation, in the form of concessions that have trade effects equivalent to the impact of the global safeguard measure.
7. Unless otherwise agreed, the compensation referred to in paragraph 6 will be determined in the consultation stage referred to in paragraph 5.
8. If the Parties fail to agree on compensation, the Party proposing to take the global safeguard measure shall be empowered to do so and the affected Party may impose measures that have trade effects equivalent to those of the global safeguard measure. adopted.
9. A Party shall not apply a global safeguard measure against a good originating in another Party when imports from that Party do not exceed 3% of total imports of that good, provided that developing country members of the WTO with a share in imports less than 3% do not represent together more than 9% of total imports of the good in question.
Article 8-05 Procedure.
1. Each Party shall establish clear and strict procedures for the adoption and application of safeguard measures, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. The application submitted to the competent authority must be supported by 25% of the national industry.
3. Within a period of 30 days, counted from the presentation of the application, the competent authority may reject it, or initiate the investigation if it has determined that it is supported by producers that represent at least 25% of the total production of like or directly competitive goods.
4. The Party that decides to initiate a procedure to adopt safeguard measures will publish the initiation thereof in the dissemination bodies provided for in its legislation. The day following the publication, it shall notify the exporting Party in writing and request, at the same time, prior consultations.
5. The notification referred to in the previous paragraph will be made through the competent authority by certified mail, specialized courier, telefax or any other means that ensures its reception. This will contain sufficient information to support the application of the safeguard measures, including:
a) the names and available addresses of domestic producers of similar or directly competitive goods representative of the domestic industry, their participation in the domestic industry of that good and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of that sector ;
b) a clear and complete description of the good subject to the procedure, the tariff position at a six-digit level, at least, and the current tariff treatment, as well as the description of the similar or directly competitive good;
c) the data on imports corresponding to each one of the three most recent years that constitute the basis that this good is imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute terms or relative to national production;
d) the data on the total national production of the similar or directly competitive good corresponding to the last three years;
e) the data that demonstrate serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by imports to the sector in question in accordance with the data referred to in subparagraphs c) and d);
f) a list and description of the presumed causes of serious damage, or threat of serious damage based on the information required in accordance with subparagraphs a) to e) and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports of that either in absolute terms or relative to national production is the cause of it;
g) the criteria and objective information that demonstrates that the assumptions established in this chapter are met for the application of a safeguard measure to the other Party, when applicable; Y
h) Information on the tariff measures that are intended to be adopted and their duration.
6. The period for prior consultations will begin on the day after the exporting Party receives the notification requesting the initiation of prior consultations. This period will be 60 business days, unless the Parties agree on a shorter term.
7. During the prior consultation period, the exporting Party will make all the observations it deems pertinent, particularly on whether the proposed safeguard measures are appropriate.
8. For the purposes of determining serious damage or threat of serious damage, the competent authorities must have reliable information and will evaluate in detail, based on said information, all the factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that have any relationship with the branch of national production affected, in particular the pace and amount of the increase in imports of the good in question, in absolute and relative terms, the part of the domestic market absorbed by the increase in imports, significant changes in the level of sales , internal prices, production, productivity, use of installed capacity, market share, profits, losses and employment.
9. To determine whether the safeguard measures are appropriate, a direct causal relationship between the increase in imports of the good in question and the serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry will be demonstrated.
10. If there are factors other than increased imports from the other Party that simultaneously injure or threaten to injure a domestic industry, the serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by those factors may not be attributed to the mentioned imports.
11. If, as a result of this investigation, the competent authority determines, based on objective evidence, that the assumptions set forth in this chapter are met, the importing Party may initiate consultations with the other Party, to determine the compensation referred to in the Article 8-03, paragraph 3; and Article 8-04, paragraph 6.
12. The provisions of this article shall not prevent the Parties from meeting at any time to discuss compensation to the Party affected by the imposition of the safeguard measure.
13. The safeguard measures provided for in this chapter may only be adopted once the consultation period has concluded. The final resolution by means of which a safeguard measure is adopted and, where appropriate, the compensation measure, will be published in the corresponding official dissemination organs of the Party that adopts it, as appropriate, and will be notified to the other Party at day after publication.
14. The notification referred to in the preceding paragraph will be made through the competent authority by certified mail, specialized courier, telefax or any other means that ensures its receipt and will take effect the day after it is received by the Party. exporter. For this purpose, the exporting Party must acknowledge receipt of the notification, the day following its receipt.
15. The Parties are at no time obliged to reveal the information that has been provided confidentially, the disclosure of which contravenes their legal systems. Notwithstanding this, the importing Party that intends to adopt the safeguard measure shall provide the other Party with a non-confidential summary of the information that is confidential.
16. If the importing Party determines that the reasons that gave rise to the adoption of the safeguard measure still persist, it shall notify the competent authorities of the other Party of its intention to extend it, at least 60 business days prior to its expiration and it will provide the information that supports the decision, including the evidence that the causes that led to the adoption of the safeguard measure persist. The notification will be made in the terms provided in this chapter, and both the prior consultations on the extension and those related to the respective compensation must be carried out before the expiration of the safeguard measures initially adopted.
17. Each Party shall ensure that the final resolution adopting a safeguard measure is subject to review by administrative or judicial courts to the extent provided by its legislation. Negative resolutions on the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage may not be modified except by this review procedure.
Annex 8-01 Competent Authority
For purposes of this chapter, the term "competent authority" shall mean:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Ministry of Economy or the one that is duly designated to act as competent authority;
b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Economy or the one that is duly designated to act as competent authority;
c) in the case of Honduras: the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce or the one that is duly designated to act as competent authority; Y
d) in the case of Mexico: the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development, or its successor.
Chapter IX UNFAIR INTERNATIONAL TRADE PRACTICES
Article 9-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
WTO Agreements: the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, which are part of the WTO Agreement;
competent authority : the one indicated by each Party in Annex 9-01(1);
investigating authority : the one indicated by each Party in Annex 9-01(2);
price undertaking : a commitment by the exporter or exporting Party to revise its prices or to terminate dumped or subsidized exports that suspends or terminates an investigation, without imposing a countervailing duty; countervailing duties: "anti-dumping duties" or "countervailing duties", in accordance with the WTO Agreements; injury: material injury to a domestic industry, threat of material injury to a domestic industry, significant delay in the creation of a domestic industry, serious injury or threat of serious injury to an industry National Production;
investigation : an investigative procedure on unfair international trade practices carried out by the investigating authority; dissemination body: the one indicated by each Party in Annex 9-01(3);  interested party : as defined in the WTO Agreements, and includes the government of each Party whose assets are subject to the investigation;
unfair international trade practices: the importation of goods under dumped or subsidized conditions that cause damage to a domestic industry;
domestic industry : "domestic industry" as defined in the WTO Agreements; final resolution: a resolution of the competent authority that puts an end to an investigation and that decides if the imposition of definitive countervailing duties is appropriate;
initial resolution : a resolution of the competent authority formally declaring the initiation of the investigation; and preliminary resolution: a resolution of the competent authority that decides on the imposition of provisional countervailing duties.
Article 9-02 General principle.
The Parties reject any unfair international trade practice and recognize the need to eliminate domestic policies that cause trade distortions.  Article 9-03 Subsidies.
1. Except as provided in Article 4-08, neither Party shall grant subsidies for the export of goods to the territory of another Party.
2. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate all subsidies on the export of goods to the territory of another Party, except those permitted under the WTO Agreement.
3. When a Party maintains or grants subsidies after the entry into force of this Agreement and these cause damage to a domestic industry, the affected Party may initiate an investigation.
Article 9-04 Principles for the application of national legislation.
1. The investigation, establishment and application of countervailing duties will be based on national legislation in a manner compatible with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions and procedures established in Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreements of the WTO.
2. In the case of a regional proceeding, the Parties shall be governed by the provisions of Annex 9-04.
Article 9-05 Publication of resolutions.
1. The Parties will publish the initial, preliminary and final resolutions in their dissemination bodies.
2. The resolutions shall take legal effect from the day following their publication in the dissemination body of each Party.
Article 9-06 Withdrawal of the investigation.
1. The applicant may at any time withdraw from the investigation.
2. If a withdrawal request is submitted after the initiation of the investigation, the investigating authority will notify the interested parties, thereby concluding the investigation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the investigating authority may only continue with the investigation if, within a period of 30 days from the notification, the national producers who expressly support its continuation represent at least 25% of the National Production.
Article 9-07 Notifications.
1. The Parties shall ensure that, during the investigation, the investigating authority notifies the competent authority of the exporting Party in writing the day after the corresponding resolution takes effect and the interested parties within three days after said resolution takes effect. , so that they present in their defense the arguments and evidence they consider pertinent.
2. With the notification referred to in paragraph 1, a copy of the respective publication of the dissemination body of the Party conducting the investigation shall be sent, as well as a copy of the public version of the request to initiate the investigation and its annexes. .
Article 9-08 Minimum content of resolutions.
The initial, preliminary or final resolutions will contain, when appropriate, at least the following:
a) name of the complainant;
b) description of the imported good subject to the investigation and its tariff classification;
c) the elements and evidence used to determine the possible existence or existence of an unfair international trade practice; Y
d) the legal reasoning, data, facts or circumstances on which the resolution in question is based and motivated, which appear in the respective file.
Article 9-09 Notification to the exporting government.
When the investigating authority considers that there is sufficient evidence to justify the initiation of an investigation regarding unfair international trade practices, it shall notify the competent authority of the other Party. Said notification must be made before the start of the investigation and will contain at least:
a) type of investigation;
b) name of the applicant;
c) description of the good under investigation and its tariff classification; Y
d) name of the exporters and importers of whom it is known.
Article 9-10 Conciliation hearing.
When an investigation is formally initiated and as long as a final resolution is not issued, without interrupting the process, ex officio or at the request of the interested party, conciliatory hearings may be promoted, in order to propose formulas for solving the case.
If the parties reach an agreement, it will be sanctioned by the competent authority in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 9-11 Preliminary resolution.
1. In no case before 60 days have elapsed, counted from the date of publication of the initial resolution, the competent authority will issue a preliminary resolution in which it determines that:
a) it is appropriate to continue with the investigation and, where appropriate, the imposition of provisional countervailing duties and their amount; or  b) the investigation is terminated by virtue of the fact that a positive preliminary determination of the existence of an unfair international trade practice has not been reached, in which case it will have the character of a final resolution.
2. When the preliminary resolution determines the imposition of a provisional countervailing duty, in addition to the provisions of article 9-08, it will include the margin of dumping or subsidy and the elements taken for its determination, a description of the damage and the methodology followed to determine them.
Article 9-12 Guarantees.
Importers may guarantee the provisional measures by means of a bond or deposit in cash equal to the provisionally estimated amount of the countervailing duty.
Article 9-13 Clarifications.
1. Once a provisional or definitive compensatory quota has been established, any interested party may request the competent authority to decide whether or not a certain asset is subject to it or to clarify any aspect of the corresponding resolution.  2. The presentation of the request referred to in paragraph 1 will not interrupt the course of the investigation or suspend the application of the countervailing duty.
3. From the acceptance of the request referred to in paragraph 1, the interested party may guarantee the payment of the compensatory fee by means of a bond or cash deposit.
Article 9-14 Sending copies.
The investigating authority shall ensure that all known interested parties receive, in a timely manner, copies of each of the reports, documents, and evidence presented to it in the course of the investigation, except for confidential information. Such copies will be provided by the party submitting the information.
Article 9-15 Technical information meetings.
1. At the request of any of the interested parties, the investigating authority will hold technical information meetings to explain the methodology used, the technical reports, the spreadsheets and any other element on which the initial, preliminary or preliminary resolution has been based. definitive, except for confidential information.
2. The presentation of said request will be made within the five business days following the publication of the resolution. The meeting will take place within 10 business days from the date of submission of the application.
Article 9-16 Public hearing.
1. The investigating authority will hold, ex officio or at the request of the interested party, a public hearing that will have the objective of the interested parties presenting their position regarding the information and evidence presented before said authority, allowing it and the interested parties among themselves, request additional explanations or clarifications on a specific element of the investigation.
2. The holding of the public hearing will be notified at least 15 business days before it takes place.
3. No interested party will be obliged to attend the scheduled hearing and their absence will not be detrimental to their cause.
4. The investigating authority will give the interested parties the opportunity to present arguments within 10 business days following the public hearing.
The allegations will consist of the written presentation of conclusions regarding the information and arguments provided during the investigation.
Article 9-17 Access to confidential information.
1. The investigating authority will grant, only to the legal representatives of the interested parties, access to the confidential information provided by the other parties in the course of an investigation into unfair international trade practices, in accordance with this article.
2. For this purpose, the investigating authority will require that the interested party express their consent so that their information classified as confidential can be reviewed by the legal representatives of the other interested parties.
3. Only the legal representatives of the interested parties who meet the following requirements may have access to confidential information:
a) submit a written request and fill out the format provided for this purpose by the investigating authority, in which they state the reasons and motives for which they wish to have access and specifically indicate the information they intend to review;
b) that they have a good reputation and prove their independence from their client, for which the following will be impediments: being a partner, occupying a managerial or salaried position of the same or having been in the last year;
c) that prove with official documents that they are a lawyer authorized to practice said profession in the territory of the importing Party, or failing that, that they are assisted by one;
d) that they guarantee before the investigating authority, through any of the forms of surety existing in the legislation of each Party, the fulfillment of the confidentiality commitment. The amount of the security will be set in accordance with its legislation or, failing that, in accordance with what the investigating authority determines;
e) that they undertake to return the original versions and copies of the minutes or summaries that have been prepared for access to confidential information, within 10 days after the interested parties have been made aware of the resolution that puts an end to to the procedure; Y
f) be a resident in the territory of the importing Party.
4. The bond will be in force for the entire duration of the investigation and the appeals that are presented as a result of the resolution that put an end to the procedure.
5. Without prejudice to making the bond effective, the legal representative and officials of the investigating authority who violate the confidentiality commitment will be subject to the sanctions established by the legislation of each Party.
6. The authorization of access to confidential information is a personal and non-transferable right.
Article 9-18 Access to information contained in other files.
In accordance with the legislation of each Party, any person who has an interest will have access to the administrative files of any investigation related to unfair international trade practices in which a final resolution has been issued, except for confidential information.
Article 9-19 Rights and obligations of interested parties.
Each Party will ensure that the parties interested in the administrative investigation have the same rights and obligations that will be respected both during the procedure, and in the administrative and contentious or jurisdictional instances that are filed against the final resolutions.
Article 9-20 Amendments to national legislation.
When a Party decides to amend, add, repeal or abrogate its legislation on unfair international trade practices, it will notify the other Parties immediately after its publication in their respective dissemination body. Said reform, addition, repeal or abrogation will be compatible with the WTO Agreements.
Addendum 9-01(1) Competent Authority
For purposes of this chapter, the term "competent authority" shall mean:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Ministry of Economy or the one that is duly designated to act as competent authority;
b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Economy, or the one that is duly designated to act as competent authority;
c) in the case of Honduras: the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, or the one that is duly designated to act as competent authority; Y
d) in the case of Mexico: the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development or its successor.
Exhibit 9-01(2) Investigating Authority
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "investigating authority" shall mean:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Directorate of Trade Policy of the Ministry of Economy or its successor;
b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Economy, or the one that is duly designated to act as investigative authority;
c) in the case of Honduras: the General Directorate for Economic Integration and Trade Policy of the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, or its successor; Y
d) in the case of Mexico: the International Trade Practices Unit of the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development or its successor.
Annex 9-01(3) Dissemination Bodies
For the purposes of this chapter, "dissemination bodies" shall mean:
a) in the case of El Salvador: a newspaper with national circulation, without prejudice to its subsequent publication in the Official Gazette;
b) in the case of Guatemala: the Diario de Centroamérica;
c) in the case of Honduras: a newspaper with national circulation, without prejudice to its subsequent publication in the Official Gazette "La Gaceta"; Y
d) in the case of Mexico: Official Gazette of the Federation.
Annex 9-04 Regional Procedure
In the case of a regional procedure, Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras will only adopt the recommendation of the Secretariat for Central American Economic Integration (SIECA) for the application of a compensatory quota, when it has observed during said procedure the provisions established in this treaty.
Chapter X CROSS- BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES
Article 10-01 Definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
cross-border trade in services: the supply of a service:
a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;
b) in the territory of a Party to a consumer of services of another Party; Y
c) by a service provider of a Party through the presence of natural persons of a Party in the territory of another Party;
service consumer : any person who receives or uses a service;  enterprise of a Party : an enterprise constituted or organized in accordance with the applicable law of a Party and having its domicile in the territory of that Party and a branch located in the territory of a Party that carries on business activities therein;  federal or central, state or departmental governments : includes non-governmental organizations that exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated by those governments;  measures that a Party adopts or maintains: those adopted or maintained by:
a) the federal, central, state or departmental and municipal governments, if applicable; Y
b) non-governmental organizations that exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated to them by those governments;
natural person of another Party : national or resident of another Party;
legal person of another Party : the one constituted or organized under the laws of that other Party and that carries out or plans to carry out substantive commercial operations in the territory of that Party or of any other Party;
service provider : any person who provides a service;
service provider of a Party : a person of a Party who intends to provide or provides a service;
quantitative restrictions : a non-discriminatory measure that places limitations on:
a) the number of service providers, whether through a quota, monopoly or an economic necessity test, or by any other quantitative means; either
b) the operations of any service provider, whether through a quota, monopoly or an economic necessity test, or by any other quantitative means;
specialized air services : aerial mapping services, aerial surveying, aerial photography, forest fire control, firefighting, aerial advertising, glider towing, skydiving services, aerial construction services, air transportation of logs or logs , scenic flights, training flights, aerial inspection and surveillance, and aerial spraying; and  service supplied in the exercise of governmental powers : that supplied by a public institution, which is not supplied under commercial conditions or in competition with one or more service providers.
2. Any other definition not contained in paragraph 1 shall be taken from the definitions contained in the GATS.
Article 10-02 Scope of application and extension of obligations.
1. This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains on cross-border trade in services by service providers of another Party, including those relating to:
a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a service;
b) the purchase, payment or use of a service;
c) access to, and use of:
i) distribution and transportation systems related to the provision of a service; either
ii) public telecommunications networks and services;
d) the presence in its territory of a service provider of another Party, including services provided by a company once it has been established in accordance with the agreed commitments; and  e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.
2. This chapter does not apply to:
a) air services, including national and international air transport, with and without a fixed itinerary, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:
i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;
ii) specialized air services; Y
iii) computerized reservation systems;
b) financial services;
c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance; neither
d) government services or functions such as, and not limited to, law enforcement, rehabilitation services, income security or insurance, social security or insurance, social welfare, public education , public training, health and care for children.
3. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a) impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of another Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor confer any right on that national, with respect to such entry or employment; neither
b) impose any obligation or confer any right on a Party, with respect to government purchases made by a Party or a State enterprise.
4. With respect to non-governmental organizations, referred to in subparagraph b) of the definition of "measures that a Party adopts or maintains", that exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated to them in accordance with national legislation, federal or central governments shall ensure that they take all reasonable measures within their power to ensure that such agencies comply with the provisions of this chapter.
5. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the measures related to the services contemplated in the annexes, only to the extent and terms stipulated in those annexes.
Article 10-03 Most Favored Nation Treatment.
1. Each Party shall immediately and unconditionally grant to the services and service providers of another Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants to similar services and similar service providers of any other country.
2. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed in the sense of preventing a Party from conferring advantages to adjacent countries, in order to facilitate exchanges, limited to contiguous border areas, of services that are produced or consumed locally.
Article 10-04 National treatment.
1. Each Party shall grant to the services and service providers of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted to its similar services or similar service providers.
2. Each Party may comply with the provisions of paragraph 1 by granting to the services and service providers of another Party formally identical or formally different treatment to the one it grants to its similar services and similar service providers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be deemed to be less favorable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favor of services or service providers of the Party as compared with similar services or service providers of the other Party.
4. Treatment accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a state, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded by that state to like services and like service providers of the Party to which belong.
Article 10-05 Local presence.
No Party shall require a service provider of another Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of business, or to reside in its territory as a condition for the cross-border provision of a service.
Article 10-06 Reservations and exceptions.
1. No Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of its existing measures with respect to Articles 10-03, 10-04 and 10-05, listed in Annex I. Any reform of any of these measures shall not decrease the degree of conformity of the measure as it was in force immediately before the reform.
2. The Parties do not have the obligation to register municipal measures.
3. Articles 10-03, 10-04 and 10-05 shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its list in Annex II.
Article 10-07 Transparency.
1. In addition to the provisions of Article 17-02, each Party shall disclose in its official publishing bodies in accordance with its legislation, promptly and, except in emergency situations, no later than the date of its entry into force, all relevant laws, regulations, administrative guidelines, and other decisions, rulings, or actions of general application that relate to or affect the operation of this chapter, and have been put into effect by federal, central, and state governments or by a nongovernmental regulatory body . Likewise, international agreements that refer to or affect trade in services and to which a Party is a signatory will be published.
2. When the publication of the information referred to in paragraph 1 is not feasible or practical, it will be made available to the public in another way.
3. Each Party shall promptly inform the other Party, at least annually, of the establishment of new laws, regulations, or administrative guidelines that significantly affect trade in services covered by its specific commitments under this Chapter, or of changes it introduces in the existing ones.
4. Each Party shall respond promptly to any requests for specific information made by another Party about the measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 The offices responsible for providing specific information to another Party that requests it on these matters, as well as on the that are subject to the notification obligation set forth in paragraph 3, will be listed in annex 10-07.
Article 10-08 Non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions.
1. Each Party shall indicate in its schedule in Annex V, within a period of six months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, any quantitative restrictions that remain at the federal or central and state levels.
2. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of any quantitative restriction it adopts after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and shall indicate the restriction in its list in Annex V.
3. Each Party shall endeavor periodically, but in any case at least every two years, to negotiate the liberalization of the quantitative restrictions indicated in its schedule in Annex V, in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2.
Article 10-09 Future liberalization.
1. In order to achieve a level of progressive liberalization, the Commission will call negotiations every two years, aimed at:
a) eliminate the remaining restrictions registered in accordance with paragraph 1 of article 10-06; and
b) Gradually incorporate into Annex I sectors and activities that each Party has consigned in Annex II.
Article 10-10 Committee on Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment.
1. The Parties establish a Committee on Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment, made up of representatives of each Party, in accordance with Annex 10-07.
Where appropriate, the Committee may authorize the participation of representatives of other institutions.
2. The Committee shall meet at least once a year, or at any time at the request of any of the Parties, or of the Commission.
3. The Committee shall perform, among others, the following functions:
a) Oversee the execution and administration of Chapters X and XIV;
b) discuss matters on cross-border trade in services and investment that are submitted to it by the Parties;
c) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties, as well as technical cooperation in the area of trade in services and investment; Y
d) examine issues of interest to the Parties related to trade in services and investment that are discussed in international forums.
Article 10-11 Procedures.
The Committee will establish procedures for:
a) that each Party notify another Party and include in its relevant annexes:
i) non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions, in accordance with article 10-08; Y
ii) the modifications to the measures referred to in article 10-06; Y
b) holding negotiations aimed at deepening the liberalization of services between the Parties, in accordance with Article 10-09.
Article 10-12 Granting of permits, authorizations and licenses.
In order to guarantee that any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the requirements and procedures for the granting of permits, authorizations and licenses to nationals of another Party does not constitute an unnecessary barrier to trade, each Party shall endeavor to guarantee that said measures:
a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as capacity, aptitude and competence to provide a service;
b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of a service; Y
c) do not constitute a disguised restriction on the cross-border provision of a service.
Article 10-13 Denial of benefits.
A Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of another Party, after prior notification and consultation, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a service provider that does not carry out substantive commercial operations in the territory of the Party. another Party and that, in accordance with the applicable law of that Party, is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party.
Article 10-14 Technical cooperation.
The Parties shall establish, no later than one year after the entry into force of this Agreement, a system to provide service providers with information regarding their markets in relation to:
a) the commercial and technical aspects of the provision of services;
b) the possibility of obtaining technology in terms of services; Y
c) all those aspects that the Commission identifies regarding services.
Article 10-15 Other disciplines.
1. The Commission will determine the procedures for establishing the disciplines related to:
a) safeguard measures; Y
b) subsidies that may have distorting effects on trade in services.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the work of the relevant international organizations will be taken into account.
Article 10-16 Relationship with multilateral agreements on services.
1. The Parties shall apply to each other the provisions contained in the multilateral agreements on services of which they are members.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, in the event of any inconsistency between these agreements and this treaty, the latter shall prevail over the former, to the extent of the inconsistency.
Addendum on Professional Services
I. Definitions
For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
professional or professional : the natural person to whom a university degree or equivalent academic degree has been legally issued, once they have complied with higher education study plans and programs or have equivalent training or experience and who has the corresponding authorization to practice a specific profession;
professional services : those services that require a title or equivalent academic degree for their provision and whose exercise is authorized, regulated or restricted in each case by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft;
professional exercise : the habitual performance of any act, for consideration or free of charge, or the provision of any service specific to each profession that requires authorization, in accordance with the legislation of each Party, even if it is only a simple consultation or the ostentation of the character professional or professional;
higher education : academic training that culminates in obtaining a university degree and academic degree, awarded by an institution of higher education in accordance with the legislation of each Party;
recognition of titles or academic degrees : any acceptance by the competent authority (governmental or non-governmental) of a Party, of the official academic documentation, obtained by a professional or professional of another Party, in higher education institutions, in accordance with its legislation ; Y
authorization for professional practice : the professional license, registration or association granted to a professional or professional, by competent governmental or non-governmental institutions of a Party, to practice a profession that requires authorization, in accordance with its legislation.
II. Aim
The purpose of this annex is to establish the rules that the Parties will observe to harmonize, among them, the measures that will regulate the mutual recognition of titles or academic degrees for the provision of professional services, through the granting of authorization for professional practice.
III. Recognition of titles or academic degrees
When a Party recognizes unilaterally or by agreement with another country, academic titles or degrees, education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of another Party or of any non-Party country:
a) the provisions of Article 10-03 shall not be interpreted in the sense of requiring that Party to recognize the titles or academic degrees, education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of another Party; Y
b) the Party will provide another Party with the opportunity to demonstrate that the academic titles or degrees, education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of that other Party may also be recognized, or to enter into an arrangement or agreement that has effect equivalents.
IV. Reciprocity
Each Party, within a period of one year from the date of entry into force of this treaty, shall examine the possibility of eliminating any requirement of nationality or permanent residence indicated in its list of Annex I that it maintains for the recognition of titles to professional service providers of another Party. Where a Party is unable to remove these requirements with respect to a particular sector, the other Party may, in the same sector and for as long as the Party maintains its requirement, maintain, as the sole remedy, an equivalent requirement. .
V. Committee on Professional Services
In order to follow up on and comply with the recommendations on mutual recognition of titles or academic degrees for professional practice agreed upon by the Parties, the Committee on Professional Services is hereby created, made up of the following governmental and non-governmental authorities and institutions:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the National Directorate of Higher Education of the Ministry of Education;
b) in the case of Guatemala: the University of San Carlos de Guatemala and the Assembly of Presidents of the Professional Colleges;
c) in the case of Honduras: the National Autonomous University of Honduras and the Federation of Professional University Colleges of Honduras; Y
d) in the case of Mexico: the General Directorate of Professions of the Ministry of Public Education. Notwithstanding the foregoing, each Party may incorporate other competent institutions or bodies into the Committee, as circumstances require. Each Party shall encourage the pertinent bodies to develop the mutually acceptable norms and criteria, referred to in item VI, as well as to submit to the Commission recommendations on mutual recognition of titles or academic degrees for professional practice.
The Committee will begin its activities within the six months following the entry into force of this treaty and will be convened by the Commission. In the first meeting, the members of the Committee will present proposals on the activities to be carried out to comply with this annex. The decisions adopted will be communicated to the Commission for follow-up.
SAW. Bases for the recognition of titles for professional practice
The Parties agree that the processes of mutual recognition of titles for the professional practice referred to in paragraph V will be based on improving the quality of professional services through the establishment of mutually acceptable standards and criteria for these processes, protecting at the same time to consumers and safeguarding the public interest.
The elaboration of norms and criteria referred to in the previous paragraph must consider the legislation of each Party and may be elaborated in relation to the following aspects: education, exams, experience, conduct and ethics; professional development and recertification; scope of action; local knowledge; supervision and consumer protection.
The Parties will provide detailed and necessary information for the mutual recognition of titles or academic degrees for professional practice, including what corresponds to academic courses, guides and study materials, payment of fees, exam dates, schedules, locations, affiliation to societies or professional colleges.
This information will include federal or central and state legislation, administrative guidelines and measures of general application and those developed by governmental and non-governmental bodies.
VII. Adoption of recommendations
Based on the recommendations received by the Parties and to the extent that these are compatible with the provisions of this treaty, the Commission will encourage the Parties so that their competent authorities adopt the recommendations presented in accordance with item VI and develop procedures. for the issuance of the corresponding authorization to the professional service providers of each Party.
VIII. Revision
The Parties shall periodically review, at least once a year, the application of the provisions of this Annex.
Annex 10-07 Information Centers
The offices in charge of providing specific information referred to in article 10-07 will be:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Directorate of Trade Policy of the Ministry of Economy, or its successor;  b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Economy or the one designated as an information center;
c) in the case of Honduras: the General Directorate for Economic Integration and Trade Policy of the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, or its successor; and  d) in the case of Mexico: the General Directorate of International Services Negotiations of the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development, or its successor.
Annex 10-09 Land Transportation by Road
Six months after the entry into force of this treaty, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico will begin negotiations in order to establish the conditions for the opening of land transport by road, within which the following aspects will be considered, among others:
a) removal of restrictions on cross-border trade; and  b) development of a work program to make the respective standardization measures of each Party compatible.
Annex 10-10 Committee on Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment
In accordance with article 10-10, the Committee on Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment will be composed of:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Ministry of Economy, or its successor;  b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Economy, or its successor;  c) in the case of Honduras: the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, or its successor; and  d) in the case of Mexico: the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development, or its successor.
Chapter XI FINANCIAL SERVICES
Article 11-01 Definitions.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:  competent authority : the authorities of each Party indicated in Annex 11-01;  public entity : a central bank, monetary authority or any institution of a public nature in the financial system of a Party that is owned or controlled by the government of a Party, that performs governmental, regulatory or supervisory functions, excluding public entities principally engaged in the supply of financial services on commercial terms;  financial institution: any financial intermediary or a company that is authorized to provide financial services and is regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the laws of the Party in whose territory it was incorporated;  financial institution of another Party : a financial institution, incorporated in the territory of a Party, that is owned or controlled by persons of another Party;  investment :
a) shares and corporate quotas and any other form of participation, in any proportion, in a financial institution including the investment that it makes in a company that provides complementary or auxiliary services for the fulfillment of its corporate purpose, which grants the right to owner to participate in the income or profits thereof; and  b) a stake in a financial institution, including the investment that it makes in a company that provides complementary or auxiliary services for the fulfillment of its corporate purpose, which grants the owner the right to participate in the corporate assets of that financial institution in a sale; however, it will not be understood by investment:
a) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:
i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a person in the territory of a Party to a company in the territory of another Party; or  ii) the granting of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing;
b) any other pecuniary claim that does not entail the types of rights provided in the literals of the definition of investment; or c) a loan granted by a financial institution or a debt security owned by a financial institution, except in the case of a loan granted to a financial institution or a debt security issued by a financial institution, which is treated as capital for regulatory effects by the Party in whose territory the financial institution is incorporated;
investment of an investor of a Party : the investment owned by, or under the direct or indirect control of, an investor of a Party, in the territory of another Party;  non-Party investment: the investment of an investor that is not an investor of a Party;  investor of a Party : a Party, a State enterprise of the Party, or a person of that Party that intends to make, makes or has made an investment in the territory of another Party;  Disputing Investor : A person who makes a claim pursuant to the provisions of Section B of Chapter XIV;  new financial service: a financial service not provided in the territory of a Party that is provided in the territory of another Party, including any new form of distribution of a financial service, or sale of a financial product that is not sold in the territory of a Party;  self-regulatory bodies : any non-governmental entity, including any stock or futures exchange, clearing house or any other association or organization that exercises its own or delegated regulatory or supervisory authority over financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers ;  person : a national or company of a Party, not including branches;  cross-border provision of financial services or cross-border trade in financial services: the provision of a financial service :
a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party;  b) in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a person of another Party; or  c) by a person of a Party in the territory of another Party;
financial service provider of a Party : a person of a Party who is engaged in the business of providing any financial service in the territory of that Party;  cross-border financial service provider of a Party means a financial institution of a Party that seeks to provide or provides cross-border financial services; and  financial service : a service of a financial nature offered by a financial institution of a Party, which includes all insurance, reinsurance, banking services and other services involving financial intermediation, including related and auxiliary services of a financial nature.  Article 11-02 Scope of application and extension of obligations.  1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
a) financial institutions of another Party;  b) cross-border trade in financial services; and  c) investors of another Party and investments of those investors in financial institutions in the territory of the Party, as well as investments of these in companies that provide them with complementary or auxiliary services for the fulfillment of their corporate purpose.
2. This chapter does not apply to:
a) Activities or services that are part of public retirement plans or public social security systems;  b) the use of financial resources owned by another Party; or  c) other financial activities or services on behalf of the Party or its public entities or with its guarantee.
3. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of this treaty, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.  4. Article 14-11 and Section B of Chapter XIV are incorporated into this Chapter.  Article 11-03 Self- regulated bodies.  When a Party requires that a financial institution or a cross-border financial service provider of another Party be a member of, participate in or have access to a self-regulatory body to offer a financial service in or to its territory, the Party shall ensure that such body complies with the obligations of this chapter.  Article 11-04 Right of establishment.  1. The Parties recognize the principle that investors of a Party should be allowed to establish a financial institution in the territory of another Party, through any of the modalities of establishment and operation that its legislation allows.
2. Each Party may impose, at the time of the establishment of a financial institution, terms and conditions that are consistent with Article 11-06.  Article 11-05 Cross-border trade.  1. Each Party shall permit persons located in its territory and its nationals, wherever located, to purchase financial services from cross-border financial service providers of another Party located in the territory of that other Party. This does not oblige a Party to allow such cross-border financial service providers to advertise or conduct business by any means in its territory. The Parties may define what is "advertise" and "do business" for purposes of this obligation.  2. When a Party allows the provision of cross-border financial services and without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in financial services, the Party may require the registration of cross-border financial service providers of another Party and of financial instruments.  Article 11-06 National treatment.  1. Each Party shall grant investors of another Party treatment no less favorable than it grants to its own similar investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other forms of alienation of similar financial institutions and investments. in similar financial institutions in its territory.  2. Each Party shall accord to financial institutions of another Party and to investments of investors of another Party in financial institutions treatment no less favorable than it accords to its own similar financial institutions and to similar investments of its own similar investors in financial institutions. similar financial institutions regarding the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale or other forms of alienation of financial institutions and investments.  3. When a Party allows the cross-border provision of a financial service pursuant to Article 11-05, it shall grant cross-border financial service providers of another Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants to its own similar financial service providers, with respect to the provision of such service.  4. The treatment accorded by a Party to financial institutions and cross-border financial service providers of another Party, whether identical or different from that accorded to its own similar institutions or similar service providers, is consistent with paragraphs 1 through 3, if it offers equal opportunity to compete.  5. Treatment by a Party does not provide equal opportunity to compete if it disadvantages similar financial institutions and similar cross-border financial service providers of another Party in their ability to provide financial services, compared with the ability of the Party's own financial institutions and financial service providers to provide those services.  Article 11-07 Most Favored Nation Treatment.  Each Party shall accord to financial institutions of another Party, to cross-border financial service providers of another Party, to investors of another Party, and to investments of such investors in financial institutions, treatment no less favorable than that accorded to financial institutions similar, to similar cross-border financial service providers, to similar investors and to investments of such investors in similar financial institutions of another Party or of another non-Party country.  Article 11-08 Recognition and harmonization.  1. When applying the measures included in this Chapter, a Party may recognize the prudential measures of another Party or of a non-Party. Such recognition may be:
a) granted unilaterally;  b) achieved through harmonization or other means; or  c) granted based on an agreement or arrangement with another Party or with a non-Party country.
2. The Party that grants recognition of prudential measures in accordance with paragraph 1 shall provide appropriate opportunities for any other Party to demonstrate that there are circumstances whereby equivalent regulations exist or will exist, supervision and enforcement of the regulation and, if appropriate, procedures for sharing information between the Parties.  3. Where a Party grants prudential measures recognition in accordance with paragraph 1 and the circumstances set forth in paragraph 2 exist, that Party shall provide appropriate opportunities for another Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate an agreement or similar arrangement.  Article 11-09 Exceptions.  1. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as an impediment for a Party to adopt or maintain reasonable prudential measures of a financial nature, for reasons such as:
a) protect investors, depositors or other creditors, holders or beneficiaries of policies or creditors of fiduciary obligations in charge of a financial institution or a provider of cross-border financial services;  b) maintain the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers; and  c) ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system of that Party.
2. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to non-discriminatory measures of general application adopted by a public entity in conducting monetary policies or credit policies, or exchange policies. This paragraph shall not affect the obligations of any Party under Article 11-17 or 14-07.  3. Notwithstanding Article 11-17, a Party may prevent or limit transfers from a cross-border financial institution or financial service provider to, or for the benefit of, an affiliate or a person related to that institution or with that service provider, through the fair and non-discriminatory application of measures related to maintaining the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply without prejudice to any other provision of this agreement that allows a Party to restrict transfers.  4. Article 11-06 shall not apply to the granting of exclusive rights by a Party to a financial institution to provide one of the financial services referred to in subparagraph a) of paragraph 2 of Article 11-02.  Article 11-10 Transparency.  1. In addition to the provisions of Article 17-02, each Party shall ensure that any measure it adopts on matters related to this Chapter is officially published or timely disclosed to the addressees thereof by some other written means.  2. The competent authorities of each Party shall make available to the interested parties all information regarding the requirements to fill out and submit an application for the provision of financial services.  3. At the request of the applicant, the competent authority will inform him about the status of his application. When that authority requires additional information from the applicant, it will communicate it without undue delay.  4. Each competent authority will issue, within a period of 120 days, an administrative resolution regarding a complete application related to the provision of a financial service, presented by an investor in a financial institution, by a financial institution or by a service provider. cross-border financial services of another Party. The authority will notify the interested party of the resolution without delay. The application will not be considered complete until all relevant hearings are held and all necessary information is received. When it is not feasible to issue a resolution within 120 days, the competent authority will notify the interested party without undue delay and will subsequently seek to issue the resolution within a reasonable period of time.  5. Nothing in this chapter requires a Party to disclose or allow access to:
a) information relating to the financial affairs and accounts of individual clients of financial institutions or of cross-border financial service providers; or  b) any confidential information the disclosure of which would hinder law enforcement, be contrary to the public interest, or harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person.
6. Each competent authority shall maintain or establish one or more consultation centers to respond in writing, as soon as possible, to all reasonable questions submitted in writing by interested persons regarding the measures of general application adopted by each Party in relation to this Chapter.  Article 11-11 Financial Services Committee.  1. The Parties establish the Financial Services Committee made up of the competent authorities of each Party. Likewise, representatives of other institutions may participate when the competent authorities deem it appropriate.  2. The Committee:
a) supervise the application of this chapter and its further development;  b) consider the aspects related to financial services that are presented to it by a Party;  c) will participate in dispute resolution procedures in accordance with the provisions of Articles 11-18 and 11-19; and  d) will facilitate the exchange of information between national supervisory authorities and will cooperate, in terms of advice, on prudential regulation, seeking the harmonization of regulatory regulatory frameworks, as well as other policies when deemed appropriate.
3. The Committee will meet at least once a year to evaluate the operation of this chapter.  Article 11-12 Consultations.  1. Any Party may request consultations with another Party regarding any matter related to this Agreement that affects financial services, and the other Party shall favorably consider such request. The consulting Parties shall inform the Committee of the results of their consultations during the meetings it holds.  2. Officials from the competent authorities of the Parties will participate in the consultations provided for in this article.  3. Each Party may request that the competent authorities of another Party intervene in the consultations carried out in accordance with this article, to discuss the measures of general application of that other Party that may affect the operations of financial institutions or service providers. cross-border financial institutions in the territory of the Party that requested the consultation.  4. The provisions of this article shall not be interpreted in the sense of obliging the competent authorities that intervene in the consultations in accordance with paragraph 3, to disclose information or to act in a way that could interfere in particular matters regarding regulation, supervision, administration or application of measures.  5. In cases where, for supervisory purposes, a Party needs information on a financial institution in the territory of another Party or on cross-border financial service providers in the territory of another Party, the Party may turn to the responsible competent authority. in the territory of that other Party to request the information.  Article 11-13 New financial services and data processing.  1. Each Party shall permit a financial institution of another Party to provide any new financial services of a type similar to those that that other Party allows its financial institutions to provide, in accordance with its legislation. The Party may decide the institutional and legal modality through which said service is offered and may require authorization for its provision. When such authorization is required, the respective resolution will be issued within a reasonable period of time and authorization may only be denied for prudential reasons.  2. Each Party shall allow financial institutions of another Party to transfer, for processing, information within or outside the territory of the Party, using any of the means authorized by it, when necessary to carry out ordinary activities. business of these institutions.  Article 11-14 Senior business management and boards of directors.  1. No Party may compel financial institutions of another Party to hire personnel of any particular nationality for senior business management or other essential positions.  2. No Party may require that the board of directors or the board of directors of a financial institution of another Party be composed of a greater than simple majority of nationals of that Party, residents of its territory, or a combination of both.  Article 11-15 Reserves and specific commitments.  1. Except as provided in Annex 11-15, within a period not exceeding two years from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall negotiate reservations and commitments to Articles 11-04, 11-05, 11 -06, 11-07, 11-13 and 11-14.  2. The Parties shall gradually liberalize, through future negotiations with each other, any financial reserves referred to in paragraph 1.  3. When a Party is not in a position to comply with the term established in paragraph 1, it shall notify the Commission, which will automatically extend the term for two more years.  Article 11-16 Denial of benefits.  A Party may deny, in whole or in part, the benefits derived from this Chapter to a financial institution of another Party or to a cross-border financial service provider of another Party, upon prior notification and consultation, in accordance with Articles 11-10 and 11. -12, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out significant business activities in the territory of any Party or that, in accordance with the current legislation of each Party, is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party country.  Article 11-17 Transfers.  1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to the investment in its territory of an investor of another Party to be made freely and without delay. Such transfers include:
a) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration expenses, technical assistance and other charges, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;  b) products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;  c) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or his investment is a party;  d) payments made in accordance with article 14-11; either
e) payments resulting from a dispute resolution procedure in accordance with section B of chapter XIV.
2. Each Party will allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currency, at the exchange rate prevailing in the market on the transfer date for cash transactions of the currency to be transferred, without prejudice to the provisions of article 20-06.  3. No Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits or profits or other amounts derived from investments carried out in the territory of another Party, or attributable to them.  4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, each Party may prevent transfers, through the equitable, non-discriminatory application of its laws, in the following cases:
a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;  b) issue, trade and operations of securities;  c) criminal or administrative offences;  d) reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments; or  e) guarantee of compliance with rulings in contentious proceedings.
5. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party may restrict transfers of in-kind earnings in circumstances where it could otherwise restrict such transfers pursuant to this Chapter.  6. Each Party may maintain laws and regulations that establish income and complementary taxes by means such as withholding taxes applicable to dividends and other transfers, provided they are not discriminatory.  Article 11-18 Settlement of disputes between the Parties.  1. In the terms in which this article modifies it, Chapter XIX applies to the solution of controversies that arise between the Parties regarding this chapter.  2. The Committee shall create by consensus a list of up to 12 individuals that includes up to three individuals from each Party, who have the necessary skills and dispositions to act as arbitrators in disputes related to this chapter. The members of this list must, in addition to meeting the requirements established in Chapter XIX, have specialized knowledge in matters of a financial nature or extensive experience derived from the exercise of responsibilities in the financial sector, or its regulation.  3. For the purposes of constituting the arbitral tribunal, the list referred to in paragraph 2 shall be used, except that the disputing Parties agree that individuals not included in that list may be part of the arbitral tribunal, provided they meet the requirements established in paragraph 2. The president of the arbitral tribunal will always be chosen from that list.  4. In any controversy in which the arbitral tribunal has found that a measure is incompatible with the obligations of this treaty, when the suspension of benefits referred to in Chapter XIX is appropriate and the measure affects:
a) only to the financial services sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits only in that sector;  b) to the financial services sector and to any other sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits in the financial services sector that have an effect equivalent to the effect of that measure in the financial services sector; or  c) any sector other than financial services, the complaining Party may not suspend benefits in the financial services sector.
Article 11-19 Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party.  1. Except as provided in this article, the claims made by a disputing investor against a Party in relation to the obligations set forth in this chapter, shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of section B of chapter XIV.  2. When the Party against which the claim is made invokes any of the exceptions referred to in Article 11-09, the following procedure shall be observed:
a) The arbitral tribunal shall refer the matter to the Committee for its decision. The court may not proceed until it has received a decision from the Committee under the terms of this article or 60 days have elapsed from the date of receipt by the Committee; and  b) once the matter is received, the Committee will decide whether and to what degree the exception of Article 11-09 invoked is a valid defense against the investor's claim and will transmit a copy of its decision to the arbitral tribunal and to the Commission. That decision will be binding on the court.
Annex 11-01 Competent Authority
For purposes of this chapter, the competent authority of each Party shall be:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Central Reserve Bank, the Superintendency of the Financial System, the Superintendency of Pensions, the Superintendency of Securities and the Ministry of Economy;  b) in the case of Guatemala: the Monetary Board, the Bank of Guatemala, the Ministry of Economy and the Superintendence of Banks;  c) in the case of Honduras: the Central Bank of Honduras, the National Banking and Insurance Commission; the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce and the Secretary of State in the Office of Finance; and  d) in the case of Mexico: the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.
Annex 11-15 Reserves and Specific Commitments
1. Guatemala is excepted from the application of the term established in paragraph 1 of article 11-15.  2. The application of the chapter on Financial Services between Mexico and Guatemala will be suspended until both parties negotiate and establish the reserves and specific commitments referred to in paragraph 1 of article 11-15.
Chapter XII TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Article 12-01 Definitions .  For the purposes of this chapter, it will be understood by:  intracorporate communications : the telecommunications through which a company communicates:
a) internally, with its subsidiaries, branches and affiliates or these among themselves, as defined by each Party; or  b) in a non-commercial way, with all the people of fundamental importance for the economic activity of the company, and who maintain a continuous contractual relationship with it;
but does not include telecommunications services provided to persons other than those described in this definition;  authorized equipment : terminal or other equipment that has been approved for connection to the public telecommunications network in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures of a Party;  terminal equipment : any digital or analog device capable of processing, receiving, switching, signaling or transmitting signals through electromagnetic means and that is connected to the public telecommunications network, through radio or cable connections, at a terminal point;  standardization measure: "standardization measure" as defined in Chapter XV;  conformity assessment procedure : "conformity assessment procedure" as defined in Chapter XV;  protocol – a set of rules and formats that govern the exchange of information between two peer entities, for the purposes of signal or data information transfer;  principal provider or dominant operator : a provider that has the ability to significantly affect the conditions of participation (from the point of view of prices and supply) in a given market for telecommunications services as a result of control of essential facilities or the use of its position in the market;  network end point: the final demarcation of the public telecommunications network at the user's premises; private telecommunications network: the internal telecommunications network of a company or between people that does not imply commercial exploitation;  public telecommunications network: the telecommunications network used to commercially operate telecommunications services intended to meet the needs of the general public; not including the telecommunications terminal equipment of the users, nor the telecommunications networks that are beyond the terminal point of the network;
enhanced or value-added services: telecommunications services that employ computer processing systems that:
a) act on the format, content, code, protocol or similar aspects of the information transmitted from the user;
b) that provide the client with additional, different or restructured information; either
c) involve user interaction with stored information;
public telecommunications service: any telecommunications service that a Party explicitly or de facto requires to be offered to the general public, including telegraph, telephone, telex, and data transmission and that generally involves real-time transmission of customer-supplied information between two or more points, with no "point-to-point" change in the form or content of the user information;  fixed rate : pricing based on a fixed amount per period, regardless of the amount of usage; and  telecommunications: the transmission, emission, reception of signs, signals, writings, images, sounds and information of any nature, by physical line, radioelectricity, optical means or other electromagnetic systems.  Article 12-02 Scope of application and extension of obligations.  1. Recognizing the dual role of telecommunications services, as a specific sector of economic activity and as a means of providing services for other economic activities, this chapter applies to:
a) the measures that a Party adopts or maintains, related to the provision of public telecommunications services;  b) the measures adopted or maintained by a Party, related to the continuous access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services by persons of another Party, including their access and use when operating private networks to carry out intra-corporate communications;  c) the measures adopted or maintained by a Party on the provision of enhanced or value-added services by persons of another Party in the territory of the first or across its borders; and  d) measures related to standardization regarding the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment to public telecommunications networks.
2. Except to ensure that persons operating broadcast stations and cable systems have continuous access to and use of public telecommunications networks and services, this Chapter does not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to broadcasting or cable distribution of radio or television programming.  3. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a) compel any Party to authorize a person of another Party to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply telecommunications networks or services;  b) compel any Party or that it, in turn, require any person to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply public telecommunications networks or services that are not offered to the general public;  c) prevent any Party from prohibiting persons who operate private networks from using such networks to provide public telecommunications networks or services to third parties; neither  d) compel a Party to require any person involved in the broadcasting or cable distribution of radio or television programming to provide its cable or broadcasting infrastructure as a public telecommunications network.
Article 12-03 Access to public telecommunications networks and services and their use.  1. Each Party shall guarantee that any person of another Party has access to and can make use of any public telecommunications network or service, including private leased circuits, offered in its territory or cross-border on reasonable terms and conditions and not discriminatory, in the conduct of its business, as specified in paragraphs 2 through 7.  2. Subject to paragraphs 6 and 7, each Party shall ensure that persons of another Party are permitted:
a) purchase or lease and connect the terminal equipment or other equipment that interfaces with the public telecommunications network;  b) interconnect private circuits, leased or owned, with public telecommunications networks in the territory of that Party or across its borders, including access by direct dialing to and by its users or customers, or with circuits leased or owned by another person, on terms and conditions mutually accepted by such persons;  c) perform switching, signaling and processing functions; and  d) use the operating protocols that they choose.
3. Without prejudice to what is established in its current legislation, each Party shall guarantee that:
a) pricing for public telecommunications services reflects the economic costs directly related to the provision of such services; and  b) private leased circuits are available on a fixed rate basis.
4. The provisions of paragraph 3 shall not be construed to prevent cross-subsidies between public telecommunications services.  5. Each Party shall guarantee that persons of another Party may use public telecommunications networks or services to transmit information in its territory or across its borders, including for intra-corporate communications, and for access to information contained in databases or stored in any other form that is readable by a machine in the territory of either Party.  6. Each Party may adopt any necessary measure to ensure the confidentiality and security of messages and the protection of the privacy of subscribers to public telecommunications networks or services.  7. Each Party shall ensure that no conditions are imposed on access to, or use of, public telecommunications networks or services other than those necessary to:
a) safeguard the responsibilities of the public service, of the providers of public telecommunications networks or services, in particular their ability to make their networks or services available to the general public; or  b) protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or services.
8. As long as the conditions for access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services comply with the guidelines established in paragraph 7, said conditions may include:
a) restrictions on the resale or sharing of such services;  b) requirements to use particular technical interfaces, including interface protocols, for interconnection with the aforementioned networks or services;  c) restrictions on the interconnection of private circuits, leased or owned, with the aforementioned networks or services, or with circuits leased or owned by another person, when these are used to supply public telecommunications networks or services; and  d) procedures for granting licenses, permits, registrations or notifications that, if adopted or maintained, are transparent and whose processing of applications is resolved in accordance with the terms established in the legislation of each Party.
Article 12-04 Conditions for the provision of enhanced or value-added services.  1. Each Party shall ensure that:
a) any procedure that it adopts or maintains to grant licences, permits, registrations or notifications regarding the provision of enhanced or value-added services is transparent and non-discriminatory and that the applications are processed in accordance with the terms established in the legislation of each Party ; and  b) the information required under such procedures is limited to that necessary to prove that the applicant has the financial solvency to start rendering the service, or that the applicant's services, terminal equipment or other equipment comply with the technical or applicable technical regulations of the Party.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of its current legislation, no Party shall require a provider of enhanced or value-added services:
a) lend them to the general public;  b) justify their rates according to their costs;  c) record a fee;  d) interconnect their networks with any client or network in particular; or  e) satisfy any particular technical standard or regulation, for an interconnection other than the interconnection with a public telecommunications network.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph c) of paragraph 2, each Party may require the registration of a fee to:
a) a provider of enhanced or value-added services, in order to correct a practice of this provider that the Party, in accordance with its legislation, has considered, in a particular case, as anti-competitive; or  b) a monopoly, main supplier or dominant operator, to which the provisions of article 12-06 apply.
Article 12-05  Measures related to standardization.  1. Each Party shall ensure that its measures related to standardization that refer to the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment to public telecommunications networks, including those measures that refer to the use of test and measurement equipment for the evaluation procedure of conformity, are adopted or maintained only to the extent necessary to:
a) avoid technical damage to public telecommunications networks;  b) avoid technical interference with public telecommunications services or their deterioration;  c) avoid electromagnetic interference and ensure compatibility with other uses of the electromagnetic spectrum;  d) prevent billing equipment from malfunctioning; or  e) guarantee the security of the user and his access to public telecommunications networks or services.
2. Each Party may establish the approval requirement for the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment that is not authorized to the public telecommunications network, provided that the approval criteria are compatible with the provisions of paragraph 1.  3. Each Party It will ensure that the end points of public telecommunications networks are defined on a reasonable and transparent basis.  4. No Party shall require additional authorization for equipment to be connected on the consumer side, once the equipment has been authorized as a protective device that meets the criteria in paragraph 1.  5. Each Party:
a) it will ensure that its conformity assessment procedures are transparent and non-discriminatory and that the applications submitted for this purpose are processed in accordance with the deadlines established in its legislation;  b) allow any technically qualified entity to perform the required test on the terminal equipment or other equipment to be connected to the public telecommunications network, in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures of the Party, subject to the right of the to review the accuracy and completeness of the test results; Y  c) shall ensure that the measures it adopts or maintains to authorize persons acting as agents of telecommunications equipment suppliers before the competent bodies for conformity assessment of the Party are not discriminatory.
6. No later than one year after the entry into force of this treaty, each Party shall adopt, among its conformity assessment procedures, the necessary provisions to accept the results of the tests they carry out, based on their established standards and procedures. , laboratories that are located in the territory of another Party.  7. The Parties establish, in accordance with Article 15-17, a Subcommittee on Measures Related to Telecommunications Standardization.  Article 12-06 Anti -competitive practices.  1. When a Party maintains or establishes a monopoly, main provider or dominant operator to provide public telecommunications networks and services, and it competes, directly or through a subsidiary, in the provision of enhanced or value-added services or other goods or services related to telecommunications, the Party shall ensure that the monopoly, main supplier or dominant operator does not use its position to engage in anti-competitive practices in those markets, either directly or through dealings with its subsidiaries, in in such a way as to disadvantageously affect a person of another Party. Such practices may include cross-subsidies, predatory conduct, and discriminatory access to public telecommunications networks and services.  2. Each Party shall endeavor to introduce or maintain effective measures to prevent the anticompetitive conduct referred to in paragraph 1, such as:
a) accounting requirements;  b) structural separation requirements;  c) rules to ensure that the monopoly, main provider or dominant operator grants its competitors access to its networks or its telecommunications services and the use thereof, on terms and conditions no less favorable than those granted to itself or to its subsidiaries; or  d) rules to ensure timely disclosure of technical changes to public telecommunications networks and their interfaces.
Article 12-07 Relationship with international organizations and agreements.  1. The Parties will do their best to stimulate the role of organizations at the regional and subregional level and encourage them as forums to promote the development of telecommunications in the region.  2. The Parties, recognizing the importance of international standards for achieving global compatibility and interoperability of telecommunication networks or services, shall promote such standards through the work of relevant international organizations, such as the International Telecommunication Union and the International Organization of Normalization.  Article 12-08 Technical cooperation and other consultations.  1. In order to stimulate the development of interoperable telecommunications services infrastructure, the Parties will cooperate in the exchange of technical information in the development of intergovernmental training programs, as well as in other related activities. In compliance with this obligation, the Parties will place special emphasis on existing coordination and exchange programs.  2. The Parties shall consult with each other to determine the possibility of further liberalizing trade in all telecommunications services.  Article 12-09 Transparency.  In addition to the provisions of Article 17-02, each Party shall make available to the public the measures relating to access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services, including measures relating to:
a) rates and other terms and conditions of service;  b) specifications of the technical interfaces with said services and networks;  c) information on the bodies responsible for the preparation and adoption of measures related to standardization that affect such access and use;  d) conditions applicable to the connection of terminal equipment or of another kind, to the public telecommunications network; and  e) any notice, permit, registration or license requirements.
Article 12-10 Relationship with other chapters.  In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of this treaty, the provisions of this chapter shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.
Chapter XIII TEMPORARY ENTRY OF BUSINESS PERSONS
Article 13-01 Definitions.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:  labor certification : the procedure carried out by the competent administrative authority, tending to determine if a foreign individual coming from a Party who intends to temporarily enter the territory of another Party, displaces national labor in the same labor branch or significantly harms the working conditions of the same;  temporary entry : the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of another Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;  migratory measure : any measure in migratory matters;  businessperson: the national of a Party who participates in the trade of goods or provision of services, or in investment activities;  recurring practice : a practice carried out by the migration authorities of a Party on a repetitive basis during a representative period prior to and immediately after its execution; and  current : the binding quality of the legal precepts of the Parties at the time of entry into force of this treaty.  Article 13-02 General principles.  The provisions of this chapter reflect the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity, and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose. Likewise, they reflect the need to guarantee the security of the borders and particularly in terms of entry, through the places authorized for migratory transit and to protect the work of their nationals and permanent employment in their respective territories.  Article 13-03 General obligations.  1. Each Party shall apply the measures related to this Chapter in accordance with Article 13-02, in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or damage, in trade in goods and services, or in investment activities. included in this treaty.  2. The Parties shall endeavor to develop and adopt common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the application of this Chapter.  Article 13-04 Temporary entry authorization.  1. Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including those contained in Annex 13-04, each Party shall authorize temporary entry to business persons who comply with other applicable measures relating to public health and safety, as well as with the relating to national security.  2. A Party may deny the issuance of a migration document that authorizes activity or employment to a business person, in accordance with its legislation, when its temporary entry adversely affects:
a) the solution of any labor conflict that exists in the place where they are employed or will be employed; either
b) the employment of any person involved in that conflict.
3. When a Party denies the issuance of an immigration document that authorizes activity or employment, in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party:
a) inform the affected business person in writing of the reasons for the refusal; and  b) promptly notify the Party whose national is refused entry of the reasons for the refusal in writing.
4. Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees caused by the processing of applications for temporary entry to the approximate cost of the services rendered.  5. The temporary entry of a business person does not authorize professional practice.  Article 13-05 Availability of information.  1. In addition to the provisions of Article 17-02, each Party:
a) provide another Party with the information that allows it to know the migratory measures; and  b) no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this treaty, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its territory and in that of another Party, a consolidated document that explains the requirements for temporary entry pursuant to this chapter, so that business persons of another Party may become acquainted with them.
2. Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to another Party, in accordance with its legislation, information relating to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this Chapter, to persons of another Party to whom documentation has been issued. migratory. This collection will include information for each authorized category.  Article 13-06 Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons.  1. The Parties establish the Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons, made up of representatives of each of them, including immigration officials.  2. The Committee shall meet, initially, no later than six months after the date of entry into force of this treaty and at least once a year, to consider:
a) the application and administration of this chapter; and  b) the development of measures that further facilitate the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity and the provisions of this chapter.
Article 13-07 Settlement of disputes.  1. The Parties may not initiate the procedures provided for in article 19-06, with respect to a refusal of temporary entry authorization in accordance with this chapter, nor with respect to any particular case included in article 13-03, except that:
a) the matter refers to a recurring practice; and  b) the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him or her with respect to that particular matter.
2. The remedies mentioned in subparagraph b) of paragraph 1, will be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution within a period of six months from the beginning of the administrative procedure and the resolution has not been delayed for reasons attributable to the affected business person.  Article 13-08 Relationship with other chapters.  Except as provided in this chapter and in chapters I, II, XVII, XIX and XXI, no provision of this agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures.
Exhibit 13-04 Temporary Entry for Business Persons  Section A Business Visitors
1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and provide the corresponding documentation to the business person who, at the prior request of a legally constituted and operating company or business association, intends to carry out any activity expressly mentioned in appendix 1 to this annex, without requiring employment authorization, provided that, in addition to complying with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry, you display:
a) proof of nationality of a Party;  b) documentation proving the prior application of a company or a business association legally constituted and operating in the territory of a Party;  c) documentation that proves that they will undertake these activities and indicates the purpose of their entry; and  d) proof of the international nature of the business activity that is proposed to be carried out and that the person does not intend to enter the local labor market.
2. Each Party will stipulate that a business person can meet the requirements indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 1, when it demonstrates that:
a) the main source of remuneration for that activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; and  b) the main place of business and where most of the profits are effectively obtained are outside this territory.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, each Party will normally accept a declaration as to the principal place of business and the place of profit. When a Party requires additional verification, a letter from the company or business association legally constituted and in operation stating these circumstances may be considered sufficient proof.  4. Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of a business person who intends to carry out a business activity other than those indicated in Appendix 1 to this annex, in terms no less favorable than those provided for in the current provisions of the indicated measures. in appendix 2 to this annex, provided that the business person also complies with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.  5. Neither Party may:
a) require as a condition to authorize temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1, prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests, or other procedures of similar effect; or  b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions on temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1 or 4.
6. Except as provided in paragraph 5, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain a visa or equivalent document prior to entry. The Parties shall consult with each other in order to eliminate the visa or equivalent document requirements.
Section B Traders and Investors
1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and provide the corresponding documentation to the business person who intends to:
a) carry out an important commercial exchange of goods or services, between the territory of the Party of which he is a national and the territory of the Party to which he requests entry; or  b) establish, develop, manage or provide advice or key technical services, to carry out or manage an investment in which the person or his company has committed, or is in the process of committing, a significant amount of capital and which exercises supervisory, executive functions or those involving essential skills, provided that the person also complies with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.
2. Neither Party may:
a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1; or  b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.
3. Except as provided in paragraph 2, a Party may examine, at a peremptory time, the investment proposal of a business person to assess whether the investment complies with the applicable legal provisions.  4. Except as provided in paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document.
Section C Personnel Transfers within a Company
1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to a business person employed by a legally constituted company operating in its territory, who intends to perform managerial, executive, or specialized knowledge functions, in that company or in one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, provided that that person and that company comply with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. The Party may require that the person have been employed by the company, continuously for one year, within the three years immediately preceding the date of filing the application.  2. Neither Party may:
a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect as a condition for granting temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1; or  b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.
3. Except as provided in paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document. The Parties shall consult with each other in order to eliminate the visa or equivalent document requirements.
Appendix 1 to Exhibit 13-04 Business Visitor Activities
I. Research and Design  - Technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out research independently or for a company established in the territory of another Party.  II. Cultivation, manufacturing and production  - Purchasing and production personnel, at the managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company established in the territory of another Party.  III. Marketing  - Researchers who carry out research or analysis, including market analysis, independently or for a company established in the territory of another Party.  - Trade fair and promotional staff who attend trade conventions.  IV. Sales  - Representatives and sales agents who take orders or negotiate contracts for goods and services for a company established in the territory of another Party, but who do not deliver the goods or provide the services.  - Buyers who make acquisitions for a company established in the territory of another Party.  V. Distribution  - Customs agents that provide advisory services with the purpose of facilitating the import or export of goods.  - Transport operators that carry out goods or passenger transport operations to the territory of a Party from the territory of another Party, or carry out loading and unloading operations of goods or passengers from the territory of a Party to the territory of another Party, without carrying out loading or unloading operations, in the territory of the Party to which entry is requested, of goods that are in that territory or of passengers that board in it.  SAW. After sales services  - Installation, repair, maintenance and supervisory personnel who have the specialized technical knowledge essential to fulfill the seller's contractual obligation and who provide services, or train workers to provide those services, pursuant to a warranty or other contract of services related to the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company established outside the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, during the term of the warranty or service contract.  VII. General Services  - Managerial and supervisory personnel involved in business operations for a company established in the territory of another Party.  - Public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions.  - Tourism personnel (excursion and travel agents, tourist guides or travel operators) who attend or participate in conventions.  - Translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company established in the territory of another Party.  - Tour bus operators entering the territory of a Party:
a) with a group of passengers on a tour bus trip that started in the territory of another Party and is going to return to it;  b) who is going to pick up a group of passengers on a tour bus trip that ends, and takes place, for the most part in the territory of another Party; or  c) with a group of passengers on a tour bus trip whose destination is in the territory of another Party, to which temporary entry is requested and which returns without passengers or with the group to transport it to the territory of another Party.
Appendix 2 to Annex 13-04 Current Immigration Measures
For the purposes of Annex 13-04, the current immigration measures will be:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Migration Law, Legislative Decree No. 2772 of December 19, 1958;  b) in the case of Guatemala: the Migration Law, Decree No. 95-98 of the Congress of the Republic;  c) in the case of Honduras: the Population and Immigration Policy Law, Decree No. 34 of September 25, 1970, and Agreement No. 8 on Immigration Procedures and Facilities for Foreign Investors and Merchants of August 19, 1988; and  d) in the case of Mexico: the General Population Law, 1974, with its reforms and its Regulations.
Chapter XIV INVESTMENT  Section A Investment
ARTICLE 14-01 Definitions.  For purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:  ICSID : the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes;  Inter- American Convention : the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, held in Panama on January 30, 1975;  ICSID Convention : the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded in Washington, DC, on March 18, 1965;  New York Convention – The United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done in New York on June 10, 1958;  demand: the claim submitted by a disputing investor against a Party, whose foundation is an alleged violation of the provisions contained in this chapter;  company : a "company" as defined in section 2-01, and the branch of a company;  enterprise of a Party : an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party and a branch of an enterprise located in the territory of a Party that carries on business therein;  investment :
a) a company;  b) shares of a company;  c) debt instruments of a company:
i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; or  ii) when the original maturity date of the debt instrument is at least three years, but does not include a debt instrument of a State enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;
d) a loan to a company;
i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; or  ii) when the original maturity date of the loan is at least three years, but does not include a loan to a State enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;
e) a participation in a company, which allows the owner to participate in the income or profits of the company;  f) a participation in a company that grants the owner the right to participate in the corporate assets of that company in a liquidation, provided that this does not derive from an obligation or a loan excluded according to literals c) or d);  g) real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit or for other business purposes; and  h) the participation resulting from the capital or other resources destined for the development of an economic activity in the territory of another Party, among them, according to:
i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of another Party, including concessions, construction and turnkey contracts; or  ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company;
but investment does not mean:
i) a State debt instrument;  j) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:  i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of a Party to a company in the territory of another Party; or  ii) the granting of credit in relation to a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, except for a loan covered by the provisions of subparagraph d); or  k) any other pecuniary claim that does not involve the interest rates set forth in subparagraphs a) to i);
investment of an investor of a Party : the investment owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an investor of a Party in the territory of another Party;  investor of a Party : a Party or a company thereof, a national or a company of that Party, that carries out the material acts tending to make an investment or, where appropriate, makes or has made an investment in the territory from elsewhere;  non-Party investor: an investor who is not an investor of a Party that intends to make, is making, or has made an investment;  disputing investor : an investor who submits a claim under the terms of section B;  disputing party: the Party against whom a claim is submitted under the terms of section B;  disputing party means the disputing investor or the disputing Party;  disputing parties : the disputing investor and the disputing Party;  UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules : the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976;  Secretary General : the Secretary General of ICSID;  transfers : international remittances and payments;  tribunal : an arbitral tribunal established under article 14-22; and  accumulation court: an arbitral tribunal established under article 14-29.  Article 14-02 Scope of application and extension of obligations.  1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
a) investors of another Party, in everything related to their investment;
b) investments of investors of another Party made in the territory of the Party; and  c) with respect to Article 14-07, all investments in the territory of the Party.
2. This chapter does not apply to:
a) the economic activities reserved for each Party, as indicated in Annex III;  b) the measures adopted or maintained by a Party regarding financial services;  c) the measures adopted by a Party to restrict the participation of the investments of investors of another Party in its territory, for reasons of national security or public order; and  d) disputes or claims arising prior to the entry into force of this treaty, or related to events that occurred prior to its entry into force, even if its effects remain after it.
3. This chapter applies throughout the territory of the Parties and at any level or order of government, despite incompatible measures that may exist in their respective laws.  4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from providing services or carrying out functions related to law enforcement, social rehabilitation services, pension or unemployment insurance, or social security, social welfare services. , public education, health and child protection.  Article 14-03 Minimum level of treatment.  Each Party shall grant investors of another Party and their investments treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as protection and legal certainty within its territory.  Article 14-04 National treatment.  Each Party shall accord to the investor of a Party and to the investment of an investor of a Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors and to the investments of such investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale or other disposition of investments.  Article 14-05 Most Favored Nation Treatment.  1. Each Party shall accord to the investor of a Party and to the investment of an investor of a Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in like circumstances, to the investor and to the investment of an investor of a Party or of a country not Party, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale or other disposition of investments.  2. If a Party has granted special treatment to the investor from a non-Party country or to the investment of an investor from a non-Party country, by virtue of agreements that establish provisions to avoid double taxation, free trade zones, customs unions, common markets, economic or monetary unions and similar institutions, said Party shall not be obliged to grant the treatment in question to the investor of a Party or to the investment of an investor of a Party.  Article 14-06 Treatment in case of losses.  Each Party shall grant the investor of a Party, with respect to investments that suffer losses in its territory due to armed conflicts or civil strife, acts of God or force majeure, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to any measure that it adopts or maintains in connection with those losses. .  Article 14-07 Performance requirements.  1. No Party may impose or compel compliance with the following requirements or commitments, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct or operation of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party country in its territory to:
a) export a certain type, level or percentage of goods or services;  b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;  c) acquire, use or grant preference to goods produced or services provided in their territory, or acquire goods from producers or services from service providers in their territory;  d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of currency inflows associated with said investment;  e) restrict the sales in their territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of their exports or to earnings generated in foreign currency;  f) transfer to a person in its territory, technology, production process or other reserved knowledge, except when the requirement is imposed by a judicial or administrative court or competent authority, to repair an alleged violation of competition laws or to act in a manner that is not inconsistent with other provisions of this treaty; or  g) act as the exclusive supplier of the goods it produces or services it provides for a specific, regional or global market.
This paragraph does not apply to any other requirement than those indicated in it.  2. The measure that requires an investment to use a technology to comply with health, environment or security requirements of general application, will not be considered incompatible with paragraph 1 literal f). To provide greater certainty, articles 14-04 and 14-05 apply to said measure.  3. No Party may condition the receipt of an advantage or the continued receipt thereof, in connection with an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or of a non-Party country, on the fulfillment of any of the following requirements :
a) acquire, use or grant preference to goods produced in its territory or to purchase goods from producers in its territory;  b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;  c) relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of currency inflows associated with said investment; or  d) restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to earnings generated in foreign currency.
This paragraph does not apply to any other requirement than those indicated in it.  4. Nothing in paragraph 3 shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to impose, in relation to an investment of an investor of a Party or of an investor of a non-Party country in its territory, legally established requirements regarding geographic location. production units, job creation or workforce training, or research and development activities.  5. In the event that, in the opinion of a Party, the imposition by another Party of any other requirement not provided for in paragraph 1 negatively affects the flow of trade, or constitutes a significant barrier to investment, the matter shall be considered by the Committee on Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment, referred to in article 10-10 of this treaty.  6. If the Committee considers that the requirement in question negatively affects the commercial flow, it will recommend to the Commission the suspension of the respective practice.  7. This article does not apply to any commitment, obligation or requirement between private parties.  Article 14-08 Business senior management and boards of directors.  1. No Party may require that a company of that Party designate individuals of any particular nationality to occupy senior management positions, without prejudice to what is established in its legislation.  2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of the governing bodies or any committee of such bodies of an enterprise of that Party that is an investment of an investor of the other Party be of a particular nationality, or is resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control over his investment.  Article 14-09 Reservations and exceptions.  1. Articles 14-04, 14-05, 14-07 and 14-08 do not apply to:
a) any existing inconsistent measure maintained by a Party, whatever the level or order of government, as set out in its schedule to Annex I or Annex III;  b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any incompatible measure referred to in subparagraph a); or  c) the reform of any incompatible measure referred to in subparagraph a), provided that said reform does not reduce the degree of compatibility of the measure, as it was in force before the reform, with articles 14-04, 14-05, 14-07 and 14-08.
2. The treatment accorded by a Party under Article 14-05 does not apply to the treaties or sectors stipulated in its Schedule to Annex IV.  3. Articles 14-04, 14-05 and 14-08 do not apply to:
a) purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; or  b) subsidies or contributions, including government loans, guarantees and insurance granted by a Party or by a State company, except as provided in Article 14-06.
4. The provisions contained in:
a) Subparagraphs a), b) and c) of paragraph 1 and subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 3, of article 14-07, shall not apply in relation to the requirements for qualification of goods and services with respect to export promotion and foreign aid programs;  b) Subparagraphs b), c), f) and g) of paragraph 1 and subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 3 of Article 14-07 do not apply to purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; and  c) Subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 3 of Article 14-07 do not apply to the requirements imposed by an importing Party related to the necessary content of goods to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.
Article 14-10 Transfers.  1. Each Party shall allow in its territory all transfers related to the investment of an investor of another Party, to be made freely and without delay. Such transfers include:
a) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration expenses, technical assistance and other charges, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;  b) products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;  c) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or an investor's investment is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;  d) payments derived from compensation for expropriation concept; and  e) payments that come from the application of the provisions related to the dispute resolution mechanism contained in section B.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, a transfer is considered to have been carried out without delay when it has been carried out within the period normally necessary to comply with the transfer formalities.  3. No Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits, or profits or other amounts derived from, or attributable to, investments carried out in the territory of another Party, nor shall it penalize them in the event that they fail to do so. transfer.  4. Each Party shall allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currencies at the prevailing market exchange rate on the date of the transfer.  5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 4, each Party may prevent transfers, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of measures:
a) to protect the rights of creditors;  b) relating to ensuring compliance with laws and regulations:
i) for the issuance, transmission and trading of securities, futures and derivatives; or  ii) related to reports or records of transfers; either
c) related to criminal offenses or resolutions in administrative or judicial proceedings.
6. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, each Party may establish temporary controls on exchange operations, as long as the balance of payments of the Party in question shows a serious imbalance and implements a program in accordance with international criteria. accepted.  Article 14-11 Expropriation and compensation.  1. No Party may nationalize or expropriate, directly or indirectly, an investment of an investor of a Party in its territory, or take any measure equivalent to the expropriation or nationalization of that investment, unless it is:
a) for reasons of public interest in accordance with the provisions of the annex;  b) on non-discriminatory grounds;  c) in accordance with the principle of legality; and  d) by compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4.
2. The compensation will be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out (date of expropriation), and will not reflect any change in value, since the intention to expropriate was known in advance of the date of expropriation. The valuation criteria will include the declared fiscal value of tangible assets, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value.  3. The payment of the compensation will be made without delay and will be fully payable.  4. The amount paid will not be less than the equivalent amount that would have been paid in a freely convertible currency in the international financial market for compensation, on the date of expropriation, and this currency would have been converted at the current market price on the date of expropriation. valuation date, plus the interest that would have been generated at a bank or commercial rate up to the date of payment.  Article 14-12 Special formalities and information requirements.  1. Nothing in Article 14-04 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of another Party, such as investments being constituted in accordance with to the law of the Party, provided that such formalities do not substantially impair the protection afforded by a Party under this Chapter.  2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 14-04 and 14-05, each Party may require, in its territory, an investor of another Party, to provide routine information regarding their investment, exclusively for information or statistical purposes. . The Party will protect the information that is confidential, from any disclosure that could adversely affect the competitive situation of the investment or of the investor.  Article 14-13 Relationship with other chapters.  In case of incompatibility between a provision of this chapter and a provision of another, the provision of the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.  Article 14-14 Denial of benefits.  1. A Party, upon notice and consultation with another Party, may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of that Party that is an enterprise of the Party and to investments of such investor, if investors from a non-Party are majority owners. or control the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is incorporated or organized.  2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of another Party that is an enterprise of that Party and to investments of such investor, if such enterprise is owned or controlled by investors from a non-Party and:
a) the Party that denies the benefits does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party country; or  b) the Party that denies the benefits adopts or maintains measures in relation to the non-Party that prohibit transactions with that company or that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this chapter were granted to that company or its investments.
Article 14-15 Extraterritorial application of the legislation of a Party.  1. The Parties, in relation to the investments of their investors, constituted and organized under the legislation of another Party, may not exercise jurisdiction or adopt any measure that has the effect of the extraterritorial application of their legislation or the obstruction of trade between the Parties. Parties, or between a Party and a non-Party.  2. If any of the Parties fails to comply with the provisions of paragraph 1, the Party where the investment has been established may, at its discretion, adopt the measures and exercise the actions it deems necessary, in order to render the legislation ineffective or the measure in question and the obstacles to trade resulting therefrom.  Article 14-16 Measures related to the environment.  1. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to adopt, maintain or implement any measure, compatible with this chapter, that it considers appropriate to ensure that investments in its territory comply with environmental legislation.  2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by relaxing domestic measures applicable to health, safety or the environment. Consequently, neither Party shall eliminate or undertake to exempt from the application of these measures the investment of an investor, as a means to induce the establishment, acquisition, expansion or maintenance of the investment in its territory. If a Party believes that another Party has encouraged an investment in such a way, it may request consultations with that other Party.  Article 14-17 Promotion of investments and exchange of information.  1. With the intention of significantly increasing the reciprocal participation of investments, the Parties may promote and support the preparation of documents to promote investment opportunities and the design of mechanisms for their dissemination. Likewise, the Parties may create, maintain and improve financial mechanisms that make investments by one Party in the territory of another Party viable.  2. The Parties shall make available information available on opportunities for:
a) investment in its territory, which may be developed by investors from another Party;  b) strategic alliances between investors of the Parties, through research and combination of interests and partnership opportunities; and  c) investment in specific economic sectors of interest to the Parties and their investors, according to the express request made by any Party.
3. The Parties shall keep each other informed and updated regarding:
a) the legislation that, directly or indirectly, affects foreign investment including, among others, exchange and fiscal regimes;  b) the behavior of foreign investment in their respective territories; and  c) the investment opportunities referred to in paragraph 2, including the dissemination of available financial instruments that help increase investment in the territory of the Parties.
Section B Settlement of Disputes between a Party and an Investor of another Party
Article 14-18 Purpose.  Without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter XIX, this section establishes a mechanism for the settlement of investment disputes that arise, from the entry into force of this treaty, and that ensures equal treatment between investors of the Parties in accordance with the principle of international reciprocity, such as the due exercise of the guarantee of hearing and defense within a legal process before an arbitral tribunal.  Article 14-19 Claim of the investor of a Party, on its own account or on behalf of a company.  1. Pursuant to this section, an investor of a Party may, on its own behalf or on behalf of an enterprise of another Party that is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by it, submit to arbitration a claim the basis of which is that another Party or a company controlled directly or indirectly by that Party, has violated an obligation established in this chapter, as long as the investor or his investment have suffered losses or damages by virtue of the violation or as a consequence of it.  2. The investor may not file a claim pursuant to this section, if more than three years have elapsed from the date on which he knew or should have known of the alleged violation committed to his investment, as well as of the losses or damage suffered.  3. When an investor files a lawsuit on behalf of a company owned or controlled directly or indirectly, and in parallel an investor who does not control a company files a lawsuit on its own as a consequence of the same acts that gave rise to the filing of a claim in accordance with this article, and two or more claims are submitted to arbitration under the terms of article 14-22, the accumulation tribunal established in accordance with article 14-29 , will examine such claims jointly, unless that court determines that the interests of a disputing party would be prejudiced.  4. An investment may not submit a claim to arbitration under this section.  Article 14-20 Settlement of disputes through consultations and negotiations.  The disputing parties will first attempt to settle the dispute through consultation or negotiation.  Article 14-21 Notification of the intention to submit the claim to arbitration.  The disputing investor shall notify the disputing Party in writing of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration, at least 90 days before the claim is formally filed. The notification will state the following:
a) the name and domicile of the disputing investor and, when the claim has been filed on behalf of a company, the denomination or business name and domicile of the same;  b) the facts on which the claim is based;  c) the provisions of this chapter allegedly breached and any other applicable provision; and  d) the remedy requested and the approximate amount of damages claimed.
Article 14-22 Submission of the claim to arbitration.  1. Except as provided in paragraph 3 and provided that six months have elapsed since the acts giving rise to the claim took place, a disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration in accordance with:
a) the ICSID Convention, provided that both the disputing Party and the investor Party are State parties thereto;  b) The ICSID Additional Facility Rules, when the disputing Party or the investor Party, but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention; or  c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.
2. The chosen arbitration rules will govern the arbitration, except to the extent modified by this section.  3. When a company of a Party that is owned by an investor of another Party or that is under its direct or indirect control, in proceedings before a judicial or administrative court that is competent according to the legislation of each Party, alleges that the first Party has allegedly breached an obligation referred to in section A, the investor(s) may not allege the alleged breach in an arbitration proceeding under this section.  Article 14-23 Conditions prior to submitting a claim to arbitration proceedings.  1. A disputing investor for its own account may submit a claim to arbitration proceedings in accordance with this section, only if:
a) consents to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures set forth in this section; Y  b) the investor and, when the claim refers to loss or damage in a participation in a company of the other Party that is owned by the investor or is under its direct or indirect control, the company waives its right to initiate any procedure before a national court competent under the law of the disputing Party or other dispute settlement procedures with respect to the measure of the disputing Party allegedly in violation of the provisions referred to in Article 14-19, except for procedures in which it is requested the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declaratory or extraordinary nature, that do not imply the payment of damages before the competent national court, in accordance with the legislation of the disputing Party,such as the exhaustion of administrative remedies before the executing authorities of the allegedly infringing measure, provided for in the legislation of the disputing Party.
2. A disputing investor, on behalf of a company, may submit a claim to arbitration in accordance with this section, only if both the investor and the company:
a) consent to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures set forth in this section; Y  b) waive their right to initiate any proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be one of the violations referred to in Article 14-19 before any national court competent under the law or law of a Party or other dispute resolution procedures, except for procedures in which the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declarative or extraordinary nature is requested, which do not imply the payment of damages before the competent national court, in accordance with the legislation or law of the Party disputing Party, such as the exhaustion of administrative remedies before the executing authorities of the allegedly infringing measure, provided for in the legislation of the disputing Party.
3. The consent and waiver required by this article shall be in writing, delivered to the disputing Party, and included in the submission of the claim to arbitration.  4. Only in the event that the disputing Party has deprived the disputing investor of control of an enterprise:
a) the resignation of the company will not be required in accordance with subparagraphs b) of paragraphs 1 or 2; and  b) paragraph 3 of article 14-22 shall not apply.
Article 14-24 Consent to arbitration.  1. Each Party consents to submit claims to arbitration in accordance with the procedures and requirements indicated in this section.  2. The submission of a claim to arbitration by a disputing investor will comply with the requirements indicated in:
a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the Parties;  b) Article II of the New York Convention, which requires a written agreement; or  c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention, which requires an agreement.
Article 14-25 Number of arbitrators and method of appointment.  With the exception of the provisions of article 14-29, and without prejudice to the fact that the disputing parties agree otherwise, the court will be made up of three arbitrators. Each of the disputing parties shall appoint an arbitrator. The third arbitrator, who will be the president of the court, will be appointed by the disputing parties by mutual agreement.  Article 14-26 Composition of the court in the event that a disputing party does not appoint an arbitrator or an agreement is not reached on the appointment of the president of the court.  In the event that a disputing party does not appoint an arbitrator or an agreement is not reached on the appointment of the president of the tribunal:
a) the Secretary General shall appoint the arbitrators in the arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this section;  b) when a tribunal, other than that established pursuant to Article 14-29, is not established within 90 days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, the Secretary General, at the request of any of the disputing parties, will appoint, at its discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed, but not the president of the court, who will be appointed in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph c); either  c) The Secretary General shall appoint the president of the tribunal from among the arbitrators from the list referred to in article 14-27, ensuring that the president of the tribunal is not a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary General shall designate, from the ICSID panel of arbitrators, the president of the tribunal, provided that he is of a different nationality from that of the disputing Party or that of the Part of the contending investor.
Article 14-27 List of arbitrators.  As of the date of entry into force of this treaty, the Parties shall establish and maintain a list of 40 arbitrators, as possible presidents of the tribunal, or to appoint the arbitrators of a consolidation tribunal, according to paragraph 4 of article 14-29, which meet the same qualities referred to in the ICSID Convention, the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and have experience in international law and investment matters. The members of the list will be appointed by consensus regardless of their nationality.  Article 14-28 Consent for the appointment of arbitrators.  For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator based on subparagraph c) of Article 14-26, or on the basis other than nationality:
a) the disputing Party accepts the appointment of each member of a tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; and  b) a disputing investor, whether on its own behalf or on behalf of a company, may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID Convention, or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only on the condition that the investor contestant and, where appropriate, the company it represents, express their consent in writing on the appointment of each of the members of the court.
Article 14-29 Consolidation of proceedings.  1. A consolidation tribunal established pursuant to this article shall be established in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of said rules, except as provided in this section.  2. When an accumulation tribunal determines that the claims submitted to arbitration in accordance with article 14-22 raise issues of fact and law in common, the accumulation tribunal, in the interest of their fair and efficient resolution, and having heard the disputing parties, may assume jurisdiction, process and resolve:
a) all or part of the demands, jointly; or  b) one or more of the demands in the understanding that this will contribute to the resolution of the others.
3. A disputing party seeking a consolidation order under paragraph 2 shall request the Secretary General to set up a consolidation tribunal and shall specify in its request:
a) the name of the disputing Party or of the disputing investors against whom the accumulation order is sought;  b) the nature of the accumulation order requested; and  c) the grounds on which the request is based.
4. Within a period of 60 days from the date of receipt of the request, the Secretary General will set up a consolidation tribunal made up of three arbitrators. The Secretary General shall appoint from the list of arbitrators referred to in Article 14-27, the president of the merger tribunal, who shall not be a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an available arbitrator is not found on the list to preside over the accumulation tribunal, the Secretary General shall designate, from the ICSID panel of arbitrators, the president of said tribunal, who shall not be a national of the disputing Party nor a national of the Party of the disputing investor. The Secretary General will appoint the other two members of the accumulation tribunal from the list of arbitrators referred to in Article 14-27 and, when they are not available on said list, will select them from the ICSID panel of arbitrators. If there are no arbitrators available on that panel, the Secretary General will make the remaining appointments at his discretion. One of the members shall be a national of the disputing Party and the other member of the consolidation tribunal shall be a national of a Party of the disputing investors.  5. When an accumulation tribunal has been established pursuant to this article, the disputing investor who has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to article 14-19, and has not been named in the application for accumulation made pursuant to paragraph 3, may apply in writing to the accumulation court to be included in an accumulation order made in accordance with paragraph 2, specifying in such application:
a) the name and domicile of the disputing investor and, where appropriate, the name or corporate name and domicile of the company;  b) the nature of the accumulation order requested; and  c) the grounds on which the request is based.
6. The accumulation court will provide, at the expense of the interested investor, a copy of the accumulation petition to the disputing investors that would be subject to the accumulation resolution.  7. A court will not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, in respect of which a consolidation court has assumed jurisdiction. 8. At the request of a disputing party, a consolidation tribunal may, pending its decision under paragraph 2, order that the proceedings of a tribunal be stayed pending a decision on the merits of the consolidation. What is ordered by the accumulation court must be complied with by the court.  Article 14-30 Notifications.  1. Within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt, the disputing Party shall send the Secretariat a copy of:
a) a request for arbitration made pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention;  b) a notice of arbitration under the terms of Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; or  c) a notice of arbitration under the terms provided by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.
2. The disputing Party shall deliver to the Secretariat a copy of the request formulated in the terms of paragraph 3 of Article 14-29:
a) within 15 days from the receipt of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing investor; or  b) within 15 days from the date of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing Party.
3. The disputing Party shall deliver to the Secretariat a copy of a request made under the terms of paragraph 5 of Article 14-29 within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of the request.  4. The Secretariat shall keep a public register of the documents referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3.  5. The disputing Party shall deliver to the other Parties:
a) written notification of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration no later than 30 days after the date of submission of the claim to arbitration; and  b) copies of all pleadings submitted in the arbitration proceeding.
Article 14-31 Participation by a Party.  Upon written notice to the disputing parties, a Party may submit submissions to a tribunal established under this section on questions of interpretation of this treaty that are in dispute before that tribunal.   Article 14-32 Documentation.  1. A Party shall be entitled, at its own expense, to receive from a disputing party a copy of:
a) the evidence offered to a tribunal established pursuant to this section, and  b) the written arguments presented by the disputing parties.
2. A Party receiving information pursuant to paragraph 1 shall treat such information as if it were a disputing Party.  Article 14-33 Seat of the arbitration procedure.  Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, a tribunal established pursuant to this section shall conduct arbitral proceedings in the territory of a Party that is a member of the New York Convention, which shall be selected in accordance with:
a) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those rules or by the ICSID Convention; or  b) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those rules.
Article 14-34 Applicable law.  1. A tribunal established pursuant to this section shall decide disputes submitted to it in accordance with this treaty and the applicable provisions of international law.  2. The Commission's interpretation of a provision of this treaty shall be binding on a tribunal established pursuant to this section.  Article 14-35 Interpretation of annexes.  1. When a Party alleges as a defense that a measure allegedly in violation falls within the scope of a reservation or exception set forth in any of the annexes, at the request of the disputing Party, a tribunal established pursuant to this section shall request the Commission for an interpretation. on that matter. The Commission, within a period of 60 days from the delivery of the request, will present its interpretation in writing to said court.  2. The Commission's interpretation submitted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be binding on a tribunal established pursuant to this section. If the Commission does not submit an interpretation within a period of 60 days, said court will decide on the matter.  Article 14-36 Expert Opinions.  Notwithstanding the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the tribunal established pursuant to this section, at the request of a disputing party, or on its own initiative unless the disputing parties do not agree, may appoint one or more experts to rule in writing on any issue raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.  Article 14-37 Provisional or precautionary measures.  A tribunal established pursuant to this section may apply to domestic courts, or order disputing parties, provisional or injunctive relief to preserve the rights of the disputing party or to ensure that the jurisdiction of the tribunal established pursuant to this section is fully exercised. effects. That court may not order compliance or suspension of the measure allegedly in violation referred to in article 14-19.  Article 14-38 Final award.  1. When a tribunal established pursuant to this section renders a final award unfavorable to a Party, such tribunal may only order:
a) the payment of pecuniary damages and the corresponding interest; or  b) restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the disputing Party may pay pecuniary damages, plus applicable interest, instead of restitution.
2. A court established pursuant to this section may also order payment of costs in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.  3. When the claim is made by an investor representing a company based on article 14-19:
a) the award that provides for the restitution of the property will provide that it be granted to the company; and  b) the award that awards pecuniary damages and corresponding interest will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company.
4. A tribunal established pursuant to this section may not order a Party to pay punitive damages.  5. The award will be rendered without prejudice to the rights that any person with a legal interest has regarding the reparation of the damages that he has suffered, in accordance with the applicable legislation.  Article 14-39 Finality and execution of the award.  1. The award rendered by a court established pursuant to this section shall be binding only for the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.  2. In accordance with paragraph 3 and the review procedure applicable to an interim award, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.  3. A disputing party may request enforcement of a final award provided that:
a) in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID Convention:
i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without any disputing party requesting its clarification, revision, or annulment; or  ii) the clarification, review and annulment procedures have been completed; either
b) in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:
i) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without any disputing party having initiated an interpretation, rectification, additional award or annulment procedure; or  ii) the procedures for interpretation, rectification or additional award have been concluded, or a judicial court of the disputing Party has resolved a request for annulment and this resolution is not susceptible to being challenged.
4. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.  5. When a disputing Party fails to comply with or does not comply with a final award, the Commission, upon receipt of a request from a Party whose investor was a party to the arbitration proceeding, shall form an arbitral tribunal in accordance with Chapter XIX. The requesting Party may invoke such procedures to obtain:
a) a determination that the breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this treaty; and  b) a recommendation that the Party comply with and abide by the final award.
6. The disputing investor may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the procedures contemplated in paragraph 5 have been initiated.  7. For purposes of the Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, it shall be considered that the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this section arises from a commercial relationship or operation.  Article 14-40 General Provisions.  Moment in which the claim is considered submitted to arbitration  1. A claim is deemed submitted to arbitration under the terms of this section when:
a) the request for arbitration under paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention has been received by the Secretary-General;  b) the notice of arbitration, pursuant to Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, has been received by the Secretary-General; or  c) the notice of arbitration provided for in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules has been received by the disputing Party.
Delivery of documents  2. The delivery of the notification and other documents to a Party shall be made at the place designated by it, in accordance with Annex 14-40 (2). Payments under insurance or guarantee contracts  3. In an arbitration proceeding requested in accordance with the provisions of this section, a Party shall not adduce as a defense, counterclaim, right of compensation, or others, that the disputing investor received or will receive, according to with an insurance or guarantee contract, indemnity or other compensation for all or part of the alleged damages for which restitution is requested.  Publication of awards  4. The publication of awards will be made in accordance with the provisions of the rules of procedure.  Article 14-41 Exclusions.  The dispute settlement provisions of this section, and those of Chapter XIX shall not apply to resolutions adopted by a Party by virtue of paragraph 2, letter c) of Article 14-02, nor to the cases contained in Annex 14- 41.  Article 14-42 Subrogation.  In the event that a Party or the entity designated by it has granted any financial guarantee on non-commercial risks in relation to an investment made by its investors in the territory of another Party and from the moment the first Party or its designated entity has made any payment charged to the guarantee granted, said Party or the designated entity will be the direct beneficiary of all types of payments to which the investor could be a creditor. In the event of a dispute, only the investor may initiate or participate in proceedings before a court established pursuant to this section.  Article 14-41 Exclusions.  The dispute settlement provisions of this section, and those of Chapter XIX shall not apply to resolutions adopted by a Party by virtue of paragraph 2, letter c) of Article 14-02, nor to the cases contained in Annex 14- 41.  Article 14-42 Subrogation.  In the event that a Party or the entity designated by it has granted any financial guarantee on non-commercial risks in relation to an investment made by its investors in the territory of another Party and from the moment the first Party or its designated entity has made any payment charged to the guarantee granted, said Party or the designated entity will be the direct beneficiary of all types of payments to which the investor could be a creditor. In the event of a dispute, only the investor may initiate or participate in proceedings before a court established pursuant to this section.
Annex 14-11 Public Utility
For the purposes of literal a) of paragraph 1 of article 14-11, the following are understood to be included in the term of public utility:
a) in the case of El Salvador: public utility or social interest;  b) in the case of Guatemala: collective utility, social benefit or public interest;  c) in the case of Honduras: need or public interest; and  d) in the case of Mexico: public utility.
Exhibit 14-40(2) Service of Notices and other Documents
1. For the purposes of article 14-40 (2), the place for delivery of notices and other documents shall be:
a) in the case of El Salvador:  Directorate of Trade Policy, Ministry of Economy Alameda Juan Pablo II, Guadalupe Street, Building C-2, Floor 3, Government Center San Salvador, El Salvador  b) in the case of Guatemala:  Ministry of Economics 8th. Avenida 10-43 zone 1 Guatemala, Guatemala  c) in the case of Honduras:  General Directorate for Economic Integration and Trade Policy, Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce Avenida Jeréz, Edificio Larach, Floor 10 Tegucigalpa, MDC, Honduras  d ) in the case of Mexico:  General Directorate of Foreign Investment, Secretariat of Commerce and Industrial Development Insurgentes Sur 1940, Piso 8, Colonia Florida, CP 01030 México, DF
2. The Parties will communicate any change in the place designated for the delivery of notifications and other documents.
Annex 14-41 Exclusions
They will not be subject to the dispute resolution mechanisms provided in section B or chapter XIX:
a) in the case of Honduras: the resolutions adopted by the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce in application of articles 11 and 18 of the Foreign Investment Law regarding health, national security and preservation of the environment .  b) in the case of Mexico, the resolutions adopted by the National Foreign Investment Commission that prohibit or restrict the acquisition of an investment in the territory of the United Mexican States that is owned or controlled by its nationals, or by one or more investors from another Party, as well as the resolutions related to the provisions of Annex I, page IMF-4. 
 
CHAPTER XV MEASURES RELATING TO STANDARDIZATION
Article 15-01 Definitions.  For the purposes of this chapter, the Parties will use the terms presented in the current ISO/CEI Guide 2, "General terms and their definitions in relation to standardization and related activities"; however, the following shall be understood as:  TBT Agreement : the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, which is part of the WTO Agreement;  hazardous waste: any material generated in the extraction, benefit, transformation, production, consumption, use, control or treatment processes, whose quality does not allow it to be used again and which, due to its corrosive, toxic, poisonous, reactive, radioactive, explosive, flammable characteristics, infectious or irritating biological, represent a danger to health or the environment;  risk assessment : the assessment of the potential damage to human, animal or plant health or safety, or the environment, could be caused by any good or service traded between the Parties;  make compatible: bring different standardization measures, approved by different standardization bodies, but with the same scope, to a level such that they are identical, equivalent or have the effect of allowing goods or services to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose, so that goods and services are allowed to be marketed between the Parties;  certification conformity mark : the mark protected, applied or issued in accordance with the rules of a certification system, which guarantees that the relevant product, process or service is in conformity with a standard or other specific normative document;  measures relating to standardization: standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures;  standard : the document approved by a recognized institution that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or related processes and production methods, or for related services or methods of operation, and the observance of which is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to, or dealing exclusively with, a good, service, process or method of production or operation;  international standard – a standard or other guide or recommendation, adopted by an international standard-setting body and made available to the public;  legitimate objectives: among others, the guarantee of safety or the protection of health or life, human, animal or plant, the guarantee of safety or protection of the environment, or the prevention of practices that may mislead or deceive consumers, including matters related to the identification of goods or services, considering, among other aspects, when appropriate, fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological, infrastructure or scientific justification type;  standardization body : a body whose standardization activities are recognized by the government of each Party, respectively;  international standardization body: a standards body open to participation by relevant bodies from at least all parties to the TBT Agreement, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the Organization World Health Organization (WHO) and its dependent bodies, the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML), the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) and the International Commission on Radiological Units and Measurements (ICUMR) or any other body that Parties designate;  approval procedure: any mandatory administrative process to obtain a registration, license, permit, or any other authorization, in order for a good or service to be marketed or used for defined purposes or in accordance with established conditions;  conformity assessment procedure : any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine whether the relevant requirements established by technical regulations or standards are met, including sampling, testing, inspection, evaluation, verification, assurance of conformity, accreditation, certification , registration or approval, used for those purposes;  administrative rejection: the actions taken by a public administration body of the importing Party, in the exercise of its powers, to prevent the entry into its territory of a shipment or the provision of a service, due to non-compliance with technical regulations or evaluation procedures of conformity;  technical regulation: the document that establishes the characteristics of the goods or their processes and related production methods, or the characteristics of the services or their related methods of operation, including the applicable administrative provisions, and whose observance is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging or labeling requirements applicable to a good, service, process or method of production or operation;  service : any service within the scope of this treaty, which is subject to measures relating to standardization or metrology; and  dangerous substances: those that threaten human, animal or plant life or health or the environment, and that are identified as such by national and international organizations.  Article 15-02 Scope of application.  1. This Chapter applies to measures related to standardization and metrology of the Parties, as well as to measures related to them that may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods or services between them.  2. This chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures.  Article 15-03 Confirmation of international rights and obligations.  The Parties confirm their current rights and obligations regarding measures related to standardization arising from the TBT Agreement and other international agreements to which the Parties are party, including agreements on health, the environment and its conservation, and consumer protection.  Article 15-04 Extension of obligations.  Each Party shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall adopt the necessary measures to guarantee its compliance by its federal or central and state or departmental and municipal government and shall adopt the measures in this regard that are within its power with respect to non-governmental organizations. standardization in its territory.  Article 15-05 Main rights and obligations.  1. Each Party may set the level of protection it considers appropriate to achieve its legitimate objectives.  2. Each Party may elaborate, adopt, apply and maintain the measures related to standardization that allow guaranteeing its level of protection of human, animal or plant life or health, or of the environment, or for the prevention of practices that may induce to error or deception of the consumer, as well as the measures that guarantee its application and compliance, including the relevant approval procedures.  3. Neither Party shall develop, adopt, apply or maintain standardization measures or approval procedures that have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between them. To this end, each Party shall ensure that measures related to standardization or approval procedures do not restrict trade, except as strictly necessary for the achievement of its legitimate objectives, taking into account the technical and economic possibilities, and the risks that it would create. its breach.  4. In connection with its measures relating to standardization, each Party shall grant to goods and services originating in the territory of the other Party national treatment and treatment no less favorable than that accorded to similar goods and similar services originating from any other non-Party country.  5. At the request of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, the Committee on Measures Related to Standardization will evaluate and recommend to the Commission for its resolution, actions on any matter related to measures related to standardization and approval procedures, taking into account their specific needs related to Article 12 of the TBT Agreement, so that its elaboration, adoption and application do not represent an obstacle to trade. These actions must be specific and with a defined temporality.  Article 15-06 Use of international standards.  1. Each Party shall use for the elaboration, development or application of its measures related to standardization, the international standards in force or imminent adoption, except when those international standards do not constitute an effective or adequate means to achieve its legitimate objectives, due to factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature, or for scientifically proven reasons.  2. It shall be presumed that a standardization measure of a Party that conforms to an international standard is consistent with the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 15-05.  3. In the pursuit of its legitimate objectives and due to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographic, technological or infrastructure nature, or for scientifically proven reasons, each Party may adopt, apply or maintain any standardization measure that results in a level of higher protection than would have been obtained if the measure were based on an international standard.  Article 15-07 Risk assessment.  1. Each Party may carry out risk assessments in its territory, provided that this does not have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between them. When making such assessments, they will take into account the risk assessment methods developed by international organizations and will ensure that their measures related to standardization are based on assessments of the risk to human, animal or plant life or health, or safety of the environment.  2. The Party that performs a risk assessment shall take into consideration all the pertinent scientific evidence, the available technical information, the intended end use, the processes or methods of production, operation, inspection, quality, sampling or testing, or the conditions environmental.  3. Having established the level of protection that it considers appropriate in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 15-05, in conducting a risk assessment, each Party shall avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions between like goods and like services, if those distinctions:
a) have the effect of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against goods or services of another Party;  b) constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties; or  c) discriminate between similar goods or services for the same use, in accordance with the same conditions that pose the same level of risk and that grant similar benefits.
4. When the Party that carries out a risk assessment concludes that the scientific evidence or other information available is insufficient to complete the assessment, it may provisionally adopt a technical regulation, of the type established in paragraph 5 of Article 15. -12 based on available relevant information, in accordance with paragraph 2. Once sufficient information has been presented to it to complete the risk assessment, the Party shall complete its assessment as soon as possible, review and, where appropriate, reconsider the provisional technical regulation in the light of that assessment.  Article 15-08 Compatibility and equivalence.  1. The Parties will work together to strengthen the level of safety and protection of human, animal or plant life or health, or the level of safety and protection of the environment, and to prevent practices that may lead to misleading or misleading consumers.  2. Without prejudice to the rights conferred on them by this Chapter and taking into account international standardization activities, the Parties will make their respective measures related to standardization compatible to the greatest extent possible, without reducing the level of security and protection to health or human, animal or plant life, or the level of safety and protection of the environment, or the prevention of practices that may mislead or deceive consumers.  3. At the request of a Party, another Party shall take reasonable measures within its power to promote the compatibility of its specific standardization measures with the standardization measures of the requesting Party, taking into account the procedures and international activities in the matter.  4. The importing Party will accept as equivalent to its own technical regulation the one adopted or maintained by the exporting Party, when the latter proves to the satisfaction of the former that its technical regulation adequately meets the legitimate objectives of the importing Party. For purposes of this accreditation, the importing Party shall cooperate with the exporting Party. The importing Party shall communicate in writing to the exporting Party, at its request, the reasons for non-acceptance of a technical regulation.  5. To the extent possible, each Party shall accept the results of conformity assessment procedures that are carried out in the territory of another Party, provided that they offer a satisfactory guarantee, equivalent to that provided by the procedures that it provides. Accepting Party carries out or that are carried out in its territory and whose result it accepts, that the relevant good or service complies with the technical regulation or with the applicable standard adopted or maintained in the territory of the accepting Party.  6. Upon acceptance of the results of a conformity assessment procedure in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 and, in order to strengthen the confidence and reliability of the conformity assessment results of each of them, The Parties may consult on matters such as the technical capacity of conformity assessment bodies, taking into account the verified compliance with the relevant international standards through that means of accreditation.  Article 15-09 Conformity assessment.  1. Taking into account the differences in the conformity assessment procedures in their respective territories, the Parties will make their respective conformity assessment procedures compatible, to the greatest extent possible, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.  2. For the mutual benefit of the Parties, each Party shall accredit, approve, license or recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of another Party on terms no less favorable than those granted to those bodies in its territory.  3. For conformity assessment procedures, a Party may use the existing technical capacity and structure of accredited bodies pursuant to paragraph 2, established in the territory of another Party.  4. With regard to its conformity assessment procedures, each Party:
a) refrain from adopting, maintaining or applying stricter conformity assessment procedures than necessary, to ensure that the good or service complies with the applicable technical regulation or standard, taking into account the risks that non-conformity could create ;  b) initiate and complete those procedures in the most expeditious manner possible;  c) establish a non-discriminatory order for processing applications;  d) it will grant to the goods and services of another Party, national treatment and a treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to originating goods and similar services of any other non-Party country;  e) publish the normal duration of each of these procedures or communicate, at the request of the applicant, the approximate duration of the procedure;  f) ensure that the competent national body:
i) upon receipt of an application, promptly examine the documentation for completeness and accurately inform the applicant of any deficiencies, it being the applicant's responsibility to correct them within the appropriate period;  (ii) as soon as possible, provide the applicant with the accurate and complete results of the conformity assessment procedure so that any corrective action can be taken by the applicant;  iii) when the application is deficient and at the request of the applicant, continue the procedure to the extent possible; and  iv) inform the applicant of the reasons for any delay and, at his request, the status of his application;
g) require from the applicant only the information necessary to assess conformity and determine the appropriate cost of the assessment;  h) grant confidential information, regarding a good or service of another Party, that is presented or derived from the procedure, national treatment and a treatment that protects the commercial interests of the applicant;  i) ensure that any charge charged for assessing the conformity of an imported good or service is equitable with that charged for assessing the conformity of an identical or similar good or service of the importing Party, taking into account communication, transport and other related costs;  j) ensure, where possible, that the procedure is carried out at the production facility of the good and, where appropriate, a certification conformance mark is awarded;  k) will limit the procedure to what is necessary, to determine that a good or service that has been modified continues to comply with a technical regulation or standard, as long as it is a good or service that has been determined prior to its modification, which complies with the pertinent requirements established by that technical regulation or that standard;  l) will limit any requirement related to samples of a good to what is essential, and will prevent their selection and collection from causing unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative; Y  m) prevent the location of the facilities where the procedures are carried out from causing unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative.
5. Each Party will give favorable consideration to the request of any Party, to negotiate agreements on the mutual recognition of the results of the conformity assessment procedures.  Article 15-10 Approval procedures.  1. The Parties shall grant national treatment in their approval procedures.  2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when specific application requirements are required within the approval procedures for imported goods or services that are not granted national treatment in said requirements, they must comply with the provisions of paragraph 3. of article 15-05.  3. When a Party considers that any specific application requirement demanded by another Party for imported goods or services in accordance with the preceding paragraph does not comply with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 15-05, it may submit it to the Approval Procedures Subcommittee. , based on the provisions of article 15-16. In order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, the consultations must be carried out within 15 days following the date of submission of the request.  The Parties in consultation, by mutual agreement, may extend said term for up to 90 days.  4. Each Party, in relation to its approval procedures, shall ensure that:
a) refrain that the procedures and their application are not stricter than necessary, taking into account the risks that non-compliance could create;  b) initiate and complete that procedure in the most expeditious manner possible;  c) establish a non-discriminatory order for processing applications;  d) communicate, at the applicant's request, the approximate duration of the procedure;  e) that the competent national body:
i) upon receipt of an application, promptly examine the documentation for completeness and accurately inform the applicant of any deficiencies, it being the applicant's responsibility to correct them within the appropriate period;  (ii) as soon as possible, provide the applicant with the results of the approval procedure, accurately and completely, so that any corrective action can be taken by the applicant; and  iii) inform the applicant of the reasons for any delay and, at his request, the status of his application;
f) require the applicant only the information necessary to carry out the approval procedure and determine the cost thereof;  g) grant confidential information, regarding a good or service of another Party, that is submitted or derived from the approval procedure, national treatment and a treatment that protects the commercial interests of the applicant;  h) that any charge charged for the procedure is equitable with that charged for the procedure for an identical or similar good or service of the Party carrying out the approval procedure, taking into account communication costs, transport and other related; and  i) limit any requirement related to samples of an asset to the essentials.
5. The Parties will grant, in accordance with their legislation, the sanitary registry for the goods that require it.  Article 15-11 Metrological standards.  Each Party shall guarantee the traceability of its metrological standards in accordance with the recommendations of the BIPM and the OIML, as stipulated in this chapter.  Article 15-12 Notification, publication and delivery of information.  1. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of the measures related to standardization and metrology that it decides to establish before they enter into force and on the same day as their nationals.  2. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of the measures related to standardization and metrology that are no longer in force.  3. When, in accordance with its legislation, a Party proposes the adoption or modification of any measure related to standardization or metrology:
a) publish a notice and notify the other Parties in writing of its intention to adopt or modify that measure, in order to allow interested persons to know the content of the proposal, at least 60 days prior to its adoption; or modification;  b) will identify in that notice and notification, the good or service to which the measure will be applied, and will include a brief description of the objective and the motivation of the same;  c) provide a copy of the proposed measure to the other Parties and to any interested person who requests it and, where possible, identify the provisions that deviate substantially from relevant international standards;  d) without discrimination, allow the other Parties and interested persons to make comments in writing, discuss them and take them into account, and upon request, let them know the results of the discussions; and  e) ensure that, upon adopting the measure, it is published expeditiously or, in some other way, made available to interested persons of another Party so that they may know its content.
4. Each Party, to the extent possible, shall notify the other Parties that express an interest in the matter, of any modification or adoption of a law or regulation that contains provisions related to technical regulations.  5. When a Party considers it necessary to address an urgent problem related to safety or the protection of human, animal or plant life or health, or safety or environmental protection or practices that may lead to to error or deception of consumers, you may omit any of the steps established in paragraph 3, provided that when adopting the standardization measure:
a) immediately notify the other Parties, in accordance with the requirements established in subparagraph b) of paragraph 3, including a description of the urgent problem;  b) deliver a copy of the measure to the other Parties and to any interested person who requests it;  c) without discrimination, allow the other Parties and interested persons to make comments in writing, discuss them and take them into account, and upon request, let them know the results of the discussions; and  d) ensure that the measure is published expeditiously, or otherwise allow interested persons to know its content;
6. Each Party shall allow an adequate period between the publication of its measures relating to standardization and metrology, and the date on which they enter into force, for interested persons to adapt their goods, services or production methods to these measures. , except when it is necessary to deal with one of the urgent problems indicated in paragraph 5.  7. Each Party shall annually notify the other Parties in writing of its plans and programs for standardization.  8. The Parties designate as competent authorities, responsible for the application of the notification provisions of this chapter, those indicated in annex 15-12. When a Party designates two or more government authorities for this purpose, it must inform the other Party, precisely and completely, of the scope of responsibilities of those authorities.  9. When a Party makes an administrative rejection, it shall promptly inform in writing, the person holding the shipment or the service provider, the justification for the rejection.  10. Once the information referred to in paragraph 9 is generated, the Party shall send it immediately to the information center or centers in its territory, referred to in article 15-13, which, in turn, They will make it known to the information center or centers of another Party.  Article 15-13 Information centers.  1. Each Party shall ensure that it has at least one information center in its territory, responsible for answering and responding to questions and reasonable requests from another Party and interested persons, as well as providing the relevant updated documentation in relation to :
a) any measure relating to standardization, metrological standards or approval procedures, adopted or proposed in its territory by governmental or non-governmental bodies;  b) any standard or conformity assessment process adopted or proposed by non-governmental standardization bodies in its territory;  c) the membership and participation of that Party, its authorities or relevant non-governmental organizations in its territory, in international or regional standardization bodies and conformity assessment systems, in bilateral or multilateral agreements, within the scope application of this chapter, as well as in relation to the provisions of those systems and agreements;  d) the medium, date and location of the notices published pursuant to this chapter, or the place where the information they contain can be obtained; and  e) the Party's risk assessment procedures, the factors it takes into consideration when carrying out the assessment and for establishing the levels of protection it deems appropriate, to achieve its legitimate objectives in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. When a Party designates more than one information center:
a) inform the other Party about the scope of competence of each one of said centers; and  b) ensure that any request sent to the wrong information center is forwarded, in an expedited manner, to the correct information center.
3. Each Party shall ensure that, when the other Party or interested persons, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, request copies of the documents referred to in paragraph 1, they are provided at the same price as its nationals, except the cost actual shipping.  4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 3, when the information center of a Party requests copies of documents issued by government agencies from the other Party, these shall be provided to them free of charge, except for the actual cost of shipping.  5. The obligation to answer and respond to the questions and reasonable requests referred to in paragraph 1, will in no way be understood in the sense that the information center is empowered to interpret any measure related to standardization or metrological standards adopted or proposed. in their territory. However, said information center must refer the Party or interested persons to the competent authority or body.  Article 15-14 Committee on Measures Related to Standardization.  1. The Parties establish the Committee for Measures Related to Standardization, which will be made up of specialized representatives of each of them. The Parties, by common agreement, will establish the procedures for determining the number and selection of their representatives. This Committee:
a) meet at least once a year, unless the Parties agree otherwise;  b) will make its decisions by consensus; and  c) will issue its own regulations, which will be approved by the Commission.
2. The Committee will have, among others, the following functions:
a) supervise the application, compliance and administration of this chapter;  b) respond to queries on issues related to measures related to standardization and metrology and formulate to the Commission any recommendations it deems pertinent;  c) submit to the Parties, when appropriate, proposals to resolve in the most expeditious manner, the problems derived from technical barriers to trade;  d) report annually to the Commission on the application of this chapter;  e) create the subcommittees it deems necessary, granting them the corresponding functions; and  f) any other assigned by the Commission.
Article 15-15 Subcommittee on Labeling, Packaging and Packaging.  1. The Parties establish the Labeling, Packaging and Packaging Subcommittee, which reports to the Committee and will be made up of competent representatives of each of them. The Parties, by mutual agreement, will establish the procedures for determining the number and selection of their representatives.  2. The Subcommittee will develop harmonized standards on labeling, packaging and packaging and will have the following functions:
a) make recommendations, among others, on:
i) common systems of symbols and pictograms;  ii) definitions, terminology and warning labeling;  iii) presentation of information, including language, measurement systems, ingredients and sizes; Y
b) any other assigned by the Committee.
3. Until such harmonized standards are adopted, each Party will apply its relevant labeling requirements, in accordance with the provisions of Article 15-06 and the other provisions of this chapter.  Article 15-16 Approval Procedures Subcommittee.  1. The Parties establish the Approval Procedures Subcommittee, which reports to the Committee and will be made up of competent representatives of each of them. The Parties, by mutual agreement, will establish the procedures for determining the number and selection of their representatives.  2. The Subcommittee will have the following functions:
a) develop a directory of representatives of relevant government authorities, who serve as a point of contact and exchange of information on its approval procedures and keep it updated;  b) identify the approval procedures whose adoption or application cause specific problems for the other Party.  c) examine such specific problems with the aim of reaching a mutually satisfactory agreement and make recommendations for their corresponding solution;  d) develop, where appropriate, equivalent approval procedures for goods and services that are subject to those requirements; and  e) any other assigned by the Committee.
Article 15-17 Subcommittee on Measures Related to Telecommunications Standardization  1. The Subcommittee on Measures Related to Telecommunications Standardization will develop, within a period of six months from the entry into force of this treaty, a work program , including a calendar, to make the measures related to standardization compatible with the authorized equipment.  2. The Subcommittee may address other issues related to standards regarding telecommunications equipment or services and any other issues it deems appropriate.  3. The Sub-Committee shall take into account relevant work carried out by the Parties in other forums, as well as that of non-governmental standard-setting entities.  Article 15-18 Technical consultations.  1. When a Party has doubts about the interpretation or application of this chapter, it may request that the Committee meet to seek a mutually satisfactory solution to the difference or resort to the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Chapter XIX. The Parties may not use both channels simultaneously.  2. When a Party decides to go to the Committee, it shall be notified so that it may consider the matter or refer it to a sub-working group or other competent forum, in order to obtain non-binding technical advice or recommendations.  3. The Committee will consider any matter referred to it in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, in the most expeditious manner possible and will inform the Parties of any advice or technical recommendation that it develops or receives in relation to that matter. Once the Parties receive the requested technical advice or recommendation from the Committee, they will send to the latter a written response in relation to that technical advice or recommendation, in a period determined by the Committee.  4. In the event that the technical recommendation issued by the Committee does not resolve the difference between the Parties, they may resort to the dispute resolution mechanism established in Chapter XIX. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the consultations carried out before the Committee or any of the subcommittees created shall constitute technical consultations for the purposes established in the dispute settlement mechanism in accordance with paragraph 2 of article 19-06.  5. The technical information generated in the Committee may be considered in the event that consultations are established under the framework of the dispute resolution mechanism.  6. The Party that asserts that a standardization measure of the other Party is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter shall prove the inconsistency.  Article 15-19 Management of hazardous substances and hazardous waste.  1. For the control and management of hazardous substances and hazardous waste, the Parties shall apply the provisions, guides or recommendations of the Charter of the United Nations, the Basel Convention and the international agreements to which they are party, as well as their current legislation.  2. Each Party shall regulate, in accordance with its legislation, the introduction, acceptance, deposit, transportation, and transit through its territory of dangerous substances and dangerous, radioactive, and other wastes of internal or external origin that, due to their characteristics, constitute a danger to public health or the environment.  Article 15-20 Technical cooperation.  1. At the request of a Party, the other Party may provide information or technical assistance, to the extent of its possibilities and in mutually agreed terms, in order to help comply with the provisions of this chapter and strengthen the activities, processes, systems and measures relating to standardization and metrology of that Party.  2. The activities referred to in paragraph 1 include:
a) the development of a mutual accreditation system for verification units and testing laboratories;  b) implementation of intercomparison programs in order to ensure that the optimal conditions of the systems and methods to be used and evaluated are maintained;  c) strengthening of the formal communication systems established in this chapter;  d) exchange of information on technical cooperation programs related to measures related to standardization carried out by a Party; and  e) identification of specific needs, such as:
i) the application of good manufacturing practices in the preparation and approval of medicines, particularly those for human use;  ii) the application of good laboratory practices in the analysis and evaluation systems established in the pertinent international guidelines in force; and  iii) the development of common identification and nomenclature systems for auxiliary goods for health and medical instruments; Y
f) preparation of training programs, training and organization of, among others, a common system for training, continuing education, training and evaluation of sanitary officials and inspectors.
Annex 15-12 Competent authorities
For the purposes of article 15-12, the authority in charge of notification will be:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Ministry of Economy, through the Directorate of Commercial Policy, or its successor;  b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Economy, through the Guatemalan Standards Commission (COGUANOR), or its successor;  c) in the case of Honduras: the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, through the General Directorate of Consumer Protection, or its successor; and  d) in the case of Mexico: the Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development, through the General Directorate of Standards, or its successor.
Chapter XVI INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  Section A General provisions and basic principles
Article 16-01 Definitions.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:  Berne Convention : the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1971);  Geneva Convention : the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against Unauthorized Duplication of their Phonograms (1971);  Paris Convention : the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1967);  Rome Convention : the Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations (1961);  Intellectual Property Rights: includes all categories of intellectual property that are protected by this chapter, in the terms indicated therein;  nationals of the other Party : with respect to the relevant intellectual property right, persons who would meet the eligibility criteria for protection under the Rome Convention, the Berne Convention, the Geneva Convention, and the Paris Convention;  public: any group of individuals who are intended to be directed and are capable of perceiving communications or execution of works, regardless of whether they can do so at the same time and place, or at different times and places, provided that this group is larger than one family and immediate circle of acquaintances. However, the public shall not be understood as a group made up of a limited number of individuals who have the same type of close relationships, which has not been formed for the main purpose of receiving these performances and communications of works; and  encrypted program-carrying satellite signal: one that is transmitted in a form by which the auditory or visual characteristics, or both, are modified or altered to prevent the reception of the program carried in that signal by persons who lack the equipment that is designed to eliminate the effects of such modification or alteration.  Article 16-02 Protection of intellectual property rights.  1. Each Party shall grant in its territory to the nationals of another Party adequate and effective protection and defense of intellectual property rights and shall ensure that the measures designed to enforce those rights do not become, in turn, obstacles to trade. legitimate.  2. Each Party may grant in its legislation protection of intellectual property rights that is broader than that required in this chapter, provided that such protection does not infringe the provisions of this chapter.  3. The Parties may freely establish the appropriate procedure to apply the provisions of this chapter, within the framework of their own legal system and practice.  Article 16-03 Provisions on the matter.  In order to grant adequate and effective protection and defense of intellectual property rights, the Parties shall apply, at least, the rules contained in this chapter and the substantive provisions of:
a) the Berne Convention;  b) the Geneva Convention;  c) the Rome Convention; and  d) the Paris Convention.
Article 16-04 National treatment.  1. Each Party shall grant to the nationals of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted to its own nationals in matters of acquisition, protection and defense of the intellectual property rights contemplated in this chapter, subject to exceptions and provided for in the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention and the Paris Convention.  2. No Party may require nationals of another Party, as a condition for the granting of national treatment under this article, to comply with any formality or condition to acquire copyright.  Article 16-05 Exceptions.  Each Party may resort to the exceptions indicated in Article 16-04 in relation to judicial and administrative procedures for the protection and defense of intellectual property rights, including the designation of a legal domicile or a representative within the jurisdiction of the Party, provided that such exception:
a) It is necessary to ensure compliance with provisions that are not incompatible with those of this chapter; and  b) is not applied in such a way as to constitute a disguised restriction on trade.
Article 16-06 Most-favoured-nation treatment.  With respect to the protection of intellectual property rights, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity that a Party grants to the nationals of any other non-Party country shall be granted immediately and without conditions to the nationals of the other Party.  Exempt from this obligation are any advantages, favors, privileges or immunity granted in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, Annex 1C of the WTO Agreement.  Article 16-07 Control of abusive or anti-competitive practices and conditions.  Provided that they are compatible with the provisions of this chapter, each Party may apply appropriate measures to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by their holders or the resort to practices that unreasonably limit trade or are detrimental to international transfers. of technology.  Article 16-08 Cooperation to eliminate trade in infringing goods.  The Parties will cooperate with each other in order to eliminate trade in goods that infringe intellectual property rights. To this end, they will establish information services in their administration and exchange information on trade in infringing goods.
Section B Copyright and Related Rights
Article 16-09 Protection of copyright and related rights.  1. Each Party shall protect the moral and property rights of the authors of the works included in Article 2 of the Berne Convention, including any others that incorporate an original expression in the sense that this Convention confers on this term, such as television programs. computing, or the compilations of data that for reasons of selection, compendium, arrangement or disposition of its content constitute creations of an intellectual nature.  2. The protection conferred on data compilations shall not extend to the data or materials themselves, nor shall it be granted to the detriment of any copyright that exists in such data or materials.  3. Each Party shall grant authors or their successors in title the rights set forth in the Berne Convention, with respect to the works referred to in paragraph 1, including the right to authorize or prohibit:
a) graphic editing;  b) translation into any language or dialect;  c) the adaptation and inclusion in phonograms, videograms, cinematographic films and other audiovisual works;  d) communication to the public;  e) reproduction by any means or in any form;  f) the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the work by sale, lease, loan or any other means;  g) the importation into the territory of a Party of copies of the work made without the authorization of the right holder; and  h) any form of use, process or system known or to be known.
4. At least with respect to computer programs, the Parties shall grant authors and their successors in title the right to authorize or prohibit commercial leasing to the public of originals or copies of their works protected by copyright. The authorization of the author or successor in title will not be necessary when the copy of the computer program does not constitute in itself the essential object of the lease.  5. Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights:
a) Any person who acquires or holds economic rights may, freely and separately, transfer them by contract for the purposes of exploitation and enjoyment by the assignee; and  b) any person who acquires and holds these economic rights by virtue of a contract, including employment contracts that imply the creation of any type of work and phonograms, has the capacity to exercise those rights in their own name and to fully enjoy benefits derived from such rights.
6. Each Party shall circumscribe the limitations or exceptions to the rights established in this article to determined special cases that do not impede the normal exploitation of the work, nor cause unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder.  7. The protection granted by this article will extend during the life of the author. After his death, those who have legitimately acquired rights will enjoy them for a term of at least 50 years. When the duration of the protection of a work is calculated on a basis other than the life of a natural person, that duration will be:
a) not less than 50 years from the end of the calendar year of the publication or authorized disclosure of the work; or  b) in the absence of its publication or authorized disclosure, 50 years from the end of the year in which the work was carried out.
Article 16-10 Performers.
1. Each Party shall grant performers the right to authorize or prohibit:
a) the fixation of their unfixed performances and the reproduction of that fixation;  b) the communication to the public, the transmission and retransmission by wireless means of their interpretations or performances; and  c) any other form of use of their interpretations or performances.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply once a performer has consented to their performance being incorporated into a visual or audiovisual fixation.  3. The rights that have not been expressly transmitted will be understood as reserved in favor of the performing artist.  Article 16-11 Producers of phonograms.  1. Each Party shall grant the producer of a phonogram the right to authorize or prohibit:
a) the direct or indirect, total or partial reproduction of the phonogram;  b) the importation into the territory of a Party of copies of the phonogram made without the authorization of the producer; and  c) the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the phonogram by sale, lease or any other means.
2. Each Party shall confer upon producers of phonograms and all other holders of rights over phonograms as determined by its legislation, the right to authorize or prohibit commercial leasing to the public of originals or copies of protected phonograms.  Article 16-12 Broadcasting Organizations.  1. Each Party shall grant broadcasting organizations the right to authorize or prohibit:
a) the fixation and reproduction of the fixations of their broadcasts;  b) the retransmission and distribution by cable, fiber optics or any other means, as well as the communication to the public of their broadcasts; and  c) the reception of their broadcasts in relation to commercial activities.
2. Violations of rights mentioned in paragraph 1 will be cause for civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.  Article 16-13 Protection of encrypted satellite signals carrying programs.  Each Party shall establish as a cause of civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with its legislation, the reception in connection with commercial activities, or the subsequent distribution of an encrypted satellite signal carrying programs, which has been received without authorization. from the legitimate signal distributor.  Article 16-14 Term of protection of related rights.  The duration of the protection granted under this chapter to performers and producers of phonograms may not be less than 50 years, counted from the end of the calendar year in which the fixation was made or the fixation took place. interpretation or performance. The duration of the protection granted to broadcasting organizations may not be less than 20 years, counted from the end of the calendar year in which the broadcast took place.  Article 16-15 Limitations or exceptions to related rights.  1. The protection provided for in this chapter with regard to performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations, will leave intact and will not affect in any way the protection of the moral and patrimonial rights of the authors of the literary or artistic works, nor may they be interpreted in detriment of that protection.  2. With regard to the rights conferred by Articles 16-10, 16-11 and 16-12, each Party may establish limitations or exceptions in the terms permitted by the Rome Convention.
Section C Trademarks
Article 16-16 Matter object of protection.  1. Any sign or combination of signs that make it possible to distinguish the goods or services of one person from those of another may constitute a trademark, since these are considered sufficiently distinctive or capable of identifying the products or services to which they are applied, compared to those of their same species or class. The marks will include the collective ones. Each Party may establish as a condition for the registration of a trademark, that the signs be visually perceptible.  2. The nature of the goods and services to which a trademark is applied will not be, in any case, an obstacle to its registration.  Article 16-17 Publication.  Pursuant to their legislation, the Parties shall publish each trademark before or soon after its registration, offering interested persons a reasonable opportunity to oppose or challenge its registration.  Article 16-18 Rights conferred.  The owner of a registered trademark shall have the exclusive right to prevent any third party, without his consent, from using in the course of business operations identical or similar signs for goods or services that are identical or similar to those for which the trademark has been registered. , when such use gives rise to the likelihood of confusion. In the event that an identical sign is used for identical goods or services, it will be presumed that there is a probability of confusion. The aforementioned rights will be granted without prejudice to previously existing rights and will not affect the possibility of the Parties to recognize rights based on use.  Article 16-19 Well-known marks.  1. The Parties, ex officio, if their legislation allows it, or at the request of the interested party, will refuse or invalidate the registration and will prohibit the use of a trademark for products or services that constitutes the reproduction, imitation or translation, likely to create confusion, of a trademark that the competent authority of the country of registration or use deems to be well known there and used for identical or similar products or services. The same will occur when the essential part of the mark constitutes the reproduction of such a well-known mark or an imitation liable to create confusion with it.  2. It shall be understood that a trademark is well-known when a determined sector of the public or commercial circles of the Party in which the reputation is claimed, knows the trademark as a consequence of the commercial or promotional activities carried out by a person who uses that trademark. brand in relation to its products or services. In order to demonstrate the notoriety of the brand, all the means of proof admitted in the Party in question may be used, including national and foreign ones.  3. The Parties will not register as a trademark those signs that are the same or similar to a well-known trademark that, to be applied to any product or service, their use could indicate a connection with the owner of the well-known trademark, or harm the interests of the owner. of the well-known mark.  4. A minimum period of five years must be granted, from the date of registration, to claim the cancellation of said trademark. The Parties have the power to provide a period in which the prohibition of use must be claimed.  5. No term will be set to claim the cancellation or prohibition of use of trademarks registered or used in bad faith.  Article 16-20 Exceptions.  Each Party may establish limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as the fair use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take into account the legitimate interests of the trademark owner and third parties.  Article 16-21 Duration of protection.  The initial registration of a trademark will last 10 years from the date of filing the application or the date of its registration, according to the legislation of each Party, and may be renewed indefinitely for successive periods of 10 years, provided that the conditions for renewal are met.  Article 16-22 Use Requirement.  1. When a Party does not establish the requirement of use of a mark to maintain its registration, that Party shall establish such requirement in its legislation within a period of five years from the date of entry into force of this treaty. A trademark registration may be declared expired or canceled for non-use only after an uninterrupted period of non-use of at least three years has elapsed, unless the owner of the trademark demonstrates valid reasons supported by the existence of obstacles to use. Valid reasons for non-use will be recognized as circumstances arising, regardless of the will of the owner of the trademark, that constitute an obstacle to its use,  2. It will be understood that a trademark is in use when the goods or services that it distinguishes have been placed on the market or are available on the market, in the quantity and in the manner that normally corresponds, taking into account the nature of the goods or services and the modalities under which their commercialization is carried out.  3. For purposes of maintaining the use requirement, the use of a trademark by a person other than the owner of the same shall be recognized, when such use is subject to the control of the owner.  Article 16-23 Other requirements.  The use of a mark in the course of commercial operations with special requirements, such as, for example, use with another mark, use in a special way, or use in a way that impairs the ability to the mark to distinguish the goods or services of one company from those of other companies. This provision will not prevent the requirement that the name that identifies the company that produces the goods or services be used jointly but not linked to the brand that distinguishes the specific goods or services in question from that company.  Article 16-24 Licenses and assignment of trademarks.  Each Party may establish conditions for the licenses and assignment of trademarks. The owner of a registered trademark will have the right to assign it with or without the transfer of the company to which the trademark belongs. Compulsory licenses will not be allowed.
Section D Patents
Article 16-25 Patentable subject matter.  1. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, patents shall be granted for inventions, whether of products or procedures, in all fields of technology, provided they are new, result from an inventive activity and are capable of of industrial application.  2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, there shall be no discrimination in the granting of patents, nor in the enjoyment of the respective rights, depending on the field of technology, the territory of the Party in which the invention was made or whether the products were imported or produced locally.  3. Each Party may exclude from patentability inventions whose commercial exploitation in its territory must be prevented to protect public order or morality, including to protect human, animal or plant life or health, or to avoid serious damage to nature. or to the environment, provided that this exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by its legislation.  4. Likewise, each Party may exclude plants and animals from patentability, except for microorganisms and essentially biological processes for the production of plants or animals, which are not non-biological or microbiological processes. However, the Parties shall grant protection to all plant varieties through patents, an effective sui generis system, or a combination thereof. To the extent that it is compatible with its legislation, without this implying any adherence commitment, each Party will consider complying with the current substantive provisions of the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV).  Article 16-26 Rights conferred.  1. A patent will confer on its owner the following exclusive rights:
a) when the matter of the patent is a product, prevent third parties, without their consent, from carrying out acts of: manufacture, use, offer for sale, sale or import for the purposes of the product object of the patent; or  b) when the matter of the patent is a procedure, prevent third parties, without their consent, from carrying out the act of using the procedure and the acts of: use, offer for sale, sale or import for these purposes, of what less, the product obtained directly by means of said procedure.
2. Likewise, the patent holders shall have the right to assign or transfer the patent by any means and to conclude license contracts.  Article 16-27 Conditions imposed on patent applicants.  1. Each Party shall require the applicant for a patent to disclose the invention in a sufficiently clear and complete manner, so that persons skilled in the art in question can carry out the invention. In addition, each Party may require that the applicant indicate the best way of carrying out the invention known to the inventor on the date of filing of the application or, if priority is claimed, on the priority date claimed in the application. .  2. Each Party may require the applicant for a patent to provide information regarding its applications, and the corresponding grants of patents abroad.  Article 16-28 Exceptions.  Each Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent, nor unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent holder, taking into account the legitimate interests of third parties.  Article 16-29 Other uses without authorization of the right holder.  When the legislation of a Party allows other uses of the subject matter of a patent, other than those permitted in accordance with the previous article, without the authorization of the right holder, including use by the government or by third parties authorized by the government, the following provisions:
a) the authorization of those uses will be considered depending on the matter in question;  b) These uses may only be allowed when, before making them, the potential user has tried to obtain authorization from the rights holder under reasonable commercial terms and conditions and these attempts have not been effective within a reasonable period of time. The Parties may exempt from this obligation in case of national emergency or in other circumstances of extreme urgency, or in cases of non-commercial public use. However, in situations of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, the rights holder will be notified as soon as reasonably possible. In the case of non-commercial public use, where the government or contractor, without doing a patent search, knows or has demonstrable reason to know that a valid patent is or will be used by or for the government,  c) the scope and duration of these uses will be limited to the purposes for which it has been authorized;  d) those uses will not be exclusive;  e) these uses may not be assigned, except together with the part of the company that enjoys those uses;  f) these uses will be authorized mainly to supply the internal market of the Party that authorizes them;  g) the authorization of those uses may be withdrawn subject to the adequate protection of the legitimate interests of the persons who have received authorization for those uses, if the circumstances that gave rise to it have disappeared and are not likely to arise again. The competent authorities will be empowered to examine, upon well-founded request, whether said circumstances continue to exist;  h) the holder of the right will be paid an adequate remuneration according to the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic value of the authorization;  i) the legal validity of any resolution regarding the authorization of those uses, will be subject to judicial review or to an independent review by a different superior authority;  j) any resolution regarding the remuneration granted for those uses will be subject to judicial review or an independent review by a different authority;  k) The Parties shall not be obliged to apply the conditions established in subparagraphs b) and f), when such uses have been allowed to remedy practices that, as a result of a judicial or administrative process, have been determined to be anticompetitive. The need to correct anti-competitive practices may be taken into account when determining the amount of remuneration in such cases. The competent authorities will have the power to deny the revocation of the authorization, if it is probable that the conditions that gave rise to that authorization will be repeated; Y  l) when these uses have been authorized to allow the exploitation of a patent (second patent), which cannot be exploited without infringing another patent (first patent), the following additional conditions must be observed:
i) the invention claimed in the second patent must represent an important technical advance of considerable economic relevance with respect to the invention claimed in the first patent;  ii) the holder of the first patent shall be entitled to a cross license, under reasonable conditions, to exploit the invention claimed in the second patent; and  iii) the authorized use of the first patent may not be assigned without the assignment of the second patent.
Article 16-30 Revocation or cancellation.  The possibility of judicial review of any decision to revoke or cancel a patent will be provided. Each Party may revoke or cancel a patent only when there are reasons that would have justified the refusal to grant it.  Article 16-31 Evidence in cases of infringement of patented processes.  1. When the matter of a patent is a procedure to obtain an identical product, the judicial authorities shall be empowered to order the defendant to prove that the procedure to obtain a product is different from the patented procedure. Accordingly, each Party shall provide that, in any infringement proceeding, the respondent bears the burden of proving that the allegedly infringing product was made by a process other than the patented one, at least in the following cases:
a) if the product obtained by the patented procedure is new; or  b) if there is a substantial probability that the identical product was manufactured by the process, and the patentee cannot establish through reasonable efforts which process was actually used.
2. The Parties will be free to establish that the burden of proof indicated in paragraph 1 will correspond to the alleged infringer only if the condition set forth in subparagraph a) is met or only if the condition set forth in subparagraph b) is met.  3. In the presentation of evidence to the contrary, the legitimate interests of the defendants in terms of the protection of their industrial and commercial secrets will be taken into account.  Article 16-32 Duration of protection.  The protection conferred by a patent will not expire before a period of 20 years has elapsed, counted from the filing date of the application.
Section E Utility models
Article 16-33 Protection of utility models.  Each Party shall protect utility models in accordance with its legislation.
Section F Industrial Designs
Article 16-34 Conditions and duration of protection.  1. Each Party shall grant protection to new or original industrial designs that are independently created. Each Party may establish that designs are not considered new or original if they do not differ significantly from known designs or from combinations of characteristics of known designs. Each Party may establish that this protection does not extend to designs based essentially on functional or technical considerations.  2. Each Party shall ensure that the requirements for obtaining industrial design protection, particularly with regard to any cost, examination or publication, do not unreasonably impair a person's opportunity to apply for and obtain such protection. The Parties shall be free to fulfill this obligation through industrial design legislation or through copyright legislation.  3. Each Party shall grant a protection period for industrial designs of at least 10 years from the date of filing of the application.  Article 16-35 Rights conferred.  1. The owner of a protected industrial design shall have the right to prevent third parties without their consent from manufacturing, selling or importing items that display or incorporate a protected design or fundamentally a copy of it, when these acts are carried out for commercial purposes.  2. The Parties may establish limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably violate the normal exploitation of protected industrial designs, nor do they cause unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design. , taking into account the legitimate interests of third parties.
Section G Undisclosed Information
Article 16-36 Protection of undisclosed information.  1. In ensuring effective protection against unfair competition, the Parties shall protect undisclosed information in accordance with paragraph 2, and data that has been submitted to governments or official bodies, in accordance with article 16-37.  2 Individuals and legal entities will have the possibility to prevent information that is legitimately under their control from being disclosed to third parties, or being acquired or used by third parties without their consent, contrary to honest commercial uses, to the extent that that said information:
a) is secret, in the sense that, as a whole or in the precise configuration and composition of its elements, it is not generally known or easily accessible to the people who are members of the circles that normally handle the type of information in question ;  b) the information has a commercial value because it is secret; and  c) in the given circumstances, has been subject to reasonable measures to keep it secret by the person who legally has control over it.
3. To grant protection, each Party may require that a trade secret be recorded in documents, electronic or magnetic media, optical discs, microfilms, films or other similar instruments.  4. No Party may limit the duration of protection for trade or trade secrets, as long as the conditions described in paragraph 2 exist.  5. No Party may discourage or prevent the voluntary licensing of trade or trade secrets by imposing excessive or discriminatory conditions on such licenses, or conditions that dilute the value of industrial or commercial secrets.  Article 16-37 Data protection of pharmaceutical or agrochemical goods.  Each Party, where it requires, as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmaceutical goods or agricultural chemical goods that use new chemical constituents, the submission of undisclosed test or other data that requires considerable effort to produce, shall protect such data from any commercial use. unfair.  In addition, each Party shall protect such data from disclosure, except as necessary to protect the public or unless measures are taken to ensure the protection of the data from unfair commercial use.
Section H Geographical indications and appellations of origin
Article 16-38 Protection of geographical indications and appellations of origin.  1. Each Party shall protect geographical indications and appellations of origin, in the terms of its legislation.  2. In relation to geographical indications and appellations of origin, each Party shall establish the legal means so that interested persons can prevent:
a) the use of any means that, in the designation or presentation of the product, indicates or suggests that the product in question comes from a territory, region or locality other than the true place of origin, so as to mislead the public as to the geographical origin of the product; and  b) any other use that constitutes an act of unfair competition, within the meaning of Article 10 bis of the Paris Convention. 
3. The Parties, ex officio, if their legislation allows it, or at the request of an interested party, will deny or invalidate the registration of a trademark that contains or consists of a geographical indication or appellation of origin with respect to non-originating goods from the indicated territory, if the use of such an indication in the mark for those goods in that Party is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true place of origin.  4. Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall apply to any geographical indication or appellation of origin which, while correctly indicating the territory, region or locality in which the goods originate, gives the public a false idea that the goods originate from another territory, region or locality.  5. In relation to geographical indications and appellations of origin, each Party shall establish the means to prevent the importation, manufacture or sale of a good that uses a geographical indication or appellation of origin protected in another Party, unless it has been produced and certified in that Party, in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations applicable to that good.
Section I Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights
Article 16-39 General obligations.  1. Each Party shall ensure that its legislation establishes procedures for the enforcement of intellectual property rights, in accordance with the provisions of this section that allow the adoption of effective measures against any action infringing the intellectual property rights referred to. this chapter, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and remedies that are an effective means of deterring new infringements. These procedures will be applied in such a way as to avoid the creation of obstacles to legitimate trade, and will provide safeguards against their abuse.  2. Procedures relating to the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and equitable. Likewise, these procedures will not be unnecessarily complicated or burdensome, nor will they entail unjustified deadlines or undue delays.  3. Decisions on the merits of a case will be formulated in writing and will be reasoned. They shall be made available at least to the parties to the proceedings, without undue delay. They will only be based on evidence about which those parties have been given an opportunity to be heard.  4. The parties to the proceeding will be given the opportunity for a review by a judicial authority of the final administrative decisions and, subject to the jurisdictional provisions provided for in their legislation regarding the importance of a case, of at least minus the legal aspects of all first instance judicial decisions on the merits of the case. However, it will not be mandatory to give them the opportunity to review the acquittals issued in criminal cases.  5. It is understood that this section does not impose any obligation to establish a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights different from the one already existing for the application of the legislation in general, nor does it affect the ability of the Parties to enforce their rights. laws in general. Nothing in this section creates any obligation with respect to the allocation of resources between IP enforcement and general law enforcement.  Article 16-40 Fair and equitable procedures.  Each Party shall make available to rights holders the civil judicial procedures to obtain the observance of all intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter. Defendants shall have the right to receive timely written notice with sufficient detail, including the basis for the claim. Parties will be authorized to be represented by independent counsel and the proceedings will not impose unreasonably onerous requirements for mandatory personal appearances. All parties to these proceedings will be duly empowered to substantiate their allegations and present all relevant evidence. The procedure must provide means to identify and protect confidential information,  Article 16-41 Evidence.  1. The judicial authorities will be empowered to order that, when a party to the procedure has presented the evidence that it reasonably has and that is sufficient to support its allegations, and has identified any pertinent evidence to substantiate its allegations that is under the control of the opposing party provides said evidence, subject, where appropriate, to conditions that guarantee the protection of confidential information.  2. Where a party to the proceeding voluntarily and unreasonably denies access to necessary information, or otherwise fails to provide such information within a reasonable time, or materially impedes a proceeding relating to an enforcement action, the Parties may authorize the judicial authorities to formulate preliminary and final determinations, affirmative or negative, based on the information that has been presented to them, including the claim or allegation presented by the party unfavorably affected by the denial of access to information, provided that the parties are given an opportunity to be heard regarding the allegations or evidence.  Article 16-42 Court orders.  1. The judicial authorities shall have the power to order a party to the proceedings to desist from the alleged infringement, among other things to prevent imported goods that infringe an intellectual property right from entering the commercial circuits of their jurisdiction, immediately after the their customs clearance. The Parties are not required to grant such power in relation to a protected matter that has been acquired or requested by a person before knowing or having reasonable grounds to know that operating with such matter would entail infringement of an intellectual property right.  2. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, and subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter that specifically refer to use by the government or by third parties authorized by the government, without the consent of the rights holder, the Parties may limit the resources available against such use to the payment of compensation, in accordance with the provisions of literal h) of article 16-29. In all other cases, the remedies provided for in this section will be applied or, when these are incompatible with the legislation, declaratory judgments and adequate compensation may be obtained.  Article 16-43 Damages.  1. The judicial authorities will be empowered to order the infringer to pay the right holder adequate compensation to compensate for the damage that the right holder has suffered due to an infringement of his intellectual property right, when the infringer has been sentenced in the corresponding judicial process. .  2. Likewise, the judicial authorities will be empowered to order the infringer to pay the expenses of the holder of the right, which may include the fees of the lawyers that are appropriate. When appropriate, the Parties may authorize the judicial authorities to grant reparation for previously recognized benefits or damages, even when the infringer did not know or did not have reasonable grounds to know that he was carrying out an infringing activity.  Article 16-44 Other resources.  1. In order to establish an effective means of dissuading infringements, the judicial authorities will be empowered to order that the goods that have been determined to be infringing be, without any compensation, separated from the commercial circuits in such a way as to avoid causing damage to the owner. of law, or that they be destroyed, provided that this is not incompatible with current constitutional provisions.  2. The judicial authorities will also be empowered to order that the materials and instruments that have been used predominantly for the production of the infringing goods, be, without any compensation, separated from the commercial circuits so as to minimize the risks of new infractions. Both the need for a proportion between the seriousness of the infringement and the measures ordered and the interests of third parties will be taken into account when processing the corresponding requests.  3. Regarding counterfeit goods, the mere removal of the illegally adhered mark will not be enough to allow their release into commercial circuits, except in exceptional cases established by the legislation of each Party, such as those in which the authority orders its donation to charitable institutions.  Article 16-45 Right to information.  Except where it is disproportionate to the seriousness of the infringement, each Party may provide that judicial authorities may order the infringer to inform the right holder of the identity of third parties who have participated in the production and distribution of the infringing goods or services, and on their distribution circuits.  Article 16-46 Compensation to the defendant.  1. The judicial authorities shall have the power to order a party to the proceedings, at whose request measures have been taken and who has abused the enforcement procedure, to adequately indemnify the party on whom an obligation or restriction has been unduly imposed, for the damage suffered as a result of such abuse. In addition, the judicial authorities will have the power to order the plaintiff to pay the defendant's expenses, which may include attorneys' fees.  2. In connection with the administration of any laws relating to the protection or enforcement of intellectual property rights, each Party shall exempt both the authorities and their officials from the responsibilities that the appropriate corrective measures give rise to, only in the case of actions carried out or planned in good faith for the administration of said laws.  Article 16-47 Administrative procedures.  To the extent that civil remedies may be brought as a result of administrative proceedings relating to the merits of a case, such proceedings shall follow principles substantially equivalent to those set forth in this section.  Article 16-48 Precautionary measures.  1. The judicial authorities will be empowered to order the adoption of fast and effective precautionary measures aimed at:
a) prevent the infringement of any intellectual property right and, in particular, prevent counterfeit goods from entering the commercial circuits of their jurisdiction, including imported goods, immediately after customs clearance; and  b) preserve the pertinent evidence related to the alleged infringement.
2. The judicial authorities shall be empowered to adopt precautionary measures, when appropriate, without having heard the other party to the proceedings, particularly when there is a probability that any delay will cause irreparable damage to the rights holder, or when there is a verifiable risk of destruction of evidence.  3. The judicial authorities shall be empowered to require the plaintiff to present the evidence reasonably available, in order to establish to their satisfaction with a sufficient degree of certainty that the plaintiff is the owner of the right and that their right is subject to or will be be imminently infringed, and to order the plaintiff to post a bond or equivalent guarantee that is sufficient to protect the defendant and prevent abuse.  4. When precautionary measures have been adopted without having heard the other party in the procedure, these shall be notified without delay to the affected party, no later than immediately after applying them. At the request of the defendant, within a reasonable period of time from that notification, a review will be carried out in which the right to be heard will be recognized, in order to decide whether these measures should be modified, revoked or confirmed.  5. The authority in charge of the execution of the precautionary measures may require the plaintiff to present any additional information necessary for the identification of the goods in question.  6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 4, precautionary measures taken under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be revoked or otherwise rendered null and void, at the request of the respondent, if the proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case The matter does not start within a reasonable period of time, which must be established when national legislation allows it, by determination of the judicial authority that ordered the measures, and which, in the absence of such determination, will not exceed 20 business days or 31 days, if this period were longer.  7. In the cases in which the precautionary measures are revoked or expire by action or omission of the plaintiff, or in those cases in which it is subsequently determined that there was no infringement or threat of infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities will be empowered to order the plaintiff, upon the defendant's request, to give the defendant adequate compensation for any damage caused by those measures.  8. To the extent that precautionary measures may be ordered as a result of administrative proceedings, those proceedings shall conform to principles substantially equivalent to those set forth in this section.  Article 16-49 Suspension of customs clearance by customs authorities.  Each part:
a) adopt procedures so that the holder of a right, who has valid reasons to suspect that the importation of counterfeit trademark goods or pirated goods that infringe copyright is being prepared, can submit to the competent authorities, a written demand with object that the customs authorities suspend the dispatch of those goods for free circulation, in accordance with articles 16-50 to 16-58;  b) may authorize such a claim to be made with respect to goods that involve other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of this section are met; Y  c) may establish analogous procedures for the customs authorities to suspend the clearance of those goods intended for export from its territory.
Article 16-50 Demand.  Any right holder initiating a proceeding under Article 16-49 will be required to submit sufficient evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authorities that, under the law of the importing country, there is a presumption of infringement of your intellectual property right and provide a sufficiently detailed description of the goods so that they can be easily recognized by customs authorities. The competent authorities will notify the claimant, within a reasonable time, if they have accepted the claim and, when they are the ones who establish it, the term of action of the customs authorities.  Article 16-51 Deposit or equivalent guarantee.
1. The competent authorities shall be empowered to require the plaintiff to provide a bond or equivalent guarantee, which is sufficient to protect the defendant and the competent authorities and prevent abuse. Such a bond or equivalent guarantee shall not unduly discourage recourse to these procedures.
prior deposit of a deposit for an amount that is sufficient to protect the owner of the right in any case of infringement. Payment of said bond shall be understood without prejudice to any other recourse available to the holder of the right. Likewise, it will be understood that the deposit will be returned if the holder does not exercise his right of action within a reasonable period of time.
Article 16-52 Notice of suspension.
The importer and the claimant will be promptly notified of the suspension of customs clearance of the goods, in accordance with article 16-49. Article 16-53 Duration of suspension.
In the event that, within a period not exceeding 10 business days from the notification of the suspension to the plaintiff, the customs authorities have not been informed that a party to the proceeding other than the defendant has initiated the proceeding leading to a decision on the merits of the matter or that the authority duly empowered for this purpose has adopted precautionary measures that prolong the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods, they will be released if all the other required conditions have been met. for import or export; in the cases in which it proceeds, the aforementioned period may be extended for another 10 business days. If the procedure leading to a decision on the merits of the matter has been initiated, at the request of the defendant, a review, including the right of the latter to be heard, shall be carried out within a reasonable period of time in order to decide whether those measures should be modified, revoked or confirmed. However, when the suspension of customs clearance is carried out or continued by virtue of a precautionary judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 6 of article 16-48 shall apply.
Article 16-53 Duration of suspension.
In the event that, within a period not exceeding 10 business days from the notification of the suspension to the plaintiff, the customs authorities have not been informed that a party to the proceeding other than the defendant has initiated the proceeding leading to a decision on the merits of the matter or that the authority duly empowered for this purpose has adopted precautionary measures that prolong the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods, they will be released if all the other required conditions have been met. for import or export; in the cases in which it proceeds, the aforementioned period may be extended for another 10 business days. If the procedure leading to a decision on the merits of the matter has been initiated, at the request of the defendant, a review, including the right of the latter to be heard, shall be carried out within a reasonable period of time in order to decide whether those measures should be modified, revoked or confirmed. However, when the suspension of customs clearance is carried out or continued by virtue of a precautionary judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 6 of article 16-48 shall apply.
Article 16-54 Compensation to the importer and the owner of the goods.
The relevant authorities shall have the power to order the plaintiff to pay the importer, the consignee and the owner of the goods adequate compensation for any damage to them caused by the unfounded retention of the goods or by the detention of those that have been dispatched in accordance with with the provisions of article 16-53.
Article 16-55 Right of inspection and information.
Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, the Parties shall empower the competent authorities to give the right holder sufficient opportunities to have any goods detained by the customs authorities inspected, in order to substantiate their claims. Likewise, the competent authorities will be empowered to give the importer equivalent opportunities to have those goods inspected. When a positive decision on the merits of the matter has been adopted, the Parties may authorize the competent authorities to communicate to the right holder the name and address of the consignor, the importer and the consignee, as well as the quantity of the goods that be concerned.
Article 16-56 Action ex officio.
When the parties to the procedure request the competent authorities to act ex officio and suspend the dispatch of those goods with respect to which they have the presumption that they infringe an intellectual property right:
a) the competent authorities may request, at any time, the holder of the right any information that may be useful to exercise that power;
b) The suspension must be promptly notified to the importer and the right holder. If the importer appeals against it before the competent authorities, the suspension will be subject, mutatis mutandis, to the conditions stipulated in article 16-53; Y
c) The Parties will exempt both the authorities and their officials from the responsibilities that the appropriate precautionary measures give rise to, only in the case of actions carried out or planned in good faith.
Article 16-57 Appeals.
Without prejudice to the other actions that correspond to the holder of the right and subject to the defendant's right to appeal before a judicial authority, the competent authorities will be empowered to order the destruction or removal of the infringing property, in accordance with the principles established in article 16-44. As for counterfeit goods, the authorities will not allow them to be re-exported in the same state, except in exceptional circumstances, nor will they submit them to a different customs procedure.
Article 16-58 Negligible imports.
Each Party may exclude from the application of articles 16-49 to 16-57, small amounts of goods that are not of a commercial nature and are part of the personal baggage of travelers or are sent in small consignments.
Article 16-59 Criminal proceedings.
1. Each Party shall establish criminal procedures and sanctions, at least for cases of willful counterfeiting of trademarks or piracy infringing copyright on a commercial scale, which shall include imprisonment or the imposition of monetary sanctions, sufficiently dissuasive, that are consistent with the level of sanctions applied for crimes of comparable gravity.
2. Where appropriate, available sanctions will also include confiscation, forfeiture and destruction of infringing property and all materials and accessories predominantly used in the commission of the offence. When considering the issuance of such orders, the judicial authorities shall take into account the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement and the measures ordered, as well as the interests of other persons including those of the right holder.
3. Regarding counterfeit goods, the mere removal of the illegally affixed mark will not be sufficient to allow the release of the goods into commercial circuits, except in exceptional cases established by the legislation of each Party, such as those in which the authority arranges your donation to charitable institutions.
Each Party may provide for the application of criminal procedures and sanctions in other cases of infringement of intellectual property rights, in particular when committed with intent and on a commercial scale.
Chapter XVII TRANSPARENCY
Article 17-01 Information Center.
1. Each Party shall designate a unit or office as an information center to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.
2. When requested by a Party, the information center of another Party shall indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter and shall provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.
Article 17-02 Publication.
Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative resolutions of general application, which refer to any matter included in this Agreement, are published as soon as possible or made available for the knowledge of the Parties and any interested party.
Article 17-03 Notification and provision of information.
1. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, notify the other Parties of any current or proposed measure that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the interests of the other Parties under the terms of this Agreement. Said notification will be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with it.
2. Each Party, at the request of another Party, shall provide information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any current or proposed measure.
Article 17-04 Hearing, legality and due process guarantees.
1. The Parties reaffirm the guarantees of hearing, legality and due process contemplated in their respective legislation.
2. Each Party shall maintain judicial or administrative procedures for the review and, when appropriate, the correction of the final acts related to this agreement.
3. Each Party shall ensure that in the judicial and administrative procedures related to any measure that affects the application of this Agreement, the essential formalities of the procedure are observed and the legal cause of the same is founded and motivated.
Chapter XVIII ADMINISTRATION OF THE TREATY
Article 18-01 Administrative Commission.  1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission, which will be made up of the officials referred to in Annex 18-01(1) or by the persons designated by them.  2. The Commission will have the following functions:
a) ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of the treaty;  b) evaluate the results achieved in the application of the treaty, monitor its development and recommend to the Parties the modifications it deems appropriate;  c) propose measures aimed at the correct administration and development of the treaty and its annexes;  d) contribute to the solution of controversies that arise regarding its interpretation and application;  e) recommend to the Parties the adoption of the necessary measures to implement their decisions;  f) set the amounts of remuneration and expenses to be paid to the arbitrators, their assistants and the experts, which shall be covered in equal parts by the disputing Parties; Y  g) hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of this treaty, or that is entrusted to it by the Parties.
3. The Commission may:
a) establish ad hoc or permanent committees, working groups and groups of experts, as well as assign powers to them;  b) request the advice of persons or institutions without governmental ties; and  c) adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions.
4. The Commission will establish its rules and procedures and all its decisions will be made by consensus.  5. The Commission shall meet at least once a year in ordinary session and, at the request of any Party, in extraordinary session. The ordinary sessions will be chaired successively by each Party.  Article 18-02 Administrative Subcommittee.  1. The Parties establish the Administrative Subcommittee, which will be made up of the officials referred to in Annex 18-02(1) or by the persons they designate.  2. The Subcommittee will have the following functions:
a) supervise the work of all committees, subcommittees and working groups established under this Agreement and included in Annex 18-02(2);  b) follow up on the decisions and agreements reached by the Commission;  c) prepare and review the technical files necessary for making decisions and agreements within the framework of the treaty;  d) act as technical secretariat in the meetings of the Commission;  e) Designate the information center for each Party, in accordance with Article 17-01; Y
f) hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of the treaty, which is entrusted to it by the Commission.
3. The Subcommittee will meet at least twice a year, alternating the venue between the Parties.  4. The Subcommittee will present an annual work report to the Commission.  Article 18-03 Secretariat  1. The Commission shall establish and supervise a Secretariat made up of national sections.  2. Each Party:
a) establish the permanent office of its national section;  b) will be in charge of:
i) the operation and costs of its section, and  ii) the remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators, their assistants and experts appointed in accordance with the chapter;
c) appoint the Secretary of its national section, who will be the official responsible for its administration; and  d) notify the Commission of the address of its national section.
3. The Secretariat will have the following functions:
a) provide assistance to the Commission and the Sub-Commission;  b) provide administrative support to the arbitral tribunals created pursuant to Chapter XIX;  c) on the instructions of the Commission, support the work of the committees, subcommittees and groups of experts established in accordance with this treaty; and  d) the others entrusted to it by the Commission.
Annex 18-01 Officials of the Administrative Commission
The officials that make up the Commission will be:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Minister of Economy or his successor;  b) in the case of Guatemala: the Minister of Economy or his successor;  c) in the case of Honduras: the Secretary of State in the Offices of Industry and Commerce, or his successor; and  d) in the case of Mexico: the Secretary of Commerce and Industrial Development, or his successor.
Annex 18-02 (1) Officials of the Administrative Subcommittee
 
The officials that make up the Subcommittee will be:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Vice Minister of Economy, or his successor;  b) in the case of Guatemala: the Vice Minister of Economy in Charge of Integration Affairs, or his successor;  c) in the case of Honduras: the Undersecretary of Economic Integration and Foreign Trade, or his successor; and  d) in the case of Mexico: the Head of the Negotiations Office for Latin America, Market Access and the FTAA, or his successor.
Annex 18-02(2) Committees and Subcommittees
Committee on Trade in Goods (article 3-18)  Committee on Agricultural Trade (article 4-10)  Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (article 5-10)  Committee on Regional Integration of Inputs (article 6-19)
Origin Committee (article 7-12)  Committee on Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment (article 10-10)  Professional Services Committee (annex on professional services)  Financial Services Committee (article 11-11)  Committee on Temporary Entry of Persons of Business (article 13-06)
Committee on Measures Related to Standardization (article 15-14)
Subcommittee on Labeling, Packaging and Packaging (article 15-15)
Approval Procedures Subcommittee (article 15-16)
Subcommittee on Measures Related to the Standardization of Telecommunications (article 15-17)
Chapter XIX SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Article 19-01 Cooperation.  The Parties shall always endeavor to reach agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement through cooperation and consultation, and shall endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that might affect its operation.  Article 19-02 Scope of application.  Except as otherwise provided in this agreement, the procedure of this chapter shall apply:
a) to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this treaty; or  b) when a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of another Party is or could be inconsistent with the obligations of this agreement or could cause nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 19-02.
Article 19-03 Settlement of disputes under the WTO Agreement.  1. Controversies that arise in relation to the provisions of this treaty and the WTO Agreement or the agreements negotiated in accordance with the latter, may be resolved in one or another forum, at the choice of the complaining Party.  2. Once a dispute settlement procedure has been initiated pursuant to Article 19-06, or one pursuant to Article 6 of the Understanding Concerning Rules and Procedures Governing Dispute Settlement that is part of the of the WTO Agreement, the selected forum will be exclusive of any other.  Article 19-04 Perishable goods.  In controversies relating to perishable goods, the terms established in this chapter will be reduced by half, without prejudice to the fact that the disputing Parties by mutual agreement decide to reduce them even more.  Article 19-05 Consultations.  1. Any Party may request, in writing, consultations with the other Party or Parties regarding any measure adopted or planned, or any other matter that it considers could affect the operation of this Agreement under the terms of Article 19-02.  2. The requesting Party, through its national section of the Secretariat, will deliver a copy of the request to the other Parties.  3. Unless otherwise provided by the Commission, a third Party may participate in the consultations, upon written notification through its national section of the Secretariat to the other Parties.  4. The consulting Parties:
a) they will examine with due diligence the queries made to them;  b) provide the information that allows examining the way in which the adopted or projected measure could affect the operation of this treaty;  c) treat confidential information exchanged during consultations in the same manner as the Party that provided it; and  d) will endeavor to avoid any solution that adversely affects the interests of any other Party under this treaty.
Article 19-06 Intervention of the Commission, good offices, conciliation and mediation.  1. Any consulting Party may request in writing, through its national section of the Secretariat, that the Commission meet whenever a matter is not resolved in accordance with Article 19-05 within 30 days of delivery of the consultation request.  2. A Party may also request in writing, through its national section of the Secretariat, that the Commission meet when technical consultations have been held in accordance with the provisions of Articles 5-13 and 15-18.  3. The requesting Party shall mention in the request the measure that is the subject of the complaint, indicate the provisions of this treaty that it considers applicable, and submit the request, through its national section of the Secretariat, to the other Parties.  4. The Commission will meet within the 10 days following the presentation of the request and in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, it may:
a) convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary;  b) resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other alternative means for dispute resolution; or  c) make recommendations.
5. Unless it decides otherwise, the Commission may combine two or more proceedings that it hears under this article, relating to the same measure. Likewise, it may accumulate two procedures referring to other matters that it knows in accordance with this article, when it deems appropriate to examine them jointly.  Article 19-07 Request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal.  1. Any consulting Party may request in writing the establishment of an arbitral tribunal when the matter has not been resolved within:
a) 30 days after the meeting of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 19-06 or, if it has not been held, within 30 days after the request for a meeting of the Commission; or  b) the 30 days following the Commission's meeting to address the most recent matter submitted to its consideration, when several procedures have been accumulated pursuant to paragraph 5 of Article 19-06.
2. The requesting Party shall deliver the request, through its national section of the Secretariat, to the other Parties. Upon submission of the request, the Commission will establish an arbitral tribunal.  3. A third Party shall be entitled to participate as a complaining Party, by delivering its intent, through its national section of the Secretariat, to the disputing Parties. The notification shall be delivered no later than seven days after the date on which a Party has submitted the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal.  4. If a third Party decides not to intervene as a complaining Party in accordance with paragraph 3, it shall thereafter refrain from bringing in respect of the same matter, in the absence of a significant change in economic or commercial circumstances:
a) a dispute resolution procedure in accordance with this chapter; or  b) a dispute settlement procedure in accordance with the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing Dispute Settlement, which forms part of the WTO Agreement, invoking grounds substantially equivalent to those that said Party could invoke. in accordance with this treaty.
5. Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, the arbitral tribunal will be integrated and will perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.  Article 19-08 List and qualifications of the arbitrators.  1. Upon the entry into force of this agreement, each Party shall designate 10 arbitrators to integrate the "List of arbitrators from Mexico and El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras". Likewise, the Parties, by mutual agreement, will designate five arbitrators from non-Party countries to integrate the "List of arbitrators from non-Party countries".  2. The members of the lists:
a) have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters related to this agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;  b) they will be elected strictly based on their objectivity, reliability and good judgment;  c) they will be independent, will not be linked to the Parties and will not receive instructions from them; and  d) they will comply with the Code of Conduct established in annex 19-08.
3. The persons who have intervened in a controversy, in the terms of paragraph 4 of article 19-06, may not be arbitrators for the same controversy.  Article 19-09 Integration of the arbitral tribunal.  1. The arbitral tribunal will be made up as follows:
a) within 10 days following the request for the integration of an arbitral tribunal, in accordance with article 19-07, each Party shall designate an arbitrator from the "List of arbitrators from Mexico and El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras";  b) by mutual agreement, the Parties will appoint the third arbitrator from the "List of arbitrators from non-Party countries", within 10 days from the date on which the last of the two arbitrators mentioned in subparagraph a was appointed. ). The third arbitrator will preside over the arbitral tribunal;  c) If a Party has not designated its arbitrator within the 10-day period established in subparagraph a), such designation shall be made by lot between the Parties, at the request of the other Party, from among the arbitrators that make up the "List of arbitrators from Mexico and El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras", who are nationals of the Party that has not appointed its arbitrator;  d) likewise, if within the 10 days following the term established in literal b) there is no agreement between the Parties to designate the third arbitrator, any Party may designate it from the "List of arbitrators from non-Party countries" ; and  e) by mutual agreement, the Parties may designate an arbitrator who is not on the lists referred to in article 19-08.
2. In the event that a disputing Party is made up of two or more Parties, one of them, elected by mutual agreement, shall assume the representation of the others regarding the procedure established in paragraph 1.  Article 19-10 Model Rules of Procedure.  1. Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, the procedure before the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure, contained in annex 19-10.  2. The Commission may modify the Model Rules of Procedure.  3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal shall be: "Examine, in light of the applicable provisions of the treaty, the controversy submitted to its consideration in the terms of the request for the meeting of the Commission, and issue the preliminary report and the final report referred to in articles 19-13 and 19-14".  4. If the complaining Party alleges that a matter has been the cause of nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 19-02, the mandate shall so indicate.  5. When a disputing Party requests that the arbitral tribunal formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse commercial effects that the measure that XIX - 7 has been deemed to be incompatible with this treaty or has caused nullification or impairment in the sense of annex XIX - 7 has generated for any Party 19-02, the mandate will indicate it.  Article 19-11 Third Party Participation.  A third Party, upon written notification through its national section of the Secretariat to the disputing Parties, shall be entitled to attend all hearings, to submit written and oral submissions to the arbitral tribunal, and to receive written submissions from the disputing Parties.  Article 19-12 Information and technical advice.  Ex officio or at the request of the disputing Party, the arbitral tribunal may request the information and technical advice of the persons or institutions it deems pertinent.  Article 19-13 Preliminary report.  1. The arbitral tribunal shall issue a preliminary report based on the arguments and communications presented by the disputing Parties and on any information it has received pursuant to article 19-12.  2. Unless the disputing Parties decide otherwise, the arbitral tribunal shall submit to said Parties, within 90 days following the appointment of the last arbitrator, a preliminary report containing:
a) findings of fact, including any arising from a request under paragraph 5 of Article 19-10;  b) the determination as to whether the measure in question is or may be inconsistent with the obligations deriving from this treaty, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of annex 19-02 or in any other determination requested in the mandate; and  c) the draft final report.
3. The arbitrators may issue written opinions on issues for which there is no unanimity.  4. The disputing Parties may make written observations to the arbitral tribunal on the preliminary report within 15 days following its presentation.  5. In this case, and after examining the written observations, the arbitral tribunal may, ex officio or at the request of any disputing Party:
a) request the observations of any disputing Party;  b) carry out any diligence it deems appropriate; or  c) reconsider the preliminary report.
Article 19-14 Final report.  1. The arbitral tribunal shall notify the disputing Parties of its final report, agreed upon by a majority, and, where appropriate, the written opinions on the issues with respect to which there has been no unanimity, within the following 30 days from the presentation of the preliminary report.  2. Neither the preliminary report nor the final report will reveal the identity of the arbitrators who have voted with the majority or with the minority.  3. The disputing Parties shall confidentially communicate to the Commission the final report within five days following the day on which they were notified, together with all written considerations that a disputing Party wishes to attach.  4. The final report shall be published within 15 days of its communication to the Commission in the Official Gazette of each disputing Party.  Article 19-15 Compliance with the final report.  1. The final report shall be binding on the disputing Parties in the terms and within the terms ordered by it, which shall not exceed three months from its communication to the Commission, unless said Parties agree otherwise.  2. When the final report of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is incompatible with this treaty, the Party complained against shall refrain from executing the measure or shall repeal it.  3. When the final report of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 19-02, it will determine the level of nullification or impairment and may suggest adjustments that it considers mutually satisfactory to the disputing Parties.  Article 19-16 Suspension of benefits.  1. The complaining Party may suspend the defendant Party, the application of benefits derived from this treaty that have equivalent effect to the benefits not received, if the arbitral tribunal resolves:
a) that a measure is incompatible with the obligations of this treaty and the Party complained against does not comply with the final report within the term that the arbitral tribunal has set; or  b) that a measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 19-02 and the disputing Parties do not reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute within the time limit set by the arbitral tribunal.
2. The suspension of benefits will last until the Party complained against complies with the final report or until the disputing Parties reach a mutually satisfactory agreement on the controversy, as the case may be. However, if the Party complained against is made up of two or more Parties, and one of them complies with the final report, or reaches a mutually satisfactory agreement with the complaining Party, the latter must lift the suspension of benefits.  3. In considering the benefits to be suspended under this article:
a) The complaining Party shall first seek to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the arbitral tribunal has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from this treaty, or that would have been cause for annulment. or impairment within the meaning of Exhibit 19-02; and  b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, it may suspend benefits in other sectors.
4. At the written request of any disputing Party, after notifying the other Parties through its national section of the Secretariat, the Commission shall set up an arbitral tribunal to determine whether the level of benefits that the complaining Party has suspended in accordance with this article. To the extent possible, the arbitral tribunal will be made up of the same members that made up the one that issued the final report referred to in article 19-14.  5. The proceedings before the arbitral tribunal constituted for the purposes of paragraph 4 shall be processed in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure. The arbitral tribunal will present its final decision within 60 days following the election of the last arbitrator, or in any other term that the disputing Parties agree.  Article 19-17 Judicial and administrative instances.  1. The Commission will endeavor to agree, as soon as possible, on an appropriate non-binding interpretation or response when:
a) a Party considers that a question of interpretation or application of this treaty, arising or to arise in a judicial or administrative proceeding of another Party, merits interpretation by the Commission; or  b) a Party receives a request for an opinion on a question of interpretation or application of this treaty by a court or administrative organ of that Party.
The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall submit to them the response of the Commission, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.  2. When the Commission is unable to agree on a response, either Party may submit its own opinion to the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.  Article 19-18 Alternative means for dispute resolution.  1. Each Party shall promote and facilitate the arbitration procedure and other alternative means for the solution of international commercial disputes between individuals.  2. To this end, each Party shall have adequate procedures to ensure compliance with arbitration agreements and the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards pronounced in those disputes.
Annex 19-02 Nullification and Impairment
1. The Parties may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism of this chapter when, by virtue of the application of a measure that does not contravene the treaty, they consider that the benefits that they could reasonably have expected to receive from the application of the treaty are annulled or impaired. Chapters III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XV and XVI.  2. The Parties may not invoke the annulment or impairment of the provisions of chapters XI, XII, XIII and XIV.
Annex 19-08 CODE OF CONDUCT
AIM
This code of conduct is established to ensure respect for the principles of integrity and impartiality that the Parties grant to the procedures of Chapter XIX of the Free Trade Agreement entered into between the United Mexican States and the Republics of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras.  The fundamental objective of this code of conduct is that all candidates or members must disclose the existence of any interest, relationship or matter that could affect their independence or impartiality or that could reasonably create an appearance of dishonesty or bias. The appearance of dishonesty or bias exists when a reasonable person, with knowledge of all the relevant circumstances that a reasonable investigation might yield, would conclude that the candidate's or member's ability to carry out their duties with integrity, impartiality and fairly is impaired. competent.  However, this principle should not be construed in such a way that the burden of making detailed disclosures makes it impossible for lawyers or business people to agree to serve as members, thus depriving Parties and participants of what may be the best members. . Consequently, candidates and members should not be required to disclose interests, relationships or issues that have a trivial influence on the procedure.  Candidates and members have a continuing obligation to disclose, throughout the proceedings, interests, relationships and issues that may be linked to the integrity or impartiality of the dispute resolution system. This code of conduct does not determine whether, based on the disclosures made, the Parties will challenge or remove a candidate or member of an arbitral tribunal, or under what circumstances they would do so.
DEFINITIONS
1. For the purposes of this code of conduct, the following means:  assistant : a researcher or a person who provides support to a member, according to the conditions of their appointment;  candidate :
a) an individual whose name appears on a list established pursuant to Article 19-08; or  b) an individual who is being considered for appointment as a member of an arbitral tribunal pursuant to article 19-09; member: a member of an arbitral tribunal constituted in accordance with article 19-09;
staff : with respect to a member, persons other than attendees, who are under their direction and control;  procedure :
a) a proceeding before an arbitral tribunal conducted in accordance with Chapter XIX; or  b) a proceeding dealing with a dispute arising out of Chapters V or XV to which Chapter XIX applies; Y
Secretariat : the Secretariat established in accordance with article 18-02; and  2. Any reference in this code of conduct to an article, annex or chapter, means the corresponding article, annex or chapter of the treaty.
Section A Responsibilities regarding the dispute resolution system.
All candidates, members and former members will maintain a high level of conduct, in such a way that the integrity and impartiality of the dispute resolution system are preserved.
Section B Declaration obligations.
1. Every candidate shall disclose any interest, relationship or matter that could affect his independence or impartiality or that could reasonably create an appearance of dishonesty or bias in the procedure. To that end, candidates will make every reasonable effort to learn of any such interests, relationships, and issues.  2. Candidates will disclose such interests, relationships and issues by completing the Initial Declaration which will be provided by the Secretariat, and submitting it to the Secretariat.  3. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each candidate will disclose the following interests, relationships, and issues:
a) any financial or personal interest of the candidate:
i) in the procedure or in its result; and  ii) in an administrative proceeding, an internal legal proceeding or other proceeding before an arbitral tribunal, involving issues that may be decided in the proceeding for which the candidate is being considered;
b) any financial interest of the employer, partner, associate or family member of the candidate:
i) in the procedure or in its result; and  ii) in an administrative proceeding, an internal legal proceeding or other proceeding before an arbitral tribunal, involving issues that may be decided in the proceeding for which the candidate is being considered;
c) any relationship, present or past, of a financial, commercial, professional, family or social nature with any party interested in the proceeding, or with their lawyers, or any relationship of that nature that the employer, partner, associate or member of the candidate's family; and  d) any provision of services as a public defender, or as a legal representative, or of any other type, related to any controversial issue in the procedure or that involves the same assets.
4. Once appointed, members shall continue to make all reasonable efforts to learn of and disclose any interests, relationships or matters referred to in paragraph 1. The obligation to disclose is ongoing and requires each member to disclose any such interests, relationships and issues that may arise at any stage of the proceeding.  5. Each member shall disclose such interests, relationships and issues by communicating them in writing to the Secretariat, for consideration by the appropriate Parties.
Section C Performance of the functions of the candidates and members.
1. Any candidate who agrees to be appointed as a member must be available to perform, and will perform, the duties of a member fully and expeditiously throughout the procedure.  2. The members shall ensure that the Secretariat can establish contact with them, at all reasonable times, in order to carry out the functions of the arbitral tribunal.  3. Every member shall perform her duties fairly and diligently.  4. Every member shall comply with the provisions of Chapter XIX and the model rules of procedure.  5. No member shall deprive the others of the right to participate in all aspects of the proceeding.  6. Members will only consider controversial issues that have arisen in the proceedings and are necessary to reach a decision. Unless otherwise provided in the aforementioned rules, no member shall delegate the duty of deciding to another person.  7. Members will take all reasonable steps to ensure that their assistants and staff comply with Sections A, B and F of this code of conduct.  8. No member shall establish ex parte contacts in the proceedings.  9. No candidate or member shall disclose issues related to violations or potential violations of this code of conduct, unless to the Secretariat or as necessary to find out if the candidate or member has violated or may violate the code.
Section D Independence and impartiality of members.
1. Every member shall be independent and impartial. Each member will act fairly and avoid creating an appearance of dishonesty or bias.  2. No member may be influenced by self-interest, external pressure, political considerations, public pressure, loyalty to a Party or fear of criticism.  3. No member may, directly or indirectly, acquire any obligation or accept any benefit that in any way could interfere, or appear to interfere, with the performance of its duties.  4. No member shall use her position in the arbitral tribunal for personal or private benefit. Each member shall avoid creating the impression that others may influence him. Members will make every effort to prevent or discourage others from creating such influence.  5. No member will allow his judgment or conduct to be influenced by relationships or responsibilities, present or past, of a financial, commercial, professional, family or social nature.  6. Every member will avoid establishing any relationship or acquiring any interest, of a financial nature, that is likely to influence its impartiality or that could reasonably create an appearance of dishonesty or partiality.  
Section E
Specific Obligations.

Any former member shall avoid creating the appearance of having been biased in the performance of his duties as a member or that he could benefit from the decision of the arbitral tribunal.

Section F
Confidentiality.


1. Members or former members shall never disclose or use information related to or acquired during the proceedings that is not in the public domain, except for purposes of the proceedings. In no case, members or ex-members will disclose or use such information to benefit themselves, to benefit others or to adversely affect the interests of others.

2. No member shall disclose an order or decision of an arbitral tribunal, prior to its issuance by the arbitral tribunal.

3. No member shall disclose a report of an arbitral tribunal issued pursuant to chapter XIX prior to its publication by the Commission. Members or former members will never reveal the identity of members who have voted with the majority or minority in a procedure carried out in accordance with chapter XIX.

4. Members or former members will never disclose the deliberations of an arbitral tribunal, or any opinion of a member, except when required by law.

Section G
Attendant and Staff Responsibilities.


Sections A, B and F of this code of conduct also apply to assistants and support staff of the arbitral tribunal.

FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES AND THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR, GUATEMALA AND HONDURAS
PROCEDURE (title) (File number assigned by the Secretariat) INITIAL DECLARATION
I have read the CODE OF CONDUCT FOR DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES OF CHAPTER XIX OF THE FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES AND THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR, GUATEMALA AND HONDURAS (Code of Conduct).
I am fully aware that Section B of the code of conduct requires me to disclose interests, relationships and matters that could affect my independence or impartiality or that could reasonably create an appearance of dishonesty or bias in the above procedure.
I have read the request for review by an arbitral tribunal filed in the above-referenced proceeding and have made every reasonable effort to learn of the existence of any such interest, relationship or matter. I make the following statement fully aware of my duties and obligations derived from the code of conduct.
1. I have no financial or personal interest in the above procedure or its outcome, except as follows:
2. I have no financial or personal interest in an administrative proceeding, domestic judicial proceeding or other proceeding before an arbitral tribunal involving issues that may be decided in the above-mentioned proceeding, except as follows:
3. I am not aware that my employer, partner, associate or any member of my family has a financial interest in the above procedure or in its outcome, except as follows:
4. I am not aware that my employer, partner, associate or any member of my family has an interest of a financial nature in an administrative proceeding, an internal legal proceeding or other proceeding before an arbitral tribunal that involves matters that can be decided in the above procedure, except as follows:
5. I have no relationship, present or past, of a financial, commercial, professional, family or social nature with any of the parties interested in the aforementioned procedure, or with their lawyers, nor am I aware that my employer, partner, associate or member of my family have such a relationship, except as follows:
6. I have not rendered my services as a public defender, or as a legal representative, or of any other type, in a disputed matter in the aforementioned procedure or that involves the same assets, except as follows:
7. I have no interests or relationships, other than those described above, nor have I become aware of any matter that might affect my independence or impartiality or that might reasonably create an appearance of dishonesty or bias, except as follows:
I acknowledge that, once appointed, I have an ongoing obligation to make every reasonable effort to become aware of and disclose any interest, relationship or matter within the scope of section B of the code of conduct that may arise during any phase of the above procedure. in writing to the Secretariat when I find out about it. 
__________________________ Signature __________________________ Name (typed name ) __________________________ Date
Annex 19-10 SAMPLE RULES OF PROCEDURE
DEFINITIONS
1. For the purposes of these Rules, it shall be understood as:
adviser : a person retained by a Party to give it advice or assistance in connection with proceedings before an arbitral tribunal;
non- business day : in respect of a Party, all Saturdays and Sundays, and any other day designated by that Party as non-business and notified to the other Parties;
Respondent Party : the Party or Parties against whom the claim is made, in terms of the definition of the complaining Party;
Disputing Parties : the complaining Party and the defending Party;
Parties involved : the disputing Parties and a third Party;
Complaining Party : the Party making a complaint, which may be made up of one or more Parties:
a) in no case may Mexico file the claim jointly with any other Party; Y
b) El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, individually or jointly, may only use this dispute resolution procedure to file claims against Mexico;
responsible section of the Secretariat : the national section of the Secretariat of the defendant Party. In case the defendant Party is made up of two or more Parties, one of its national sections of the Secretariat, chosen by lot, will be the section responsible for the Secretariat;
Secretariat : the Secretariat established in accordance with article 18-02; Y
third Party : a Party, other than a disputing Party, that gives written notice pursuant to Article 19-11.
MANDATE
2. The disputing Parties shall deliver, without delay, the mandate to the responsible section of the Secretariat, who shall immediately deliver it to the arbitral tribunal, once it has been established.
3. If the disputing Parties have not agreed on the mandate after 20 days from the date of delivery of the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal, at the request of any Party, a mandate will be delivered under the terms of article 19-10, to the disputing Parties and to the third Party, and to the arbitral tribunal, once it has been established.
WRITINGS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS
4. A Party or the arbitral tribunal, respectively, shall deliver any request, notice, and other document related to the proceeding to the responsible section of the Secretariat, who, in turn, shall forward it as expeditiously as possible to the other Parties involved and to the arbitral tribunal.
5. To the extent possible, each Party involved shall attach an electronic copy of all requests, notices, writings and other documents that they deliver to a responsible section of the Secretariat.
6. The Parties involved will deliver to their responsible section of the Secretariat the original and seven copies of each of their writings and, at the same time, will make a copy of them available to the Embassy of each of the other Parties involved.
7. No later than 10 days after the date on which the arbitral tribunal has been established, the complaining Party shall deliver its initial submission to its responsible section of the Secretariat. Within 20 days from the date of delivery of the initial brief, the Party complained against shall deliver its response brief to its responsible section of the Secretariat. The third Party will deliver its brief to its responsible section of the Secretariat, within the same period in which the defendant Party must submit its own.
8. In the case of any request, notice or other document related to the procedure that is not contemplated by rules 6 and 7, the Party involved must deliver a copy to the other Parties involved by any means of electronic transmission.
9. Minor errors in the form contained in an application, notice, writing or any other document related to the procedure, may be corrected by delivering a new document that clearly identifies the modifications made.
10. When the last day to deliver a document to any section of the Secretariat is a non-business day for said section, or if the offices of that section are closed on that day, due to government order or force majeure, the document may be delivered during the next business day. All delivery of documents related to these rules will be made within the normal working hours of the corresponding offices where the delivery must be made.
OPERATION OF THE ARBITRAL COURT
11. The meetings of the arbitral tribunals will be chaired by their president who, by delegation of the members of the arbitral tribunal, will have the power to make administrative and procedural decisions.
12. Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the arbitral tribunal shall perform its duties by any means of communication, including telephone, fax transmission, or computer links.
13. Only the arbitrators may participate in the deliberations of the arbitral tribunal, unless the latter allows the presence, during said deliberations, of assistants, staff of the Secretariat, interpreters or translators.
14. Regarding procedural issues not provided for in these rules, the arbitral tribunal may apply the procedural rules it deems appropriate, provided they are not incompatible with this treaty.
15. If an arbitrator dies, resigns or is dismissed, a substitute will be appointed, in the most expeditious manner possible, following the same selection procedure used for the appointment of the former.
16. The procedural deadlines will be suspended from the date the arbitrator dies, resigns or is dismissed, until the date the substitute arbitrator joins the arbitral tribunal.
17. After consulting the disputing Parties, the arbitral tribunal may modify the procedural deadlines and make any other procedural or administrative adjustment that may be necessary in the proceeding, such as due to the substitution of an arbitrator or when the Parties must respond in writing to the questions that the arbitral tribunal asks them.
AUDIENCES
18. The president of the arbitral tribunal will set the place, date and time of the hearing in consultation with the Parties involved, the other members of the arbitral tribunal and the responsible section of the Secretariat. The responsible section of the Secretariat will notify the Parties involved in writing about the place, date and time of the hearing.
19. The hearing shall be held in the capital of the Party complained against.
20. With the prior consent of the disputing Parties, the arbitral tribunal may hold additional hearings.
21. All arbitrators must be present at the hearings.
22. The following persons may be present at the hearing:
a) the representatives of the Parties involved;
b) the advisors of the Parties involved, provided that they do not address the arbitral tribunal and that neither they nor their employers or bosses, partners, associates or members of their family have any financial or personal interest in the proceeding;
c) the administrative staff of the Secretariat, interpreters, translators and stenographers; Y
d) assistant referees.
23. No later than five days before the date of the hearing, each Party involved shall deliver to the other Parties involved and to the responsible section of the Secretariat, a list of the persons who, on their behalf, will make oral arguments at the hearing, as well as of the other representatives or advisors who will be present at the meeting.
24. The arbitral tribunal will conduct the hearing as follows and will ensure that the complaining Party and the defendant Party enjoy the same time:
oral arguments
a) Allegation of the complaining Party.
b) Allegation of the defendant.
c) Presentation of the third Party.
Replies and counter-replies
d) Reply of the complaining Party.
e) Counter-reply of the defendant.
25. At any time during the hearing, the arbitral tribunal may ask questions of the Parties involved.
26. The responsible section of the Secretariat will adopt the necessary measures so that the hearing is recorded in writing and, as soon as possible, will deliver to the Parties involved, the other sections of the Secretariat and the arbitral tribunal, a copy of the transcript of the audience.
COMPLEMENTARY WRITINGS
27. At any time during the proceedings, the arbitral tribunal may ask written questions to any of the Parties involved. The arbitral tribunal will deliver the written questions to the Party or Parties to whom they are addressed through the responsible section of the Secretariat. In the most expeditious manner possible, the responsible section of the Secretariat will arrange for the copies of the questions to be delivered to the other sections of the Secretariat and to any other Party involved.
28. The Party concerned to which the arbitral tribunal puts written questions shall deliver a copy of its written response to its national section of the Secretariat. In the most expeditious manner possible, that section of the Secretariat will forward said response to the responsible section of the Secretariat. Also in the most expeditious manner possible, the responsible section of the Secretariat will arrange for the delivery of copies of the response to the other sections of the Secretariat and to the other Parties involved. During the five days following the date of delivery, each Party involved will have the opportunity to make written comments on the response document.
29. Within 10 days of the date of the hearing, the Parties involved may submit to their national section of the Secretariat a supplementary brief on any matter that has arisen during the hearing.
BURDEN OF PROOF REGARDING INCOMPATIBLE MEASURES AND EXCEPTIONS
30. A Party that asserts that a measure of another Party is inconsistent with the provisions of the treaty shall bear the burden of proving that inconsistency.
31. The Party that asserts that a measure is subject to an exception under the treaty shall have the burden of proving that the exception is applicable.
AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION
32. The Parties shall maintain the confidentiality of the hearings before an arbitral tribunal, the deliberations and the preliminary report, as well as all the writings and communications with the arbitral tribunal, in accordance with the procedures periodically agreed between the representatives of the Parties.
EX PARTE CONTACTS
33. The arbitral tribunal shall refrain from meeting with an involved Party and from establishing contact with it in the absence of the other involved Parties.
34. No arbitrator shall discuss with one or more of the Parties involved any matter related to the proceedings in the absence of the other arbitrators.
TECHNICAL ADVICE
35. No arbitral tribunal, either ex officio or at the request of an involved Party, may collect information or request technical advice from the persons or institutions it deems appropriate after 15 days have elapsed from the date of the hearing.
36. Before the date of selection of the persons or institutions referred to in the preceding paragraph, the Parties involved may submit to the arbitral tribunal written observations on the issues of fact regarding which said persons or institutions must give an opinion.
COMPUTATION OF TERMS
37. When, in accordance with the treaty or these rules, it is required to carry out any action, procedure or procedure, or the arbitral tribunal requires it to be carried out, within a specific period after, before or from a specific date or event, it will not include in calculating the term that specific date or the one on which said event occurs.
38. When, as a consequence of the provisions of Rule 10, a Party involved receives a document:
a) on a date other than that on which the same document is received by any other Party involved; either
b) from another Party involved on a date before or after the date on which it receives the corresponding document from a third Party involved; any period that must begin to run with the receipt of said document shall be calculated from the date of receipt of the last of said documents.
ARBITRATION COURTS FOR SUSPENSION OF BENEFITS
39. These rules shall apply to arbitral tribunals established pursuant to paragraph 4 of article 19-16, except for:
a) the Party requesting the establishment of the arbitral tribunal shall deliver its initial brief to its section of the Secretariat within 10 days after the last arbitrator has been appointed;
b) the Party that must respond shall deliver its brief to its section of the Secretariat within 15 days following the date of delivery of the initial brief;
c) Subject to the time limits established in the treaty and in these rules, the arbitral tribunal shall fix the time limit for the delivery of any additional submissions, including written replies, in such a way that each disputing Party has the opportunity to submit an equal number of submissions. ; Y
d) Unless otherwise agreed by the disputing Parties, the arbitral tribunal may decide not to hold hearings.
RESPONSIBLE SECTION OF THE SECRETARIAT
40. The responsible section of the Secretariat:
a) provide administrative assistance to the arbitral tribunal;
b) remunerate and provide administrative assistance to the experts, arbitrators and their assistants, court reporters or other persons that it hires in connection with the proceedings before an arbitral tribunal;
c) once his appointment is confirmed, he will make available to the arbitrators copies of the treaty and other documents related to the procedure, such as these rules; Y
d) keep indefinitely a copy of the complete file of the procedure before an arbitral tribunal.
REFEREE LISTS
41. The Parties shall communicate to each section of the Secretariat the composition of the lists established in accordance with article 19-08. The Parties shall promptly notify each section of the Secretariat of any changes to the lists.
Chapter XX EXCEPTIONS
Article 20-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, a tax agreement shall be understood as an agreement to avoid double taxation or another international agreement or arrangement in tax matters.
Article 20-02 General exceptions.
1. Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this treaty and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of chapters III, IV, VI, VII, VIII, IX and XV, except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to trade in services or investment.
2. Paragraphs a), b) and c) of Article XIV of the GATS are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of Chapters X, XII and XV, except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to trade in goods.
Article 20-03 National security.
The provisions of this treaty shall not be construed to mean:
a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;
b) prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:
i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on goods, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment ;
ii) adopted in time of war or other emergencies in international relations; either
iii) regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; neither
c) prevent any Party from adopting measures in accordance with its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Article 20-04 Exceptions to the disclosure of information.
The provisions of this treaty shall not be construed in the sense of obliging a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which may impede compliance or be contrary to its Political Constitution or its laws regarding the protection of privacy. of people, financial, tax matters and bank accounts of individual clients of financial institutions, among others, or be contrary to the public interest.
Article 20-05 Taxation.
1. For the purposes of this article, "tax measures" does not include:
a) a "customs duty" as defined in Article 2-01; neither
b) the measures listed in exceptions b), c) and d) of that definition;
2. Except as provided in this article, no provision of this treaty shall apply to tax measures.
3. Nothing in the present treaty will affect the rights and obligations of any of the Parties that derive from any tax agreement. In the event of any inconsistency between this treaty and any of these agreements, the agreement shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:
a) Article 3-03, and those other provisions in this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same degree as Article III of the GATT 1994; Y
b) Article 3-14 shall apply to tax measures.
5. Article 14-11 shall apply to tax measures, except that no investor may invoke that article as the basis of a claim, made under article 14-19, when it has been determined in accordance with this paragraph that the measure does not constitutes an expropriation. The investor will submit the matter, at the time of making the notification referred to in article 14-21, to the competent authorities indicated in annex 20-05, so that said authority can determine if the measure does not constitute an expropriation. If the competent authorities do not agree to examine the matter or if, having agreed to examine it, they do not agree that the measure does not constitute an expropriation, within a period of six months after the matter has been submitted to them, the investor may submit a claim to arbitration,
Article 20-06 Balance of payments and safeguard.
1. Each Party may adopt or maintain a measure to suspend, for a reasonable time, all or only some of the benefits contained in this treaty when:
a) the application of any provision of this treaty results in serious economic and financial disruption in the territory of the Party, which cannot be adequately resolved by any other alternative measure; either
b) the balance of payments of a Party, including the state of its monetary reserves, is seriously threatened or faces serious difficulties.
2. The Party that suspends or intends to suspend the benefits in accordance with paragraph 1, shall notify the other Parties as soon as possible:
a) what the serious economic and financial disturbance caused by the application of this treaty consists of and, as appropriate, the nature and scope of the serious threats to its balance of payments or the serious difficulties it faces;
b) the situation of the economy and foreign trade of the Party;
c) alternative measures available to you to correct the problem; Y
d) the economic policies that it adopts to face the problems mentioned in paragraph 1, as well as the direct relationship that exists between those and their solution.
3. The measure adopted or maintained by the Party, at all times:
a) avoid unnecessary damage to the economic, commercial and financial interests of the other Parties;
b) it will not impose greater burdens than those necessary to face the difficulties that cause the measure to be adopted or maintained;
c) it will be temporary and will be progressively released to the extent that the balance of payments, or the economic and financial situation of the Party, as the case may be, improves;
d) it will be applied trying at all times that this measure avoids discrimination between the Parties; Y
e) must be consistent with internationally accepted criteria.
4. The Party that adopts a measure to suspend the benefits contained in this treaty, will inform the other Parties about the evolution of the events that gave rise to the adoption of the measure.
5. For the purposes of this article, "reasonable time" shall be understood as that during which the events described in paragraph 1 persist.
Annex 20-05 Competent Authority
For the purposes of article 20-05, the competent authority will be:
a) in the case of El Salvador: the Ministry of Finance;
b) in the case of Guatemala: the Ministry of Public Finance and the Superintendence of Tax Administration;
c) in the case of Honduras: the Secretary of State in the Office of Finance; Y
d) in the case of Mexico: the President of the Tax Administration Service.
Chapter XXI FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 21-01 Validity.
This treaty will have an indefinite duration and will enter into force between Mexico and El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, 30 days after, respectively, they have exchanged their corresponding ratification instruments that certify that the necessary legal formalities have been completed.
Article 21-02 Future Negotiations.
Eighteen months after the entry into force of this agreement, the Parties will begin negotiations regarding a chapter on public sector procurement, which guarantees broad coverage and the application of the principle of national treatment between the Parties.
Article 21-03 Reserves.
This treaty may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations at the time of its ratification or approval by the legislative body of each Party.
Article 21-04 Modifications.
The Parties may agree on any modifications to this agreement, which must be approved according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party and shall constitute an integral part thereof. Said modifications shall enter into force the day following that on which the last notification that the corresponding procedures have been completed is exchanged.
Article 21-05 Accession .
1. Any country or group of countries may access this treaty subject to the terms and conditions agreed between that country or group of countries and the Commission, and once their accession has been approved in accordance with the applicable legal procedures of each one of them.
2. The accession will enter into force in accordance with what is stipulated in the corresponding instrument.
Article 21-06 Complaint.
1. Any Party may denounce this treaty. The denunciation will take effect 180 days after it is communicated to the other Parties, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term.
2. In the case of the accession of a country or group of countries in accordance with the provisions of Article 21-05, notwithstanding that a Party has denounced the treaty, it will remain in force for the other Parties.
Article 21-07 Transitory Provisions.
1. As of the entry into force of this treaty, the Partial Scope Agreements, hereinafter, PSAs, signed between Mexico and El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras are null and void.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, regarding Chapter VII, importers may request the application of the respective AAP, for a period of 30 days, counted from the entry into force of this treaty. For these purposes, the certificates of origin issued in accordance with the respective AAP must have been completed prior to the entry into force of this treaty, be in force, and be enforced for up to the indicated period.  
Done in Mexico City, on June twenty-ninth, two thousand, in four original copies, all texts being equally authentic.- The President of the United Mexican States, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de León.- Signature.- The President of the Republic of El Salvador, Francisco Guillermo Flores Pérez .- Signature.- The President of the Republic of Guatemala, Alfonso Portillo Cabrera .- Signature.- The Presidential Appointee of the Republic of Honduras, William Handal Raudales .- Signature.
