MainText:
Economic Complementation Agreement No. 16 between the Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile The Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship of the Argentine Republic and the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Chile, CONSIDERING the common will to make the mandate to intensify economic cooperation between the two countries a reality, in accordance with the Treaty of Peace and Friendship of November 29, 1984, as well as to develop the General Bases for the signing of an Economic Complementation Agreement, agreed upon by the President of the Argentine Nation and the President of the Republic of Chile on August 29, 1990; That the current democracy in Argentina and Chile, makes this desire for economic cooperation acquire full legitimacy before the two peoples; That the economic and commercial cooperation between the two countries must reach the dynamism and intensity that corresponds to two nations that are united by a common geography and twinned by their history; The need to deepen binational integration by creating solid reciprocal interests to optimize the use of their resources and productive structures, and thus improve the conditions for their competitive insertion in the international economy; The broad coincidences that exist in the basic orientation of their economic policies, supported by the dynamic harmonization of capital and labor, and in the opening of foreign trade in which the two governments are committed, which make possible binational understandings compatible with the purposes of free trade promoted by the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) and provided for in the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT), That these coincidences allow the processes of integration and regional economic cooperation to acquire a renewed viability perspective to gradually achieve a more fluid circulation of goods and services, as well as factors of production in the area; That there has been increasing fluidity in reciprocal trade between the two countries, which should reach the highest possible levels; That regional economic integration is today one of the essential instruments for the Latin American countries to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples and enhancing their ability to compete in world markets, and to negotiate in international economic forums; That the efforts made to translate this cooperation and economic integration must be supported by stable and effective instruments, with the consequent benefit for all matters of common interest; The importance of ensuring the full and responsible participation of private businessmen in the development of this Agreement, in trade and investment between both countries; The international commitments that have been entered into within the scope of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) and, in the case of Argentina, the commitments assumed in the Treaty on Integration, Cooperation and Development with the Federative Republic of Brazil and by the Treaty of Asunción that creates the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR), AGREE : Sign this Partial Agreement for Economic Complementation, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers of the Association, which will be governed by the aforementioned provisions and by the rules that follow. are set: CHAPTER I Purpose and Scope of Application of the Agreement ARTICLE 1 The purpose of this Agreement is: a) Facilitate, expand and diversify trade between the signatory countries; b) Promote reciprocal investment and encourage entrepreneurship; c) Stimulate the physical integration between both countries, through the facilitation of transport, the streamlining of border traffic and access to ports; d) Facilitate the development of projects of common interest in the field of industry, infrastructure, energy, mining, tourism and other sectors, especially with the active participation of the private sector. ARTICLE 2 The scope of application of this Agreement will include the gradual and balanced development, among others, of the following matters: a) Facilitation of reciprocal trade and tariff preferences; b) Market access rules and fair competition practices; c) Payment and credit standards; b) Economic complementation, and c) Physical integration. CHAPTER II Facilitation of Reciprocal Trade and tariff preferences ARTICLE 3 As of January 1, 1992, the products negotiated by the signatory countries within the framework of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) and which are included in the following instruments will be incorporated into this Agreement: I) Agreement of Partial Scope of Renegotiation No. 26 II) Partial Scope Agreement of a Commercial Nature No. 5 III) Partial Scope Agreement of a Commercial Nature No. 16 IV) Partial Scope Agreement of a Commercial Nature No. 21 The aforementioned incorporation will be carried out contemplating the preferences and treatments existing in said agreements. The concessions granted by the signatory countries for the importation of the negotiated products -tariff preferences and other conditions agreed on said products- will be registered in Annexes I and II of this Agreement, classified in accordance with the Tariff Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association. (NALADI). ARTICLE 4 The tariff preferences included in Annexes I and II, incorporated to this Agreement, will be valid until December 31, 1992. ARTICLE 5 The tariff preferences referred to in articles 3 and 4 consist of a percentage reduction in the taxes that the signatory countries apply to their imports from third countries that are not members of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI). ARTICLE 6 "Charges" shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affect imports. Similar rates and surcharges are not included in this concept when they correspond to the cost of the services rendered. ARTICLE 7 "Restrictions" shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate or of any nature, through which a signatory country prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, its imports. The measures adopted by virtue of the situations provided for in Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty are not included in this concept. ARTICLE 8 Before the end of the first half of 1992, the signatory countries of this Agreement will carry out negotiations with the purpose of expanding the lists of products included and the preferences granted, and they will proceed to evaluate the resulting global content to ensure the balance of the Agreement taking into account the effective preferences in force in both countries. In addition, specific rules will be defined on safeguards, origin and, if necessary, preservation of preferences and other complementary rules. The result of these negotiations will be incorporated into an Additional Protocol to this Agreement. ARTICLE 9 Within a period of no more than one hundred eighty (180= days), the mechanisms and procedures will be established, as well as the requirements to simplify and agree, stable and transparent regulations and -when possible- harmonize the provisions related to the facilitation of exchange of affected products to: a) Zoo-phytosanitary and bromatological standards; b) Standards on metrology and other technical aspects. ARTICLE 10 Included as Protocol No. 1 of this Agreement is the "Bilateral Regulation for the Transit of Products of Vegetable Origin in Hermetic and Sealed Containers between the Argentine Republic and the Republic of Chile." ARTICLE 11 The signatory countries agree to sign before October 30, 1991, a "Bilateral Regulation to regulate the transit of animals, meat, livestock products and by-products", which will be incorporated as an Additional Protocol to this Agreement. CHAPTER III Market access rules and fair competition practices ARTICLE 12 The signatory countries undertake to gradually dismantle the existing restrictions on foreign trade and adopt regimes aimed at eliminating all legal or administrative regulations that prevent or hinder access to markets with prohibitions, licenses, import permits and any other obstacles. to free trade, incompatible with the rules of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the Code on Subsidies and Compensatory Duties. In supplementary notes to be incorporated into this Agreement before December 31, 1991, the existing restrictions will be identified. The Council for Economic Complementation, provided for in article 28, will propose the necessary measures to enable the gradual dismantling of these measures to be carried out. Likewise, the signatory countries undertake not to introduce new restrictions on reciprocal trade. ARTICLE 13 The signatory countries undertake to investigate and adopt the pertinent corrective measures, before the presentation of complaints of dumping and any unfair trade practice, such as the granting of export subsidies and other internal subsidies of equivalent effects. In the event of reciprocal trade situations of this nature, the affected country will apply the measures provided for in its internal legislation. On this matter, the signatory countries undertake to follow the criteria and procedures stipulated in the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and its Codes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an exchange of information will be carried out simultaneously, in order to expedite the final resolution on the matter. ARTICLE 14 The signatory countries undertake to grant imports originating in the territory of the member countries, a treatment no less favorable than that applied to similar national products in terms of taxes, rates and other internal charges. The collection of taxes on imports originating from the other signatory country must be based on the CIF value, plus applicable customs duties. Situations that do not fall within the provisions of this article will be identified in Complementary Notes, which must be incorporated into this Agreement before December 31, 1991 and will be considered, for their solution, by the Economic Complementation Council provided for in article 28. . CHAPTER IV Payment and credit rules ARTICLE 15 The signatory countries will try to channel through the Reciprocal Payment and Credit Agreement of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), the payment of bilateral transactions. Likewise, they will coordinate their efforts to adjust and improve the current system in order to strengthen the growth of reciprocal exchange. CHAPTER V Economic complementation ARTICLE 16 The signatory countries will sign agreements, protocols and other complementary decisions to facilitate the development within the framework of this Agreement, among other matters, of the following activities: a) Stimulate reciprocal investment, capital association and the constitution of binational companies; b) promote and facilitate the provision of services; c) facilitate the circulation of productive factors; d) promote sector complementation and coordination; e) strengthen communications and flow of traffic; f) promote cooperation in research and technological development; g) promote tourism and the development of related services; h) promote complementarity and coordination for the development of the mining sector; Y i) Stimulate coordination and complementarity in the agricultural and fruit and vegetable sector. ARTICLE 17 Included as Protocol No. 2 of this Agreement, "Rules that regulate the gas interconnection and the supply of natural gas between the Argentine Republic (Cuenca Neuquén) and the Republic of Chile." ARTICLE 18 The signatory countries highlight the convenience of promoting and facilitating the development of mining projects on both sides of the border by natural or legal persons from the two countries, as well as the participation of foreign investment in them. Protocol No. 3 on "Cooperation and Mining Integration" is included in this Agreement . CHAPTER VI Physical integration ARTICLE 19 The signatory countries recognize that the physical integration process should tend to facilitate the transit of people and trade, both bilaterally and towards third markets, through the development and use of the port capacity of both countries, the improvement and expansion of the land, sea and air communication routes, the improvement of all national infrastructure works and any other common initiative that is of binational interest. For this purpose, the Economic Complementation Council, provided for in article 16 - in coordination with the Binational Commission provided for in article 12 of the Treaty of Peace and Friendship of November 29, 1984 - must commission feasibility studies to establish the reciprocal convenience of the use of land, port and air infrastructure, of interest to both countries, as well as the access conditions that, while granting greater fluidity to traffic, are not detrimental to the commercial flows already established for third countries, respecting the efficiency conditions of the ports and the relations of capacity, use and operating costs of the same. ARTICLE 20 The signatory countries agree that air, sea and land transport systems must respond with maximum efficiency to the desire for integration and exchange of goods and people. This means overcoming obstacles and restrictions, both in terms of inefficiencies in the different stages of transport and in the mechanisms for regulating the activity. For this purpose, Protocol No. 4 "Land, sea and air transport" is included in this Agreement . CHAPTER VII Preservation of agreed preferences ARTICLE 21 The signatory countries undertake to maintain the agreed preferences and preserve the margin in relation to the current tariff for the importation of products from third countries that are not members of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI). In case of registering changes that erode the preferences and treatments contained in this Agreement, immediate consultations will be carried out to restore the pre-existing situation. CHAPTER VIII Regime of origin ARTICLE 22 The signatory countries adopt, for the application in this Agreement, the General Regime of Origin approved by Resolution 78 of the Committee of Representatives of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI). It may be complemented by the adoption of specific rules of origin that will take precedence over those of general scope. CHAPTER IX Safeguard clause ARTICLE 23 The signatory countries adopt, for its application in this Agreement, except in what refers to Protocol No. 2 on "Rules that will Regulate the Gas Interconnection and Natural Gas Supply between the Republic of Argentina (Cuenca Neuquén) and the Republic of Chile ”, the Regional Safeguard Regime approved by Resolution 70 of the Committee of Representatives of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI). CHAPTER X Convergence ARTICLE 24 On the occasion of the sessions of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference referred to in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the signatory countries will examine the possibility of proceeding with the progressive multilateralization of the treatments included in this Agreement. CHAPTER XI Validity ARTICLE 25 This Agreement will have an indefinite duration. It will enter into force from the moment of its signature, together with the Protocols and Annexes that form an integral part of it. CHAPTER XII Evaluation of the Agreement ARTICLE 26 As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the signatory countries will periodically evaluate, at the request of the Party, compliance with the provisions of the Agreement, with the purpose of achieving a harmonious and balanced progress on integration issues, and generating benefits. fair for both countries. Modifications or additions to this Agreement, by virtue of the provisions of this article, must be included in Protocols signed by Plenipotentiaries duly accredited by the governments of the signatory countries. CHAPTER XIII Settlement of disputes ARTICLE 27 Controversies that may arise in the execution of this Agreement will be resolved through direct negotiations between the signatory countries. In the event that a solution is not reached within a period of thirty days from the notification of the dispute, extendable by mutual agreement, the signatory countries will submit it for the consideration of the Economic Complementation Council, provided for in article 28, which will then After evaluating the situation, it will formulate the pertinent recommendations for the solution of the dispute within 60 days. For this purpose, the Council may establish or convene panels of experts or groups of experts in order to obtain technical advice. Before December 31, 1991, the Council for Economic Complementation provided for in article 28, will approve a definitive regime for dispute resolution. CHAPTER XIV Administration of the Agreement ARTICLE 28 For the administration and development of this Agreement, the signatory countries agree to create an Economic Complementation Council (the "Council"), within the framework of the Binational Commission provided for in article 12 of the Treaty of Peace and Friendship of November 29, 1984, which will be made up of officials from each country and coordinated by the respective Ministries of Foreign Affairs. This Council may establish the Working Groups it deems appropriate for the performance of its functions. ARTICLE 29 The "Council" must be constituted within a term of sixty (60) days from the entry into force of this Agreement. It will issue its own internal regulations. ARTICLE 30 The signatory countries stress the importance of active private sector participation. For these purposes, the "Council" will determine operational forms that allow such purpose to materialize. CHAPTER XV Accession ARTICLE 31 This Agreement is open to adhesion, after negotiation, by the other member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI). The accession will be formalized, once the terms of the same have been negotiated, between the signatory countries and the adhering country, through the signing of an Accession Protocol, which will enter into force thirty (30) days after its deposit in the General Secretariat of the ALADI. For the purposes of this Agreement and the Protocols that are signed, the signatory country will also be understood as the admitted adherent. CHAPTER XVI Complaint ARTICLE 32 A country may denounce this Agreement, communicating its decision to the other Parties 180 days prior to the deposit of the respective denunciation instrument with the ALADI General Secretariat. As of the formalization of the complaint, the rights acquired and the obligations contracted under this Agreement will automatically cease for the complainant country, the treatments referring to the import of negotiated products remaining in force, which will continue in force for the term of a (1) year, counted from the deposit of the respective denunciation instrument, unless at the time of the same, the signatory countries agree on a different term. Protocol No. 2 on "Rules Regulating the Gas Interconnection and Natural Gas Supply between the Argentine Republic (Cuenca Neuquén) and the Republic of Chile", regarding complaints, will be governed exclusively by its own rules. TRANSITORY DISPOSITIONS 1) The signatory countries will proceed to immediately comply with the necessary procedures to formalize this Economic Complementation Agreement in the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and the Resolutions of the Council of Ministers. 2) The signatory countries agree to nullify among themselves, as of December 31, 1991, the preferences and treatment received and granted between both countries within the framework of the Partial Scope Agreement of a Commercial Nature Nos. 5, 16 and 21, signed within the framework of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), through the corresponding communication to the General Secretariat of ALADI. Annexes I and II, referred to in article 3 of this Agreement, will be incorporated into it through the signing of an Additional Protocol that will enter into administrative force as of January 1, 1992. Done in the city of Buenos Aires, Argentine Republic, on the second day of August, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-one, in two equally identical originals. (Signed:) For the Argentine Republic: Guido Di Tella; Domingo F. Cavallo; For the Republic of Chile: Enrique Silva Cimma, Carlos Ominami.

AppendixText:
Appendix 1 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR ARGENTINA-CHILE BILATERAL TRANSIT ARTICLE 1.- For the transit of garlic and onions from Argentina, it is agreed to maintain the concept of "free area" in accordance with the agreements previously signed for Globodera rostochiensis (Golden nematode). However, while the prospecting program for the area that will be declared free is being carried out, the transit of these products in airtight and sealed containers will be authorized, after soil analysis of the properties of origin of the merchandise that demonstrates a negative result. ARTICLE 2.- For the purposes indicated in the previous article, Argentina will promptly submit the quarantine scheme that will be used in accordance with the guidelines established in article 8 of this Regulation. Additionally, Chile must verify the analytical laboratory system and later, when the first operation takes place, the transit system proposed by Argentina, for its authorization. ARTICLE 3.- For the transit of fruit from Argentina, the feasibility of carrying out the cold treatment in containers calibrated by qualified inspectors will be analyzed, in order to be able to authorize the quarantine treatment during the transit period, instead of doing so in origin. ARTICLE 4.- For the transit of products of vegetable origin from Chile, the documentation will only be inspected when the means of transport provide the security of not allowing agricultural pests to escape. Any rejection of products in transit must be documented and reported to the Division of Agricultural Protection. ARTICLE 5.- With regard to the transit of seed potatoes through the Province of Mendoza, Chile requests that a route be authorized for this purpose. Economic Complementation Agreement No. 16 between the Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile PROTOCOL No. 4 The Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship of the Argentine Republic and the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Chile agree to incorporate the following provisions on the Economic Complementation Agreement of August 2, 1991 signed between both countries: LAND, SEA AND AIR TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE 1.- The signatory countries agree to the elimination of the quota system in land transportation as of October 1, 1991. They also agree to eliminate, within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, all operational restrictions that hinder or limit border crossings. It will also proceed, within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, to apply customs controls in international cargo transportation by motor vehicle, in the places of origin and destination of the cargo. It also agrees on: a. promote the uniformity of vehicle weights and dimensions throughout the region; b. establish the automaticity of the complementary permit; c. provide for the participation of business union entities in bilateral meetings; d. establish the free use of any route or passage enabled for the transport of cargo, without prejudice to respecting the special routes for heavy traffic established by the local authorities in general; and. to continue the comparative analyzes tending to the harmonization of the norms in matters of transport and road safety; F. maintain a permanent exchange of information, in order to eliminate any asymmetry; g. initiate the study of the deregulation of passenger transport, and h. adopt international legislation on the transport of dangerous cargo. ARTICLE 2.- In matters of maritime transport, the signatory countries agree that it be carried out within a framework of wide freedom and to that end, they agree to advance in the coordination of their national legislation, in order to allow the fluid maritime traffic from third countries. They also agree to exchange experiences in maritime and port policy. ARTICLE 3.- Regarding air transport, the signatory countries will continue the necessary technical level meetings and analysis, in order to sign agreements aimed at increasing efficiency in the provision of air transport services between the two countries. countries. In terms of air cargo transport, the signatory countries will seek to achieve, within the framework of their respective national legislation, a programmed and progressive deregulation, in accordance with what was agreed by the competent authorities at the technical meeting held in Santiago de Chile on 16 and July 17, 1991. The General Secretariat of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) will be the depositary of this Protocol, of which it will deliver duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Governments. In witness whereof, the Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship of the Argentine Republic and the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Chile sign this Protocol in the city of Buenos Aires, Argentine Republic, on the second day of August one thousand nine hundred and ninety one. (Signed.:) For the Argentine Republic: Guido Di Tella; Domingo F. Cavallo; For the Republic of Chile: Enrique Silva Cimma, Carlos Ominami.

AnnexText:
Economic Complementation Agreement No. 16 between the Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile PROTOCOL No. 1 HAVING SEEN the need to regulate the transit of products of plant origin through the territories of the Argentine Republic and the Republic of Chile and; CONSIDERING That the transit of products of plant origin could imply risks for the country that authorizes it, since the conditions governing importation are not required; That the goods authorized in transit are exempted from the phytosanitary inspection requirement; That transit regulations must be consistent with the control of quarantine pests and the protection of areas free of them, also taking into account the minimum risk analysis; That in order to enforce and respect said regulations, there must be a quarantine organization that officially supports the conditions of the consignments dispatched in transit, in accordance with the provisions of the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC); That in order to authorize the transit through the territory of both countries of products of plant origin from either of them, a quarantine and agricultural surveillance system must be established, with diagnostic support from official laboratories, in accordance with the scheme detailed below. . The Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship of the Argentine Republic and the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Chile agree to incorporate the following into the Economic Complementation Agreement of August 2, 1991 signed between both countries: BILATERAL REGULATION FOR THE TRANSIT OF PRODUCTS OF VEGETABLE ORIGIN, IN HERMETIC AND SEALED CONTAINERS BETWEEN THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE TRANSIT TRANSIT ARTICLE 1.- Goods in transit will be considered those that must cross national territory to reach their destination, before entering the jurisdiction of another country. Likewise, all those goods that are stored in the customs fiscal zone without having completed their entry procedures will be considered goods in transit. AUDIT ARTICLE 2.- For the purposes of inspection, the following requirements must be taken into account: a. Documentation: the merchandise must be accompanied by a Phytosanitary Certificate, with or without additional declarations as appropriate, Certificate of Origin, Transit and Phytosanitary Guides. b. Inspection: the documentation, seal, hermeticity of the containers and safety conditions of the means used for the transport of cargo will be inspected. c. Re-export certificate: it will be granted when the goods undergo transshipment from one means of transport to another, are stored in the fiscal zone until their final departure from the national territory, their packaging suffers deterioration, or when the transit duration stipulated by the certificate has expired. regulations of each country. INTERVENTION METHODOLOGY ARTICLE 3.- Intervention Methodology shall be understood as the act by which the phytosanitary authority determines that the inspected merchandise does not comply with the phytosanitary regulations in force for transit and intervenes on it. TRANSIT DURATION ARTICLE 4 .- The duration of the transit is the maximum period of time that the merchandise remains within each country and will be regulated by product. TRAFFIC INTERRUPTION ARTICLE 5.- If transit is interrupted, the carrier must immediately notify the Inspection Service, which will intervene to: allow the continuation of transit, reshipment, the application of quarantine measures or destruction of the merchandise as appropriate. AUTHORIZED MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE 6.- The authorized means of transport will be considered: railway wagons, closed trucks, thermal trucks, covered flat trucks and hermetic metal containers. In all cases, the means of transport and the packaging used must provide the necessary security so as not to allow the potential escape of pests. PORTS AND BORDER PASSES AUTHORIZED FOR TRANSIT ARTICLE 7.- Both parties will exchange the list of ports and border crossings enabled for transit. OFFICIAL QUARANTINE ORGANIZATION ARTICLE 8.- The quarantine organization can be national or be established for different areas under the jurisdiction and supervision of the competent National Directorate, in accordance with the scheme that is developed below: 1. Establishment of the internal and external quarantine system including protected areas: a. internal barriers b. external barriers c. Barrier control d. official documentation and. Personnel: endowment, qualification and location. 2. Diagnosis and surveillance system. a. Verification of existing sanitary problems in the area b. Official diagnostic laboratories 3. Infrastructure for quarantine treatments: a. Pests for which they are used and their spread in the area. b. Treatments used and operational system c. Available infrastructure and location d. Execution, certification and supervision and. Execution responsibility. 4. Protected areas. Free area maintenance system and its verification. 5. Biological history of the pest in that area that allows and facilitates the application of minimal phytosanitary risk, as opposed to zero phytosanitary risk, in order to facilitate trade by granting phytosanitary assurances that satisfy the country that authorizes transit. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS ARTICLE 9.- Both Parties agree to specific regulations for some products that are added as Annex 1. CONSULTATION SYSTEM ARTICLE 10.- It is agreed that periodic bilateral consultations will be held in order to elaborate other specific regulations and jointly analyze the results of the application of this Regulation. The General Secretariat of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) will be the depositary of this Protocol, of which it will deliver duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Governments. In witness whereof, the Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship of the Argentine Republic and the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Chile sign this Protocol in the city of Buenos Aires, Argentine Republic, on the second day of August one thousand nine hundred and ninety one. (Signed.:) For the Argentine Republic: Guido Di Tella; Domingo F. Cavallo; For the Republic of Chile: Enrique Silva Cimma, Carlos Ominami. Economic Complementation Agreement No. 16 between the Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile PROTOCOL N° 2 RULES REGULATING THE GAS INTERCONNECTION AND NATURAL GAS SUPPLY BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA (CUENCA NEUQUINA) AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE Economic Complementation Agreement No. 16 between the Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile PROTOCOL No. 3 The Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship of the Argentine Republic and the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Chile agree to incorporate the following provisions on the Economic Complementation Agreement of August 2, 1991 signed between both countries: COOPERATION AND MINING INTEGRATION ARTICLE 1.- Both countries agree to encourage the implementation of specific cooperation programs and projects in the areas of metallic and non-metallic minerals, application rocks and metallurgical concentrates, both in the basic and applied research sector, oriented towards the promotion of innovation and the development of new products, as well as for the start-up of production and marketing companies. ARTICLE 2.- In this regard, they agree to launch a program for the exchange of surface scientific-technical information between the National Mining Directorate of the Argentine Republic and the National Mining and Geology Service of the Republic of Chile, through in order to evaluate and enable the development of joint projects for the exploration and exploitation of existing mining resources along the borders between both countries. The scientific-technical information will refer mainly to a strip approximately forty (40) kilometers wide on both sides of the borders of the respective countries. ARTICLE 3.- They also agree on the advisability of ensuring, in cases where circumstances allow it, the joint use of the resources that extend to both sides of the border, in such a way that their exploration and exploitation is carried out carried out in a rational and integrated manner, applying the most advanced mining engineering standards and practices. To this end, they will encourage the constitution of joint ventures between natural and legal persons from both countries, as well as the participation of foreign investments in them. ARTICLE 4.- They also agree to promote the acquisition of mining equipment and services, as well as facilitate the transit of the same and the appropriate personnel across the border, in order to allow the investigation, exploration and integrated exploitation of those mineral resources. border. ARTICLE 5.- Both countries also agree on the advisability of promoting the harmonization of their respective mining laws. ARTICLE 6.- In the next ninety (90) days, an action program must be established to materialize and complement, as the case may be, what is established in the preceding articles. The General Secretariat of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) will be the depositary of this Protocol, of which it will deliver duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Governments. In witness whereof, the Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship of the Argentine Republic and the Minister of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Chile sign this Protocol in the city of Buenos Aires, Argentine Republic, on the second day of August one thousand nine hundred and ninety one. (Signed.:) For the Argentine Republic: Guido Di Tella; Domingo F. Cavallo; For the Republic of Chile: Enrique Silva Cimma, Carlos Ominami.
