COMPLEMENTARY BORDER TREATY BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY AND ARGENTINA The Governments of the Republics of Paraguay and Argentina, encouraged by the desire to find a solution to the question of limits that remains pending between the two countries due to the lack of geographical determination of part of the course of the Pilcomayo river, limit established in the Treaty of 3 February 1876 and the Arbitration Award of November 12, 1878; AND Considering that this limit follows the channel of said river, which runs in its central zone through completely flat and despicable terrain, which causes digressions that involve very frequent changes of course, making it impossible to adopt it as a natural limit throughout its route, they have resolved , in a high spirit of brotherhood, to celebrate this Treaty for which purpose they appoint their Plenipotentiaries, namely: His Excellency the President of the Republic of Paraguay, Mr. Higinio Arbo, his Extraordinary Envoy and Plenipotentiary Minister accredited to the Argentine Government, His Excellency the President of the Argentine Republic, Mr. José María Cantilo, his Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship; Who, once communicated and exchanged and their Full Powers that were found in good and due form, agreed to the following stipulations: ARTICLE 1 The Republic of Paraguay agrees with the Argentine Nation, to set the final limit of both countries in the sections of the Pilcomayo River that are determined below: 1. Starting from the mouth of the Pilcomayo river in the Paraguay river to the south of Cerro Lambaré, whose approximate geographic coordinates are: Longitude -57º 38' 57'', and Latitude -25º 22' 05'', 2, the border line will go up the course of the Pilcomayo until its bifurcation into two branches in the Fontana Juntas and from here it will follow the current course of the South branch referred to in the report presented by the Experts Krause and Ayala, of the Pilcomayo River Study Commission, dated March 23, 1909, until its birth at the point called Salto Palmar. 2. From the point called Horqueta, located approximately 5 kilometers east of the Argentine Fort Nuevo Pilcomayo, the line will again follow the current course of the Pilcomayo River to the place called Esmeralda, the border between Bolivia and Paraguay. ARTICLE 2 To determine the border line between Salto Palmar and Horqueta, in the area excluded from the preceding Article, it is resolved to set up a Mixed Commission made up of Paraguayan and Argentine technicians, who will study the area between the following points: from the North from Horqueta following by the Esteros formed by the North branch of the Pilcomayo river up to the Argentinian Fort Caracoles; by the South from the same point Horqueta, continuing the dry bed of the Pilcomayo to Fortín Zalazar and, from this point to Salto Palmar; and to the east the line between Fortín Caracoles and Salto Palmar. ARTICLE 3 Once the Commission referred to in the previous Article has been designated and until the border line in the area indicated by it is determined and definitively established, the Governments agree to withdraw all military personnel that garrison the forts established by both countries within this zone. ARTICLE 4 The Mixed Commission will carry out its work and present its report within a term of two years from the ratification of this Treaty. On the basis of this report, both governments undertake to pronounce on the border line in the respective area within six months of its presentation, and in the event of not reaching an agreement, they undertake to resolve the disagreement by resorting to one of the the means of conciliation provided for in the American treaties that bind both countries. ARTICLE 5 For the purposes of police surveillance within the area referred to in Article 3, both Governments shall set up a civil police force to protect the inhabitants, their assets and their estates. For this sole purpose, the area mentioned in Article 2 is divided by a line that starts from the Paraguayan Fort Tifunque and reaches the Argentine Fort Zalazar. The Paraguayan police will be in charge of the eastern part of said zone and the Argentine police the western part of it. ARTICLE 6 Once this Treaty is ratified, both Governments will proceed to the appointment of a Technical Commission made up of Paraguayans and Argentines, which will study and formulate the plan of works necessary to allow the proportional distribution of the flow of the Pilcomayo River in its two arms to the North and South. from the border line. ARTICLE 7 For the purposes of the constitution and regulation of the Mixed Technical Commission referred to in Article 2, a special Protocol is signed on this same date. ARTICLE 8 The exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty will take place in the City of Buenos Aires within the shortest possible time. In witness whereof the above-named Plenipotentiaries signed this Treaty in duplicate, and sealed it in the City of Buenos Aires, on the fifth day of July of the year one thousand nine hundred and thirty-nine.
NA
SPECIAL PROTOCOL ANNEX TO THE COMPLEMENTARY TREATY OF LIMITS In Buenos Aires, on the fifth day of July of the year one thousand nine hundred and thirty-nine, H. E. Dr. Higino Arbo, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Paraguay accredited to the Argentine Government and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Argentine Republic, H. E. Mr. José María Cantilo, in the office of the second, in order to comply with the provisions of Article 7 of the Treaty on the determination of limits between both countries signed on this same date, have agreed as follows : ARTICLE 1 The Government of the Republic of Paraguay and the Government of the Argentine Republic, resolve that the Paraguayan-Argentine Mixed Commission referred to in Article 2 of the Boundary Treaty signed on this date shall be made up of three technical delegates for each of the High Contracting parts. ARTICLE 2 The cartographic documentation of the area, which the Mixed Commission will present to their respective Governments, will be based on an aerial photogrammetric survey. ARTICLE 3 The delegates will meet in the City of Buenos Aires within two months of the approval by both contracting Governments of this Protocol, in order to constitute the Mixed Commission, and give it its technical and administrative regulations, to begin within that term the jobs established therein. ARTICLE 4 The delegates will request from their respective Governments the appointment of engineers, geologists, assistants and auxiliary personnel for the formation of the Sub-Commissions that the Mixed Commission deems necessary. ARTICLE 5 The technical personnel will be appointed in equal numbers by each Party, and in the event that a position becomes vacant, the respective Government must name the replacement within one month. ARTICLE 6 The Mixed Commission may not suspend its work until it has fully completed its mission. ARTICLE 7 When the Mixed Commission is constituted and its technical and administrative regulations are given for the execution of the works established in Article 2 of the Treaty, it will decide which expert authority in the technical order will settle the cases of disagreement in everything that concerns the execution of the works campaign to carry out together. ARTICLE 8 Once the campaign work is finished, the result of which the Mixed Commission will record in a diary that it will keep in duplicate, the Commission will present said diary to the respective Governments, with a report on the operations carried out, and on the results of the physiographic investigations of the region. . ARTICLE 9 Based on the studies and plans mentioned in this Protocol, the delegates will present, if they agree, the proposal for the dividing line on the currently undetermined border. Otherwise, each delegation will formulate it separately to their respective Government. ARTICLE 10 The contracting governments undertake to allow military or civil aircraft that have a mission to fulfill in the work entrusted to the Mixed Commission to fly in the area in dispute and outside of it. ARTICLE 11 For the purposes of the previous article, these planes will enjoy freedom of entry in both countries and will be granted all the facilities for the use of landing fields and hangars. ARTICLE 12 Each one of the contracting Governments will cover the expenses of their delegates, and by halves, the common ones that the Mixed Commission made in the performance of the entrusted mission. ARTICLE 13 The provisions, instruments, vehicles, luggage, and all the tools and materials required by the Mixed Commission, will enjoy customs franchises in both countries and complete freedom of internment and transit. The contracting Governments undertake to grant facilities for the transportation of the personnel, equipment, instruments, etc., of the Mixed Commission. In witness whereof, the above-named Plenipotentiaries sign and seal this Protocol in two copies of the same tenor.
