MainText:
convention for facilitating trade exchange and the regulation of transit trade between states of the arab league Being eager to foster the economic ties between States of the Arab League, and in fulfilment of Article 2 of the Pact of the League of Arab States, to the effect of the necessity of the existence of a close co-operation between States of the Arab League in financial and economic matters, including facilitating the exchange of trade, custom, agricultural and industrial matters. A. Approved by the Council of the League of Arab States on 7 September 1953, during its Extraordinary Nineteenth Session. Having agreed upon what follows: ARTICLE 1 (A) Exchange of agricultural, livestock production and natural resources. Agricultural and livestock products as well as natural resources, included in Annex A, appended to this Convention, shall be exempted from custom import duties, provided that their origin is a country of the Contracting Parties.(B) Exchange of industrial production: Arab industrial products, the origin of which is a country of the Contracting Parties, and which are included in Annex B appended hereto, shall be the subject of the treatment of the most Devoured nation, as regards custom import dues and shall be subject to a reduced custom tariff in the proportion of 25 per cent of the ordinary binding tariff, in the importing Arab country. (C) Agricultural, livestock and industrial products, produced in any of the countries of the Contracting Parties, and imported in a country of another Party, shall not be subjected to internal duties exceeding the duties imposed on similar local products, or on their raw materials in the importing country. (D) Arab countries shall, in the treatment between them of delivering import and export permits, observe the treatment of the most favoured nation. (E) Due observation should be paid to all this, without infringing on other privileges, provided for by bilateral agreements already concluded, or to be concluded in future between Arab States. ARTICLE 2 Articles Subject to Government Monopoly The provisions of this Convention shell not be applicable to articles, subject to government monopoly. ARTICLE 3 Goods, the Import orExport of which is Prohibited Goods, the import of which is prohibited or to be prohibited into the territories of one of the Contracting Parties, according to binding regulations in that country, are liable to confiscation, if imported from other territories, unless a previous authorization, bearing the custom s,al. had been obtained for their transfer (by way of transit) to countries other than those of the Contracting Parties. The goods shall not be returned to the exporting country.Goods, the export of which is prohibited from any country of the Contracting Parties, shall be confiscated when imported into the territories of one of the other Contracting Parties. The custom authorities in the importing country shall be called upon to return them to the exporting country. ARTICLE 4 Transit The Contracting Parties are hereby pledged to facilitate trait movement across their territories by all the means of transport, according to binding rules and custom regulations in the country which is being crossed by transit trade. Are considered as transported by transit across the territories of any of the Contracting Parties, the transfer of goods and personal effects, regardless of their origin, be they transferred by other means of transport, or are not transported or be they deposited or not in warehouses or be their loading altered, so as to constitute a complete transfer beginning and ending beyond the boundaries of the country which is being crossed by transit. The transport of cattle and livestock is considered as effected by way of transit through the country of a Contracting Party to the country of another Contracting Party and this in conformity with binding regulations. Goods and personal effects, despatched by transit by any of the Parties to the country of another Party, shall be accompanied by a manifest, to be drawn up by means of a transport agency or its accredited representative and which shall be annotated in due form by means of the custom authorities of the exporting country. It shall be duly considered by the country of destination, on the crossing of the goods and effects through the boundaries of the other Contracting Party, and when the custom authorities of this latter country are assured of the integrity of the custom lead appended to the goods and of the means of transport, and this in conformity with binding regulations. ARTICLE 5 Goods liable to deterioration and despatched by way of transit across the territories of any of the Contracting Parties, to a third power, must be exported or withdrawn from the customs within thirty days of their entry into the custom circuit. Unless this shall be accomplished, the goods shall be confiscated and sold by public auction or destroyed, according to regulations in force. ARTICLE 6 Ratification of the Convention The signatory powers of the Convention shall ratify it in accordance with their own constitutional laws and processes, at the earliest possible date. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretariat General of the League of Arab States, which shall establish a protocol of the deposit of the instruments of ratification of eachPower and shall notify the other Contracting Parties thereof. ARTICLE 7 States of the Arab League, non-signatories of this Convention, may adhere thereto by means of a notification on their part to the Secretary General of the League of Arab States, who shall notify the other powers, bound to this Convention, of their adhesion thereto. ARTICLE 8 This Convention shall become binding a month after the deposit of the instruments of ratification of three of the signatory powers and shall become binding as regards other Powers a month after the deposit of the instruments of their ratification or adhesion.. Article 9 This Convention shall become binding for a year from the date of its enforcement and shall be automatically renewed, year after year, unless one of the Contracting Parties shall notify the Secretary General to the League of Arab States, in written form, of its desire to amend or non-renew the Convention, at least two months before its expiry. The Secretary General shall then notify this desire to the other Parties, bound by this Convention. It shall remain. in force with regard to other Contracting Parties, and its provisions shall remain binding with regard to former claims for importing or exporting goods, and which had been made before the expiry of the mentioned period. In testimony whereof, the Plenipotentiaries, whose names follow, have signed this Convention on behalf of their Governments and in their names. This Convention was drawn up in Arabic, at Cairo, on Zu-el-Hegga 28th, 13?2 (7 September 1953) in one original to be kept in the custody of the Secretariat General of the League of Arab States. A true copy of the original shall be delivered to every Power signatory thereof or adhering thereto. agreement in amendment of the convention for facilitating trade exchange and the regulation of transit trade between states of the arab league Being desirous of amending the Convention For Facilitating Trade Exchange and The Regulation of Transit Trade Between States of the Arab League, which was approved by the Council of Arab League States on 7 September 1953 and as amended by the agreements approved by the Economic Council on 15 December 1954, 25 January 1956 and 29 May 1957. Have agreed on the following provisions which were approved by the Economic Council on 14 January 1959, in its fifth ordinary session which called upon member States to abide thereby. ARTICLE ONE Firstly: The following clause shall be added to the last paragraph of item "A" of Article 1 of the Convention for Facilitating Trade Exchange and the Regulation of Transit Trade Between States of the Arab League. "..and from export duties, provided that the importing country is one of the States of the Contracting Parties and provided also that it shall not be re-exported." Secondly: Paragraph "B" as amended on 15 December 1954, of Article 1 of the Convention shall be amended as follows: "B" Exchange of Industrial Production: The Arab Industrial products whose origin is one of the State of the Contracting Parties shall be accorded the most favoured nation treatment as regards customs import and export duties, and shall be subject to reduced duties in the following rates: 1 - (A) 35 per cent of the ordinary tariff applicable in the Arab importing State as far as concerns the items enlisted in Annex "B" to this Agreement. (B) 25 per cent of the ordinary export duties applicable in the exporting Arab State in case one of these items is subject to the export duties. 2 - (A) 60 per cent of the ordinary tariff applicable in the Arab importing State as regards the items enlisted in Annex "C" to this Agreement. (B) 50 per cent of the ordinary export duties applicable in the Arab exporting State in case one of these items is subject to the export duties. ARTICLE TWO 1 - The industrial products enlisted in Annex "1" to this Agreement shall be deleted from Annex "B" to this Agreement and the Amendments thereof. 2 - The industrial products enlisted in Annex "2" to this Agreement shall be added to Annex "B" to this Agreement and the Amendments thereof. 3 - The industrial products enlisted in Annex "3" to this Agreement shall be added to Annex "C" to this Agreement as amended on 15 December 1954 and the Amendments thereof. ARTICLE THREE Notwithstanding the Amendments to this Agreement, the provisions of the Convention for Facilitating Trade Exchange and the Regulation of Transit Trade between States of the Arab League and the Amendments thereof shall continue to be in force and effect. The above Amendments have been signed by the undermentioned plenipotentiaries on behalf of their Governments. This Amendment and its Annexes have been done in Cairo in the Arabic language on Wednesday 14 January 1959, in one original copy to be kept at the Secretariat of the Arab League States, an authentic copy thereof to be delivered to the signatory or acceding States: agreement in amendment of the convention for facilitating trade exchange and the regulation of transit trade between the states of the arab league Third Amendment Referring to the Convention for Facilitating Trade Exchange and the Regulation of Transit Trade as approved by the Council of The Arab League on 7 September 1958, and the Agreement in Amendment of the Convention for Facilitating Trade Exchange and the Regulation of Transit Trade as approved by the Economic Council on 15 December 1954, and to the Agreement in Amendment of said Convention as approved by the Economic Council on 25 January 1956, and to Article Eight of the Treaty on Joint Defence and Economic Cooperation between States of the Arab League, and in accordance with the decision of the Economic Council during its session on 29 May 1954.Have agreed on the following: ARTICLE ONE A new section No. 17 of Annex "C" shall be added, under which shall come the word "Sugar'' as follows: "Sugar made of substance of Arab origin". ARTICLE TWO Section 85 of Annex "C" shall be added, to which shall come the following article: Metal locks for shoes, clothes and leather articles ARTICLE THREE This amendment shall be ratified by the contracting States according to their constitutional systems at the earliest possible time and the instrument of ratification shall be deposited at the Secretariat General of the League of Arab States which shall deposit the instruments of deposit of such instruments by each State and shall transmit it to the other contracting States. ARTICLE FOUR This Agreement shall be considered an integral part of the Convention for Facilitating Trade Exchange and the Regulation of Transit Trade signed on 7 September 1963 and the Agreement amended on 15 December 1954 and the Agreement amended on 25 January 1956 and shall be subject to the provisions of Article 7, 8 and 9 of the Original Convention. This Amendment was signed by the Plenipotentiaries whose names are mentioned hereunder on behalf of their Governments. This Amendment was done in Cairo on Monday, 3 June 1957 in one original copy in the Arabic language to be kept at the Secretariat General of the Arab States League. An authentic copy to be kept with each of the signatory or acceding States.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX 1 List A List of Articles Exempted from Custom Duties between States of the Arab League. ANNEX B List B List of Arab Industrial Products, Subject to the Treatment of the Most Favourized Nation, as Drawn up by the Experts Sub-Committee, Established by the Congress of Arab Ministers of Finance and Economy. Annex No. "1" Industrial products deleted from Annex "B" and enlisted in Annex "C": Industrial Products added to Annex (B). Annex No. (3) List "C"
