MainText:
Economic Complementation Agreement No. 2 Signed between the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of Uruguay Adaptation Protocol The Plenipotentiaries of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, duly authorized by their respective Governments, according to powers presented in good and due form, taking into account the provisions of the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Commerce, signed in the city of Rivera, on June 12, 1975, and in the Protocol signed in Montevideo on May 7, 1982, amending the Trade Expansion Protocol between the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, agree to sign this Agreement of Economic Complementation, provided for in the seventh article of Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers of Foreign Relations of the Association, of August 12, 1980, which will be called the Commercial Expansion Protocol (PEC),in accordance with the provisions contained in Resolutions 1 and 2 of the Council of Ministers, especially taking into account the third article of Resolution 6 of said Council and the provisions established below: ARTICLE 1 - The purpose of this Agreement is to promote among the signatory countries the maximum use of production factors and stimulate their economic complementarity, based on the establishment of a reciprocal exchange tax relief program. ARTICLE 2.- The products included in the reduction program established in this Agreement, when they originate and come from one of the signatory countries, will enter the territory of the other signatory countries free of taxes and restrictions, except for those provided for in this Agreement, assuming the parties the commitment not to apply new restrictions or to intensify those that were declared in the respective notes, except as provided in article 50 of the Montevideo Treaty 1980. The signatory countries will negotiate the gradual elimination or reduction of the aforementioned restrictions. For the purposes of this Agreement, levies are understood to be customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether of a fiscal, monetary or exchange nature, that affect imports. Restrictions are understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate or of any other nature through which a signatory country prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, its imports. The General Coordination Commission referred to in article 10 will indicate the taxes and restrictions that will be subject to the reduction or elimination referred to in this article. The signatory countries also agree not to establish other restrictions or taxes on the import of the products negotiated in the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 2, other than those expressly declared in the Complementary Notes of Annexes I and II of this Protocol. ARTICLE 3.- The tariff reduction program for the products negotiated in this Agreement is included in Annexes I and II , which form an integral part thereof. The products included in the reduction program of this Agreement will be specified at the NALADI item level, not admitting observations that limit the content of the respective item except in exceptional cases. The signatory countries will periodically carry out negotiations to include, modify or eventually withdraw items from the reduction program under the terms of the rules and procedures established in Annex IV of this Agreement. ARTICLE 4.- A signatory country may, at any time and through prior communication to another signatory country, limit imports of any product with the treatment of the third article to a minimum quota equivalent to 5 percent, in quantity and/or value, of the production of the national similar of the immediately previous year. The quota in question may be previously fixed, on the occasion of the inclusion of the product in the regime of article 3. ARTICLE 5.- The products included in the tax reduction program will not have the respective taxes for third countries consolidated and the eventual elimination, total or partial, of the margin of preference, determined by the economic interest of a signatory country, will not oblige the grantor of the concession to offer direct or immediate compensation, except to meet the provisions of article 8, regarding the balance of exchange. ARTICLE 6.- The products included in the reduction program referred to in article 3º, will have the treatment established in this Agreement in accordance with Annex III , for the qualification of the origin of the merchandise. The origin requirements may be set when the product is included in the reduction program or by the Commission referred to in article 10. The origin requirements referred to in this article shall apply exclusively to the use of the benefits provided for in this Agreement. ARTICLE 7.- A signatory country may, based on a situation of serious damage or on the undue use of a concession on a product, suspend the respective tax relief regime, or demand, for its importation with the benefits of article 3º, the fulfillment of requirements specifically intended to contemplate the situation created. The safeguard measure referred to in this article will enter into force 1 (one) month after its communication to another signatory country and will remain in force until the final manifestation of the Commission referred to in article 10, to whose appreciation it will be submitted, the which must be pronounced within a maximum period of 60 (sixty) days from the date of said communication. ARTICLE 8.- The signatory countries, taking into account the treatment granted to Uruguay in the third article of Resolution 6 of the Council of Ministers of the Association, will try to maintain a balanced exchange of products covered by the reduction program provided for in this Agreement. , with the objective, among others, of creating conditions that contribute to a reasonable balance of their bilateral trade. The signatory countries will evaluate every three years through the Commission referred to in article 10, the evolution of the reduction program of this Agreement, with the purpose of correcting the imbalances that derive from its application, based fundamentally on the established principle in the previous paragraph. ARTICLE 9.- The complementary rules and procedures for specific negotiations within the scope of this Agreement and their periodic evaluation are recorded in Annex IV . ARTICLE 10.- This Agreement will be administered by the General Coordination Commission created by the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Commerce, which may adopt or recommend modifications to the norms referred to in the previous article and other acts necessary for the proper execution of the Agreement. this Agreement. The General Coordination Commission may delegate to its Commercial Expansion Subcommittee powers to resolve issues related to the execution of the provisions of this Agreement. ARTICLE 11.- The Trade Expansion Protocol will be open to adhesion, through negotiation, by the other member countries of the Latin American Integration Association and the concessions included therein will exclusively benefit the signatory countries. ARTICLE 12.- On the occasion of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference referred to in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the signatory countries will examine the possibility of proceeding with the progressive multilateralization of this Agreement. ARTICLE 13.- The signatory countries will communicate annually to the Committee of Representatives of the Latin American Integration Association the progress achieved in accordance with the commitments signed in this Agreement, and any modification that means a substantial change in its text. ARTICLE 14.- This Agreement shall enter into force simultaneously for the signatory countries on the date on which they have complied with the provisions of their respective internal legislation. It will have a duration of 6 (six) years, automatically extendable for equal periods unless one of the parties states otherwise, through diplomatic channels, at least 90 (ninety) days in advance. ARTICLE 15.- After the first 3 (three) years, the signatory countries may denounce this Agreement at any time, through formal communication through diplomatic channels. Once the complaint is formalized, the concessions granted will remain in force for a period of 2 (two) years, counted from the date of the aforementioned communication.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
Adaptation Protocol ANNEX 1 PRODUCTS AND PREFERENCES GRANTED BY THE FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL AND ORIGIN REQUIREMENTS SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES The importation of products included in the reduction program granted by the Federative Republic of Brazil, registered in Annex I of the Agreement, are subject, without prejudice to the conditions established in each case, to compliance with the following provisions: 1. Of a general nature 1.1 The products included in this Agreement are subject to the payment of the port improvement rate (Law No. 3,421, of 10/VIII/38, article 2, subsection a) and Decree-Laws Nos. 415 and 1,507 of 10/I/ 69 and 23/XII/76, respectively). 1.2 Tax on financial operations - Decree-Laws No. 1,783 of IV/18/80 and 1,844 of XII/30/80 and Resolution No. 816 of IV/7/83 of the Central Bank of Brazil, is reduced to zero for the products included in this Agreement. 1.3 Products originating in and coming from the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, included in this Agreement, are not subject to the quantitative limits of the Import Programs established by CACEX (Resolution No. 125, of 5/VIII/80 of CONCEX). Consequently, provided that the import documents are issued correctly, the respective import guides will be issued automatically, except as provided in subitem 2.1 of the Notes of a specific nature, whose imports depend on the prior consent of other government bodies. Brazilian. 1.4 The CACEX will authorize, in the respective communications, the registration of new importers for products originating in and coming from the Oriental Republic of Uruguay included in this Agreement. 1.5 The products included in this Agreement are exempt from the consular fee. 2. Of a specific nature 2.1 Prior consent of the Special Secretariat of Informatics -SEI- of machines, equipment, apparatus and instruments, isolated or that constitute electronic systems, their components, parts and pieces (Resolution Nº 121 of 7/II/79, of CONCEX). 2.2 The mechanism of Resolution No. 136, of 19/IV/83, of CONCEX (prior consent from CONSIDER for the import of steel and non-ferrous products) is applied only for registration purposes. 3. Complementary rules A) Each of the preferences that appear in the list of products included in the reduction program granted by the Federative Republic of Brazil is indicated by a code marked from 1 to 7. Those preferences indicated with codes 1 to 5 are associated with an amount expressed in dollars that for 1986 responds to the following detail: (1) 300,000 (2) 500,000 (3) 1,000,000 (4) 2,500,000 (5) 5,000,000 These amounts will suffer the automatic modifications referred to in article C). The preferences indicated with code 6 are accompanied by an amount expressed in units of physical volume or in specific value. Products included in code 7 are not subject to value or volume limits. The Brazilian authorities may suspend the application of a preference indicated with codes 1 to 6 whenever Uruguayan exports in the course of a given year under this Agreement exceed the amount associated with the code (for those indicated from 1 to 5). or the amount expressed in units of physical volume or value (code 6). Such suspension will only be in effect for the remainder of the year in question, and must be timely notified to the Uruguayan authorities. The suspension procedure referred to in the preceding paragraph will not be applicable to the preferences indicated with code 7. The suspension procedure referred to in this article is without prejudice to the provisions of articles 4 and 7 of Economic Complementation Agreement No. 2. B) The preferences indicated with codes 1 to 5 and 6 when they are associated with amounts expressed in dollars, which fall on products that were already the object of concessions in the PEC as of July 1986, subject to limitations expressed in measures of physical volume are They will be regulated by the following regime: Without prejudice to the amounts in dollars associated with the respective codes, the Brazilian authorities will not be able to make use of the suspension procedure referred to in article A) until the physical volumes previously agreed in the PEC are not exported. C) In order to ensure the maintenance of the value of the concessions, the amounts expressed in dollars associated with the preferences indicated with codes 1 to 5 will be automatically modified according to the mechanism that is stated below: Each year an adjustment will be made the amounts corresponding to the previous year in the same proportion in which the consumer price index of the United States of America would have varied in the immediately preceding year. For simplicity purposes, adjustments will be rounded to the nearest thousand dollar amounts. The authorities of the Federative Republic of Brazil will adopt as quickly as possible, and in any case within 60 days of having the information on the variation of the price index referred to for the previous year, the necessary measures for the effective validity of the aforementioned adjustment, immediately notifying the authorities of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay. The latter may collaborate in obtaining and processing the information necessary for the adjustment. D) In ​order to enable a dynamic framework for the use of concessions, the preferences indicated with codes 1 to 4 will be automatically reclassified in the next higher code, provided that the value of Uruguayan exports within their framework reaches an average of three years. consecutive 90 percent of the annual amount associated with each code. The preferences indicated in code 5 will be, in the same case, automatically reclassified in code 7. The authorities of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay will opportunely communicate the preferences that are in the conditions of automatic reclassification provided for in this article, and the Brazilian authorities, after verification, will adopt the necessary measures for the effective validity of the same before the expiration of the 60 days of communication by the Uruguayan side. In the case of the preferences indicated in code 6, the reclassification mechanism will operate as follows: Provided that the exports within its framework reach, on average, in three consecutive years, 90 percent of the annual amount expressed in physical volume or in value. when applicable, said annual amount will be automatically increased by 30 percent, unless the parties agree on a different percentage. 4. Specific conditions When expressly indicated in the corresponding column, the concessions will be subject to compliance with specific conditions, according to the following code: Adaptation Protocol ANNEX 2 PRODUCTS AND PREFERENCES GRANTED BY THE EASTERN REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY The following products will be included in the list of products registered in this Annex, provided there is no national production: A) Fertilizers and raw materials for their production in accordance with the relevant regulations of the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries. B All products that at the time of importation are registered with the Animal Health and Plant Health Directorates of the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries and the raw materials for their production. (As established by Laws Nos. 8,086 of 14/VI/1927; 3,606 of 9/IV/1910; 3,921 of 28/VIII/1911; 13,663 of 14/VII/1968; Regulatory Decree of 20/III/1936 and Decrees Nos. 149/1977 of 15/III/1977 and 194/979 of 30/III/1979). SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES The importation of the products included in the reduction program granted by the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, registered in Annex II of the Agreement, are subject, without prejudice to the conditions established in each case, to compliance with the following provisions: 1. Of a general nature 1.1 The products included in this Agreement are subject to the payment of the Package Mobilization Rate when it integrates the Global Tariff Rate that corresponds to the Import Tariff Nomenclature. 1.2 The minimum surcharge established by Decree No. 125/977 of 2/III/1977, is reduced to zero for the products included in this Agreement. 1.3 The Rate for Consular Rights that integrates the Global Tariff Rate is reduced to zero. 1.4 Import complaints that cover operations of products originating in and coming from the Federative Republic of Brazil will be issued automatically as long as they are properly completed. 1.5 Imports of cars, trucks and buses, as well as their kits are subject to prior authorization and compliance with compensatory exports. Adaptation Protocol ANNEX 3 ORIGIN REGIME For the purposes of the Commercial Expansion Protocol, under the terms of its article 6 and Chapters I, II and III of this Annex: 1. Products extracted, created, or cultivated in the territory of the signatory countries, or made in said countries with materials of origin from the signatory countries, or in accordance with the requirements established in the terms of article 6, shall be considered "originating." ° of the Agreement and maritime products extracted outside its territorial waters by vessels under its flag or rented by companies established in its territory, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of Annex IV – Direct transport – of the Complementary Regulations. I. Qualification of origin 2. For the purposes of the tax relief regime of the Agreement, the treatment for qualifying the origin of the goods will be applied based on the following criteria: i) The goods manufactured entirely in its territory will originate from a signatory country, when exclusively materials originating from the exporting country are used in their preparation; either ii) Produced in the exporting country, using materials from other sources, through a substantial transformation process: a) Established as a specific requirement in accordance with Article 6 of the Agreement; or failing that; b) As a result of which the final merchandise acquires a new individuality, characterized by the fact of being classified in the NALADI in a different position from that of the aforementioned materials; Y c) As a result of an assembly or assembly operation carried out in the territory of one of the signatory countries, using zonal and extra-zonal materials, when the CIF port of destination or CIF seaport value of those materials does not exceed 50 percent of the FOB value of the final merchandise. 3. For the purposes of the previous article, materials imported from a signatory country, made or processed in the territory of another signatory country, will be considered originating from the latter. 4. “Non-originating” materials from the signatory countries may be used when: i) Circumstantial supply problems occur, such as: availability, price or delivery time; ii) The materials used in the manufacture of the products to be exported are not produced in either of the two countries; Y iii) The materials do not adapt to the industrial process or the technology applied in the exporting country of the final product. It will be understood that the expression "materials" includes the raw materials, intermediate products and the parts or pieces used in the production of the merchandise. 5. Once the situations provided for in paragraph 4 have been verified, the certifying body of origin will issue the corresponding certificate, informing the body indicated by the importing signatory country to that effect. 6. When the imported signatory country is in a position to provide the materials, the authorized body must communicate this fact to the body of the other country, so that the latter reestablishes the requirement to use the "originating" material when issuing future certificates of origin, except in the cases of material in the importation process, with the respective guide already issued, for which a period of 60 (sixty) days will be granted for the issuance of the certificate under the conditions mentioned in paragraph 5. 7. The products resulting from the operations mentioned below will not be considered originating: i) Manipulations intended to ensure the conservation of the goods during transport and storage (aeration, spreading, drying, refrigeration, placement in brine, sulfur water or with other substances, extraction of damaged parts and similar operations); ii) The simple operations of removing dust, sifting, selection, classification, provisioning (including the composition of sets of merchandise), washing, painting and cutting; iii) a) The change of packaging and the division and assembly of packages; b) The simple placement in bottles, jars, bags, cases, boxes on plates and any other conditioning operations; iv) The application on the products themselves, or on their packaging, of brands, labels or other similar indications; v) The simple mixture of materials, even of different species, provided that one or more components of the mixture cannot be considered as originating; vi) The assembly or assembly of parts of articles with the purpose of constituting a complete article, except in cases that meet specific requirements of origin, adopted under the terms of Article 6 of the Agreement; vii) The accumulation of two or more operations mentioned in points i) and vi) above; Y viii) Animal slaughter. II. Establishment of specific origin requirements 8. The signatory countries may, under the terms of Article 6 of the Agreement: i) Establish specific requirements, on the occasion of the inclusion of the product in the tax relief regime; either ii) Subsequently, through the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee and at the request of a signatory country, review the requirements already set, or establish them for products that do not yet have them. 9. In the case of item ii) of the previous paragraph, the Subcommittee will make a statement within a maximum period of 60 (sixty) days after the submission of the request. The new requirement, or the modification of the existing one, will enter into force 180 (one hundred eighty) days after its approval by the Commission, and never before one year after the validity of the concession, unless agreed between the countries. 10. At the request of one of the countries, the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee may suspend, in whole or in part, the origin requirement set for specific products and for a determined period of time, in order to allow the progressive adaptation of productive sectors that cannot satisfy them. . The Subcommittee will express itself on the matter within a period of 30 (thirty) days. 11. In the case of parts, pieces and components of machines, devices and instruments in general, the established specific requirement will always prevail, and the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5 will not apply, except with the express authorization of the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee. , which will be manifested within 30 (thirty) days. III. Origin Certification 12. The export of goods covered by the tax relief regime of the Agreement will always be accompanied by the Declaration and Certificate of Origin document, in accordance with the model that will be approved by the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee. 13. For the purposes of certification, the signatory countries will expressly accredit the bodies or entities authorized to issue the certificates of origin of the goods covered by the tax relief regime. The bodies or entities authorized to issue the certificates of origin will correctly fill out the origin form, verifying compliance with the requirements and controlling the corresponding declaration. Each certificate of origin will have a serial number corresponding to the certifying body or entity, by which it can be identified. Each signatory country will provide the other with the specimens of the signatures and seal impressions applied in the certification of origin and the facsimile copies that may be necessary. 14. A country may request a subsequent verification from another country regarding an issued certificate, whenever there is a well-founded doubt about the authenticity of the document, regarding the correspondence between the certificate and the actually exported merchandise, or regarding the the accuracy of the declaration of origin or, even, if the merchandise complies, in fact, with the demanded origin requirements. The importing signatory country will not stop the process of importing the merchandise in question, but may, in addition to requesting the corresponding evidence, adopt the measures it deems necessary to safeguard the fiscal interest. The signatory countries will provide maximum collaboration in order to facilitate the verification work as well as the collection of the evidence necessary to clarify the case. 15. For the purposes of subsequent control, copies of the certificates and the respective documents must be kept for 2 (two) years. 16. The signatory countries will sanction, based on the respective legislation, the false declaration of origin. 17. Notifying the fraud, without prejudice to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the exporting signatory country must suspend the issuance of certificates for the exporter who makes a false declaration of origin. 18. The certificates of origin issued for the purposes of the tax reduction regime will have a validity period of 60 (sixty) days, counting from the date of certification by the competent body or entity of the country of export. In the case of merchandise covered by quota utilization certification, the validity period of the certification of origin will coincide with the quota utilization period, according to paragraph 16.1 of Annex IV. 19. Materials imported from another signatory country, according to the criteria of paragraph 3, will explicitly appear, as a percentage, in the certificate of origin. 20. Products imported from any country by a signatory country may not be re-exported to another signatory country, except when there is a prior agreement between the signatory countries concerned. Adaptation Protocol ANNEX 4 SUPPLEMENTARY RULES AND PROCEDURES FOR NEGOTIATIONS I. Inclusion of products in the tax relief regime 1. The inclusion of products in the tax relief regime of article 3 of the Agreement, will be done through periodic negotiations that will be scheduled by the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee. 2. For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, each signatory country will submit, before the negotiation period begins, a list of offers, with the products that it is willing to include, through negotiation, in the Agreement's tax relief regime. 2.1 The list of offers must take into account, as far as possible, the interests of another signatory country, expressed at least 90 (ninety) days in advance, unless otherwise agreed between the countries. 2.2 The list of offers must include, for each product: i) NALADI code. ii) Description of the product, specified at the NALADI item level. iii) Taxes and restrictions on the importation of the product, when it comes from third countries. iv) Tariff commitments eventually assumed: a) At ALADI; Y b) With other countries. v) Special conditions to which the concession will be subject and other pertinent information. 3. During the negotiations, the signatory countries will try to balance the perspectives of exchange, based on the broadest offer. II. Treatment of products included in the tax relief regime. 4. The signatory countries will indicate, for each product included in the tax relief regime, the conditions that will prevail, in their territory, for the importation of said product, when it originates from another signatory country. 5. The signatory countries will endeavor to maintain a reasonable balance of import duties, not included in Article 3, paragraph 2 of the Agreement, also taking into account any residual duties that may be maintained. 6. Unless otherwise agreed between the signatory countries, no tax of any nature will be required for the importation of merchandise included in the tax relief regime, nor will any restriction be applied that is not expressly provided for in the negotiation conditions to which refers to paragraph 4 of these rules. 6.1 The signatory country that adopts a monetary or exchange measure, not selective by product or discriminatory by origin, as well as eventual restrictions adopted on a general and temporary basis, to correct imbalances in the balance of payments, will endeavor so that its application does not adversely affect the exchange covered by the Agreement. 7. The signatory countries will reciprocally inform each other of the changes that occur in their respective foreign trade regimes and in the treatments for third countries, which affect products included in the tariff reduction regime of the Agreement. III. Record of negotiations 8. The general results of the periodic negotiations will be consolidated in minutes that will be countersigned by both countries. IV. Entry into force of concessions 9. The concessions granted by the signatory countries in the periodic negotiations will be valid simultaneously and from the publication of the competent act of the signatory country that makes them govern second. V. Quota system - use 10. In the case of limited concessions, in quantity or value, the corresponding quotas will be set for use within a specific period, preferably one year, and will be automatically renewed for the following year, without prejudice to the provisions of article 3. , paragraph 4 of the Agreement. 11. The quotas will not be cumulative, extinguishing at the end of the period of use the right to any unused balance. 11.1 For the purposes of the provisions of this article, the date of issuance of the certificates of use of the quota will be considered. 11.2 The signatory countries will adopt the necessary measures to avoid administrative difficulties that prevent the use of the quotas within the established period. 12. Any eventual excess in the use of the quota will be deducted from the current quota for the following year, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7 of the Agreement. 13. Exceptionally, the use of the quota may be staggered in certain periods, within the term of validity. 14. Exceptionally, in order to meet the particularities of the domestic market for a certain product, the signatory countries may, on the occasion of the negotiation, parcel out the use of the quota, by customs or fiscal dependencies for the clearance of the merchandise. SAW. Quota regime - distribution 15. The use of the tariff quotas, established in the terms of the Agreement, will be authorized by the official body expressly designated for it by the exporting signatory country. 16. The body of the exporting country, referred to in the previous paragraph, will issue a document, in two copies, according to the model that will be approved by the Subcommittee for Commercial Expansion, certifying that the merchandise indicated therein with the specified characteristics and quantity is included within the quota provided for in the tax relief regime. 16.1 Within a non-extendable period of thirty days, counted from the date of issuance of the quota utilization certificate, the importer must request the corresponding guide or import complaint, or the equivalent document provided for in the legislation of the importing country, to whose terms will be subject to the use of the quota. Customs clearance in the country of importation, with the treatment of the tax relief regime, will be made by the importer presenting the first copy of that certificate to the merchandise clearance tax office, together with the other documents pertinent to the case. . 16.2 The body of the exporting country, issuer of the certificate, will send the second copy of the document to the body of the importing country designated for this purpose according to the agreed procedure. 16.3 The certificate of use or quota distribution must have the approval of the competent authority of the importing country, must have a serial number, by which it will be identified, and will contain, among other elements, the indication of the customs office. of the merchandise. 16.4 The aforementioned certificate will be valid exclusively for the customs office or fiscal unit of the destination indicated therein, and within the period established for its use. 16.5 The body referred to in paragraph 15 may annul certificates of use of quotas, notifying said annulment to the competent authority of the importing country. 17. The body referred to in paragraph 15 will be responsible for controlling the application of the quota, suspending the issuance of certificates once the amounts established have been reached in the manner established in paragraphs 10 and 13. VII. Quota regime - control 18. Periodically, at intervals to be established, the body referred to in paragraph 15 will inform, directly, the body indicated by the other country, about the movement of use of the quotas, with an individualized indication of the product object of the concession, the respective quantities and values ​distributed, as well as the corresponding balance to be used. 18.1 Failure to comply with the provisions of the preceding paragraph will authorize the importing signatory country to suspend the application of the quota, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 12. 18.2 Each signatory country may designate, permanently or temporarily, a duly accredited official, so that, together with the body of another signatory country, accompany the issuance of certificates of use of the quota and collect the elements under its control. 19. The body in charge of authorizing the use of the quotas will provide the body indicated by the other signatory country with the specimens of the signatures and stamp impressions applied in the issuance of the certificate and the necessary facsimile copies. 20. The importing country may control the use of the quotas, without, however, creating administrative difficulties for their use. 21. Eventual divergences between the controlling bodies, regarding the use of the quotas, must be resolved through direct understanding between the aforementioned bodies and, if necessary, submitted to the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee. VIII. direct transport 22. The treatment provided for in the tax relief regime of the Agreement will be applied exclusively to goods transported directly from one signatory country to the other. 22.1 Merchandise whose transport is carried out without transiting through the territory of a third country is considered directly transported from another signatory country. IX. General administrative cooperation measures 23. Each signatory country will create an executive group, made up of representatives of the bodies that directly intervene in the import and export process, to which it will be possible to adopt or propose the necessary internal measures for the proper execution of the Agreement. 23.1 Each signatory country will accredit a representative, who will participate, as a union element, in the executive group of another country. 24. The executive groups will provide mutual collaboration and exchange information of interest to both signatory countries, including through the corresponding documentation, especially on: i) export and import of goods covered by the Agreement; ii) authenticity of export documents, related to goods benefited by the treatment of the Agreement, particularly in relation to certificates of origin or use of quotas; Y iii) any other information that facilitates the execution of the Agreement and speeds up the processing of matters related to it. 25. The executive groups, including their members, will maintain direct understandings with a view to giving prompt attention to eventual problems arising in the application of the Agreement. 26. At the express request of a signatory country, the executive group of another country will proceed with investigations and proceedings to obtain factual elements concerning a certain import from the requesting country, to which it will communicate the results obtained. 27. The signatory countries will provide the maximum collaboration to establish the factual elements, related to a certain operation, as well as to verify, before the bodies of another signatory country, in charge of the execution of the Agreement, writings, records and other documents, and extract the necessary information from them. 27.1 The information collected as established in the previous paragraph will be considered confidential and used exclusively for the purpose for which it was requested. X. Equilibrium of exchange 28. Periodically, the signatory countries will jointly analyze the reciprocal exchange of negotiated products to evaluate their results and, if necessary, adopt measures tending to achieve the balance referred to in Article 8 of the Agreement. 28.1 For the evaluation referred to in the previous article, the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee will take into account the value of the materials originating from a signatory country effectively incorporated in the production of the final products exported by the other, when these materials are not included. in the tax relief regime of the latter. The signatory country that exports the final product will provide the aforementioned Subcommittee with the information necessary to verify the value of the aforementioned materials. XI. Other provisions 29. The certificates of quota and origin, mentioned in Annexes III and IV of this Protocol, may be consolidated in a single document. In the cases of export of a product, whose concession is not limited in volume or value, only a certificate of origin will be required. 30. Omitted cases will be resolved in accordance with the following rules, observing the following order of precedence: i) specific rules, instructions and other provisions adopted by the General Coordination Commission, or by the Commercial Expansion Subcommittee, within the powers delegated to it; ii) agreement between the countries; iii) pertinent provisions in force in the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI).
