MainText:
Agreement Establishing an Association between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Central America THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND (\"the United Kingdom\") on the one hand, and THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA, THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR, THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA, THE REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS, THE REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA, THE REPUBLIC OF PANAMA, (\"Central America\") on the other, (hereinafter referred to as \"the Parties\"); RECOGNISING that the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Union and its Member States on the one hand, and Central America on the other, done at Tegucigalpa on 29 June 2012 (\"the EU-Central America Agreement\") will cease to apply to the United Kingdom when it ceases to be a Member State of the European Union, or at the end of any transitional arrangement during which the rights and obligations under the EU-Central America Agreement continue to apply to the United Kingdom; RECOGNISING that the EU-Central America Agreement has been applied pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 353 of that Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, and Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama since 1 August 2013, between the European Union and its Member States, and Costa Rica and El Salvador since 1 October 2013 and between the European Union and its Member States, and Guatemala since 1 December 2013; DESIRING that the rights and obligations between the Parties as provided for by the EU-Central America Agreement should continue; HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: ARTICLE 1. Objectives 1. The overriding objective of this Agreement is to preserve the links between the Parties established in the association created in Article 2 of the EU-Central America Agreement. 2. In particular, the Parties agree to preserve the preferential conditions relating to trade between the Parties set out in the EU-Central America Agreement and to provide a platform for further trade liberalisation between the Parties. 3, For the avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that the Parties affirm the objectives in Articles 2, 24 and 78 of the EU-Central America Agreement (as modified by this instrument). ARTICLE 2. Definitions and Interpretation 1. Throughout this instrument: the \"Incorporated Agreement\" means the EU-Central America Agreement as incorporated into this Agreement (and related expressions are to be read accordingly);an \"incorporated Article\" means an Article of the Incorporated Agreement, as modified and incorporated into this Agreement (and related expressions are to be read accordingly); and \"mutatis mutandis\" means with the technical changes necessary to apply the EU- Central America Agreement as if it had been concluded between the United Kingdom and Central America, taking into account the object and purpose of this Agreement. 2. Throughout the Incorporated Agreement and this instrument \"this Agreement\" means the entire Agreement, including anything incorporated by Article 3. 3. References to financial assistance in the Incorporated Agreement cover a range of forms of such assistance and means by which it may be provided, including assistance provided through multilateral and regional organisations. ARTICLE 3. Incorporation of the EU-Central America Agreement The provisions of the EU-Central America Agreement at the time of signature of this Agreement (whether or not the provisions are in force) are incorporated by reference into, and made part of, this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, subject to the provisions of this instrument. ARTICLE 4. References to European Union Law 1. Except as otherwise provided, references in this Agreement to European Union law are to be read as references to that European Union law in force as incorporated or implemented in United Kingdom law as retained European Union law on the day after the United Kingdom ceases to be bound by the relevant European Union law. 2. In this Article \"United Kingdom law\" includes the law of the territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible to whom this Agreement applies, as set out in Article 6. ARTICLE 5. References to the Euro Notwithstanding Article 3, references to the euro (including \"EUR\" and \"€\") in the Incorporated Agreement shall continue to be read as such in this Agreement. ARTICLE 6. Territorial Application 1. In respect of the United Kingdom, this Agreement shall apply to the extent that and under the conditions which the EUCentral America Agreement applied (or would have applied had it fully entered into force) to the United Kingdom and the territories for whose international relations it is responsible. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, and Article 10, this Agreement shall apply to the territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible, from the date of written notification by the United Kingdom to the Republics of the CA Party that those territories have completed their internal procedures for the entry into force of this Agreement. 3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, this Agreement shall not apply to the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia in the Republic of Cyprus. 4. In respect of Central America, this Agreement shall apply to the territories of the Republics of the CA Party, in accordance with their respective domestic legislation and international law. ARTICLE 7. Continuation of Time Periods 1. The Parties agree that unless this instrument provides otherwise, at the date of entry into force of this Agreement: (a) if a period in the EU-Central America Agreement has not yet ended, the remainder of that period shall be incorporated into this Agreement; and (b) if period in the EU-Central America Agreement has ended, any ongoing right or obligation in the EU-Central America Agreement shall apply between the Parties and that period shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a reference in the Incorporated Agreement to a period relating to a procedure or other administrative matter (such as a review, committee procedure or notification) shall not be affected. ARTICLE 8. Further Provision In Relation to the Association Council and Association Committee 1. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, any decisions adopted by the Association Council or Association Committee established by the EU-Central America Agreement before signature of this Agreement shall, to the extent those decisions relate to the Parties to this Agreement, be deemed to have been adopted, mutatis mutandis, and subject to the provisions of this instrument, by the Association Council or Association Committee established under incorporated Articles 4 and 7, respectively. (1) 2. Nothing in paragraph 1 prevents the Association Council or the Association Committee making decisions which modify, are different to, revoke or supersede the decisions deemed to have been adopted by it under that paragraph. ARTICLE 9. Integral Parts of this Agreement The Annex and Joint Declarations to this instrument shall form an integral part of this Agreement. ARTICLE 10. Entry Into Force 1. This Agreement shall be approved by the Parties in accordance with their own internal procedures. The Parties shall notify each other of the completion of those procedures, in accordance with paragraph 7. 2. This Agreement shall enter into force between the United Kingdom and each of the Republics of the CA Party from the later of: (a) the date on which the EU-Central America Agreement ceases to apply to the United Kingdom;(2) or (b) the date of the later of those Parties' notifications that they have completed their internal procedures. 3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, this Agreement, or provisions of it, may be applied by the United Kingdom and each of the Republics of the CA Party from the later of: (a) the date on which the EU-Central America Agreement ceases to apply to the United Kingdom; or (b) the date of the later of those Parties' notifications that they have completed their internal procedures necessary for this purpose. 4. The United Kingdom and each of the Republics of the CA Party to which this Agreement, or provisions of it, is applied in accordance with paragraph 3 may terminate the application of this Agreement, or provisions of it, by written notification in accordance with paragraph 7. Such termination shall take effect on the first day of the second month following the notification. 5. Where a provision of this Agreement is applied in accordance with paragraph 3, any reference in such provision to the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall be understood to refer to the date from which those Parties agree to apply that provision in accordance with paragraph 3. 6. For the avoidance of doubt, the Parties for which this Agreement has entered into force in accordance with paragraph 2, or is applied pursuant to paragraph 3, may also use materials originating in the Republics of the CA Party for which this Agreement is not in force or applied. 7. Notifications under this Article shall be sent to the Secretaria General del Sistema de la Integración Centroamericana (SGSICA), who shall be the depository of this Agreement. Certified copies of the notifications shall be lodged with the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement. DONE at MANAGUA this eighteenth day of July 2019 in 8 originals, each original in the English and Spanish languages, both texts being equally authoritative. One original shall be deposited with the Depositary.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX The EU-Central America Agreement shall be incorporated into this Agreement with the following modifications: 1. MODIFICATIONS TO THE PREAMBLE (a) The paragraph starting with the words "HIGHLIGHTING the need to build upon" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) The paragraph starting with the words "BEARING IN MIND the strategic partnership developed" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. MODIFICATIONS TO PART I, TITLE I NATURE AND SCOPE OF THIS AGREEMENT In Article 2(e) immediately after the words "regional integration" insert "in Central America". 3. MODIFICATIONS TO PART I, TITLE I INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK (a) In Article 4(1) replace the word "two" with "four." (b) In Article 9(1) the words "is hereby established" shall be replaced by "may be established by the Parties". (c) Article 10 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 4. MODIFICATIONS TO PART II POLITICAL DIALOGUE Article 23 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 5. MODIFICATIONS TO PART III COOPERATION (a) Article 25 (j) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In Article 26 the following shall not be incorporated into this Agreement: i. in subparagraph (g), the words "in particular through funding of the European Investment Bank in Central America in line with its own procedures and financial criteria"; and ii, subparagraphs (h) and (i). (c) In Article 28(3) the words "and Eurostat" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 6. MODIFICATIONS TO PART III, TITLE II JUSTICE, FREEDOM AND SECURITY In Article 35(3) the second sentence shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 7. MODIFICATIONS TO PART III, TITLE III SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL COHESION Article 43(3) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 8. MODIFICATIONS TO PART IH, TITLE IV MIGRATION In Article 49(3) the second instance of the word "concerned" shall be moved to directly following the second instance of the words "Republic of the CA Party". 9. MODIFICATIONS TO PART III, TITLE VI ECONOMIC AND TRADE DEVELOPMENT (a) In Article 56(2)(a) the words "at the European Union's level and at national and sub-national levels" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In Article 68(2)(c) replace the words "for the transfer of European technology in the Global Navigation Satellite System and urban public transport centres" with "in the field of satellite navigation systems and urban public transport". 10. MODIFICATIONS TO PART III, TITLE IX KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY In Article 76(1) the following shall not be incorporated into this Agreement: 11 i. the words "covering all the activities under the research framework programmes (FPs)"; ii. in subparagraph (a), the words "as well as on the European Research and Technological Development and Demonstration Programmes"; and iii. subparagraph (b). 11. MODIFICATIONS TO PART IV, TITLE II TRADE IN GOODS (a) Without prejudice to Article 7 of this instrument: i. in Articles 83(3) and 104(2)(b)(i), replace "date of entry into force of this Agreement" with "date on which Part IV of the EUCentral America Agreement has been applied"; and ii. in Article 104(3), in both places replace "entry into force of this Agreement" with "date on which Part IV of the EU-Central America Agreement has been applied". (b) Article 109 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement nor shall any references to Article 109. (c) In Article 111: i. replace paragraph 1 with: "1. Pursuant to each Party's domestic legislation, where applicable, a safeguard proceeding may be initiated by the competent investigating authority on its own initiative, or upon a written application by an entity which demonstrates that it is representative of the domestic industry producing a good like or directly competitive with the imported good."; and ii. in paragraph 4 replace "the requirements of its domestic legislation" with "any requirements of its domestic legislation". (d) In Article 140(f) replace the words "the region to region" with "a UK to Central America". 12. MODIFICATIONS TO PART IV, TITLE Il ESTABLISHMENT, TRADE IN SERVICES AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE The footnote to Article 160(e) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 13. MODIFICATIONS TO PART IV, TITLE VI INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (a) Article 244(1) shall be replaced with: "1. The Parties shall maintain systems for the protection of geographical indications in their legislation.". (b) Article 245 shall be replaced with: "Geographical indications listed in Annex XVII shall be processed according to the applicable protection procedures of the United Kingdom, once such an application for protection has been submitted." (c) Article 246(2) shall be replaced with: "2. A geographical indication which has been granted protection in one of the Parties, as listed in Annex XVIII, cannot, in that Party of registry, be deemed to have become generic, as long as it is protected as a geographical indication in the Party of origin." (d) In Article 246(4) replace "the date of entry into force of this Agreement" with "the date on which Part IV of the EU-Central America Agreement has been applied." (e) In Article 247(1) replace "or regional authorities" with "authority". (f) The second footnote to Article 248(1) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (g) For the purposes of Article 252, and for the avoidance of doubt, in the United Kingdom an "unregistered design" is one which is protected by Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 of 12 December 2001 on Community designs. 14. MODIFICATIONS TO PART IV, TITLE VII TRADE AND COMPETITION Article 277(2)(a) shall be replaced with: "(a) for the United Kingdom Party, the Competition and Markets Authority;" 15. MODIFICATIONS TO PART IV, TITLE IX REGIONAL ECONOMIC INTEGRATION (a) Article 305(1) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) Article 306(2) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 16. MODIFICATIONS TO PART V FINAL PROVISIONS (a) In Article 352(1) replace the words "European Union or its Member States or the European Union and its Member States, within their respective areas of competence, referred to as the "EU Party"" with "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, referred to as the "United Kingdom"". (b) Article 353 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement nor shall any reference to Article 353. (c) In Article 359(1) the words "of any request made by a third State to become a member of the European Union and" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) Article 359(2) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (e) Article 360 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 17. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNEX I ELIMINATION OF CUSTOMS DUTIES (a) In Appendices 1 and 2 to Annex I, information relating to the import tariff rate quota volumes and, where applicable, annual increase volumes, are replaced by the rates and volumes as set out in the tables below. (b) In those tables: i. the applicable import tariff-rate quota volumes for 2019 shall be those stipulated under the heading "2019 quota"; and ii. for import tariff-rate quotas that increase over time, the volume for subsequent years shall be calculated in accordance with the "Yearly increase" figure. (c) Should this Agreement enter into force in 2020 or in a subsequent year, for import tariff-rate quotas that increase over time, the applicable volume during the year the Agreement enters into force shall be calculated by combining the "2019 quota" and the "Yearly increase" figures as applicable for each year after 2019 up until and including the year of entry into force. (d) For the avoidance of doubt, if this Agreement enters into force partly through a quota period, the import tariff-rate quotas shall be applied on a pro-rata basis in accordance with Annex I, section A, paragraph 9. (e) Appendix 1 – Import tariff-rate quotas of the Republics of the CA Party [Tables are not included]. [18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 not included] 23. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNEX X LISTS OF COMMITMENTS ON ESTABLISHMENT (a) Throughout Section A, commitments relating to specific countries which are not part of this Agreement shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In paragraph 1 the subparagraph beginning with the words "When the column" and ending with the words "reservations that may apply)." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In commitment 6E. b) (Rental/Leasing Services without Operators) the words "or elsewhere in the EU" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) Replace the footnote referred to in the description of the reservation to commitment 7B.a) (Telecommunications Services) with "The United Kingdom reserves its rights to maintain public participation in certain telecommunication operators in the future. This is not a market access limitation." (e) In commitment 16B (Internal Waterways Transport) the words "(incl. agreements following the Rhine-Main-Damube link)" and "Regulations implementing the Mannheim Convention on Rhine Shipping." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (f) In commitment 17B (Services auxiliary to internal waterways transport) the words "(incl. agreements following the RhineMain-Danube link)" and "Regulations implementing the Mannheim Convention on Rhine Shipping." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (g) In commitment 17E.d) (Rental of aircraft with crew) the words "or elsewhere in the EU" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 24. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNEX XI LISTS OF COMMITMENTS ON CROSS-BORDER SUPPLY OF SERVICES (a) Throughout Section A, commitments relating to specific countries which are not part of this Agreement shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In paragraph 1 the subparagraph beginning with the words "When the column" and ending with the words "reservations that may apply)." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In commitment 1E.b) (Rental/Leasing Services without Operators) the words "or elsewhere in the EU" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) In commitment 11B (Internal Waterways Transport) the words "(incl. agreements following the Rhine-Main-Damube link)" and "Regulations implementing the Mannheim Convention on Rhine Shipping." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (e) In commitment 12B (Services auxiliary to internal waterways transport) the words (incl. agreements following the RhineMain-Danube link)" and "Regulations implementing the Mannheim Convention on Rhine Shipping." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (f) In commitment 12E.d) (Rental of aircraft with crew) the words "or elsewhere in the EU" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 25. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNEX XII RESERVATIONS ON KEY PERSONNEL AND GRADUATE TRAINEES OF THE EU PARTY (a) Throughout Section A, reservations relating to specific countries which are not part of this Agreement shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In paragraph 1 the subparagraph beginning with the words "When the column" and ending with the words "reservations that may apply)." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) The ALL SECTORS reservation on Recognition, including the footnote to it, shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. [27, 28 and 29 not included]
