MainText:
Partial Scope Agreement signed between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Costa Rica The Plenipotentiaries of the Republic of Costa Rica and the Republic of Colombia, duly authorized by their respective Governments, according to powers presented in good and due form, agree to enter into this Partial Scope Trade Agreement, which will be governed by the provisions set forth below. established and that in the case of Colombia are based on article 25 of the Treaty of Montevideo 1980. CHAPTER I Object of the Agreement ARTICLE 1.- The purpose of this Agreement is to strengthen trade by granting tariff and non-tariff preferences that Colombia will grant to Costa Rica, anticipating that in the future Costa Rica may, when conditions permit, grant preferences to Colombia. Hereinafter, for the purposes of this Agreement, Colombia and Costa Rica will be called signatory countries. CHAPTER II Preferences ARTICLE 2.- The signatory countries agree to reduce or eliminate the taxes and other restrictions applied to the importation of the products included in their respective annexes, in the terms, scope and modalities agreed upon by the countries. ARTICLE 3.- For the purposes of this Agreement, preferences shall be understood as the advantages that the signatory countries grant themselves in terms of taxes, restrictions, and margins of preference on the products that are the object thereof. Taxes shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges of equivalent effect, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affect imports. Any tax or similar charge is excluded from this concept when they are equivalent to the approximate cost of services actually rendered. Restrictions shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange, para-tariff, or of any nature, through which a signatory country prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, its imports. In the preferences granted by Colombia by virtue of this Agreement, the margin of preference shall be understood as the percentage advantage that a signatory country assigns to the other signatory country with respect to the tariffs in force for third countries. Consequently, this percentage preference margin applied to the tariff for third countries is the one that should be applied in favor of the other signatory country. ARTICLE 4.- In Annex I, which is part of this Agreement, the preferences and other conditions agreed by the signatory countries for the importation of the negotiated products originating from their respective territories are recorded. Likewise, the tariff position and the description of the negotiated products are registered, in accordance with the tariff nomenclature of the signatory countries, as well as the other agreed conditions. CHAPTER III Origin ARTICLE 5.- The benefits derived from the preferences agreed in this Agreement will be applied exclusively to products originating in and coming from the territory of the signatory countries in accordance with the regulations contained in Annex II of this Agreement. CHAPTER IV Differential treatment ARTICLE 6.- The tariff preferences granted by Colombia to products originating in and coming from Costa Rica will be extended to the countries with the least relative economic development of the Latin American Integration Association, in accordance with article 25 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty. CHAPTER V Preservation of preferences ARTICLE 7.- When a signatory country modifies its national tariff, either by increasing or decreasing the tariff rates and thereby violating the agreed margin of preference, the preference will automatically be readjusted in such a way that said margin is preserved. CHAPTER VI Safeguard clause ARTICLE 8.- The signatory countries of this Agreement may apply, unilaterally, on a transitory basis, restrictions on imports of products subject to concessions when they are carried out in quantities and conditions such that they cause or threaten to cause serious damage to certain productive activities of significant importance to the national economy. These restrictions cannot fall on concessions that have less than one year of being in force and application. Said restrictions may not subsist for more than one year, after which, without having solved the problem that caused such application, the signatory countries will proceed to review the respective preference. ARTICLE 9.- The signatory country interested in invoking the safeguard clause must notify the affected country; the safeguard clause will not apply to products that have been shipped within fifteen days from the date of notification of its application. ARTICLE 10.- Within thirty days of the communication, the signatory countries will carry out negotiations in order to establish a quota that will govern the application of the safeguard clause, in order to preserve an adequate volume of imports of the affected product. ARTICLE 11.- Any of the signatory countries may, prior communication to the other signatory country, apply appropriate measures to trade in agricultural products included in this Agreement aimed at: a) limiting imports to what is necessary to cover deficits in domestic production; and b) level the prices of the imported product with those of the similar national product. CHAPTER VII Withdrawal of concessions ARTICLE 12.- During the term of this Agreement, the unilateral withdrawal of the agreed concessions shall not proceed. ARTICLE 13.- The exclusion of a concession that may occur as a consequence of the negotiations for the revision of this Agreement does not constitute unilateral withdrawal. It also does not establish the withdrawal of concessions, the elimination of the preferences agreed to term, if the renewal has not been carried out at the expiration of the respective terms of validity. CHAPTER VIII Accession ARTICLE 14.- This Agreement will be open to the accession of any member country of the Latin American Integration Association, after negotiation. ARTICLE 15.- The accession will be formalized, once the terms of the same have been negotiated between Colombia and the applicant country, through the subscription of an additional instrument to this Agreement, which will enter into force thirty days after its deposit in the Secretariat of the Association. For the purposes of this Agreement and of the additional instruments that are signed, the adherent country will be understood as a signatory country. CHAPTER IX Review ARTICLE 16.- The signatory countries may revise this Agreement at any time in order to preserve the trade flows generated by virtue of its application and promote its expansion. For these purposes they may: a) introduce new products; b) agree on greater preferences for the importation of the negotiated products; c) proceed to the renegotiation of the preferences granted; d) Introduce the necessary modifications to this Agreement. The review referred to in this article and any modification to this Agreement must be formalized by signing an additional instrument to this Agreement. CHAPTER X Validity ARTICLE 17.- This Agreement is in force from the date on which the signatory countries communicate that they have complied with the necessary legal requirements, and will have a duration of three years, automatically extendable for equal periods, if the country interested in terminating it does not communicates said intention to the other signatory country ninety (90) days prior to the date on which it expires. However, the Government of Colombia may put it into force early in accordance with its internal legal regulations. CHAPTER XI Administration of the Agreement ARTICLE 18.- In order to enforce compliance with this Agreement, both parties agree to set up a Mixed Commission that will establish its own regulations and will meet at the request of either party, on the date and place they deem by mutual agreement. convenient. The Commission will have the following attributions: a) ensure compliance with the objectives set forth in this Agreement; b) recommend the pertinent measures to solve the problems that arise in the application thereof; c) analyze and recommend the lists of products that will enjoy the benefits consigned in the Agreement; its extensions or modifications; d) recommend to the signatory countries modifications to this Agreement; Y e) Recommend to the signatory countries the levels of preferences that will be applied to the products benefiting from this Agreement, as well as modifications to them. CHAPTER XI Administration of the Agreement ARTICLE 19.- With the purpose of establishing a direct information channel that facilitates the application and better achievement of the objectives of this Agreement, the Governments of the signatory countries will designate an administrative authority to permanently attend to the queries of any of the parties. and administer the provisions of this Agreement. CHAPTER XII Complaint ARTICLE 20.- Any of the signatory countries of this Agreement may denounce it, after one year of their participation in it. For this purpose, the denouncing country must communicate its decision to the other signatory country, at least sixty (60) days in advance. ARTICLE 21.- Once the denunciation is formalized, the rights acquired and the obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country. CHAPTER XIII Convergence ARTICLE 22.- The signatory country of this Agreement, member of ALADI, undertakes to carry out negotiations with the other member countries of the Association, with the purpose of proceeding to the progressive multilateralization of the benefits derived from it. CHAPTER XIV Final Provisions ARTICLE 23.- The signatory country of this Agreement, member of ALADI, will inform the Committee of Representatives of the Latin American Integration Association of the progress made in the implementation of this Agreement, as well as any modification that means a substantial change of your text. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Agreement in the city of San José, on the second day of March, nineteen eighty-four, in the Spanish language. (Signed:) For the Government of the Republic of Costa Rica: Marco Antonio López A., Minister of Economy and Commerce; Carlos José Gutiérrez, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship; For the Government of the Republic of Colombia: Rodrigo Marín Bernal

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX I LIST OF PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO CONCESSIONS BY COLOMBIA ANNEX II RULES OF ORIGIN CHAPTER I Conditions of origin ARTICLE 1.- The following goods shall be considered originating from the signatory countries for the purposes of this Agreement: a) those goods that have been totally produced within their territories using inputs originating from them; b) those goods that belong to the animal, vegetable or mineral kingdom and have been extracted, harvested, collected, or have been born or cultivated in the territory of the signatory countries or in their territorial waters; c) those goods made with inputs from third countries, when these have undergone substantial transformation in the territory of the signatory countries and provided that the final product is classified in a different four-digit position in the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature, modified by the Latin American Free Trade Association. However, when such processes consist exclusively of the simple assembly, packaging, separation, selection, classification, brands or other equivalents, such goods will not be considered originating; d) those goods assembled in any of the signatory countries that use inputs imported from third countries when the CIF value of the latter is less than 50% of the FOB value of the former; Y e) those goods produced in the territory of any of the signatory countries and that satisfy the special requirements of origin agreed upon by mutual consent between the signatory countries. The special origin requirements will prevail over the general principles established in this article. CHAPTER II Declaration and certification of origin ARTICLE 2.- The preferences contained in this Agreement for the negotiated products will become effective only when the corresponding export documents include a declaration that said products satisfy the origin requirements contained in the previous Chapter. ARTICLE 3.- The declaration referred to in the previous article will be issued by the final producer or exporter of the merchandise and will be certified by a competent government office or by a trade association or producers to whom this has been legally delegated. function on the part of the Government of the signatory country. ARTICLE 4.- The signatory countries will inform each other of the government offices or of the trade associations or of producers authorized to certify the declarations of origin and of the signatures and stamps respectively authorized. Any modification of these conditions, signatures and seals, must be communicated at least thirty days in advance. ARTICLE 5.- If a signatory country considers that the certification of origin issued by a competent authority does not satisfy the requirements of this Annex, it must adopt the appropriate corrective measures. The importing signatory country may, in such cases, request additional information from the Government of the other signatory country and may adopt the measures it deems necessary to protect its fiscal interests. ARTICLE 6.- In all cases, the standard form that appears in the Appendix will be used.
