MainText:
Trade Agreement between Panama and the Dominican Republic The Government of the Republic of Panama and the Government of the Dominican Republic, hereinafter referred to as the Contracting Parties, committed to strengthening the existing traditional ties of fraternal friendship and desirous of maximizing commercial exchange between the two countries, in such a way that the benefits are equitable, have decided to sign this Trade Agreement. ARTICLE 1 The Contracting Parties agree to establish a preferential exchange regime that could be free trade, preferential treatment or tariff reduction, for which partial or total import taxes will be used as a basis in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in their respective countries. countries, to develop commercial exchange of mutual interest. ARTICLE 2 The Contracting Parties agree to grant each other concessions and facilities, within the limits of the laws and provisions in force in their respective territories, so that the established trade and that which may be established between both countries, is carried out with the greatest fluidity. The concessions and facilities granted by the Contracting Parties will appear in the agreements signed by the Permanent Mixed Commission, established in Article XVII and will form part of this Treaty. ARTICLE 3 The products exchanged between the Contracting Parties under the present Treaty must originate from the respective countries in accordance with the criteria established in Article IV; and must be codified in accordance with the tariff nomenclature used in each country. The products covered by this Treaty and identified in the corresponding Annex must be supported by certificates of origin, issued by designated agencies or institutions. ARTICLE 4 For the purposes of this Treaty, totally originating products of the Contracting Parties are considered to be articles and products cultivated, produced and manufactured, with national and/or imported materials and raw materials from one of the Contracting Parties. Products manufactured with imported raw materials whose national added value is not less than 35% will also be considered originating. The determination and the elements of the national added value will be defined by the Permanent Mixed Commission. When there is doubt about the origin of a product or merchandise, in the first instance it will correspond to the customs authorities of the respective country, to coordinate with the respective Administrative Authorities in order to clarify it. In the event that the problem could not have been resolved by the Customs or the Administrative Authorities, the Mixed Commission must decide on the matter. ARTICLE 5 Articles produced in the Free Zone or Free Zone of the Contracting Parties could, exceptionally, be eligible for the benefits of this Treaty when the Permanent Mixed Commission so agrees. The Contracting Parties undertake to clearly indicate the place of manufacture of the articles, prior to the negotiation of each one of them. ARTICLE 6 The Contracting Parties undertake to examine annually, through the Permanent Mixed Commission, the result of the commercial exchange of the previous year with the purpose of evaluating their behavior and revising the lists, so that, if necessary, the pertinent measures required to increase reciprocal trade. In order to equalize the benefits derived from trade carried out under this Agreement, the Contracting Party that experiences favorable balances agrees to give priority to requests for the inclusion of new products that are of interest to the other Party. Contractor. ARTICLE 7 The modifications of the agreed concessions, as well as the inclusion of new products in the exchange lists under this Treaty must be approved by the Permanent Mixed Commission and will enter into force after the corresponding Exchange of Notes from the Ministries of Foreign Relations. . ARTICLE 8 When one of the Contracting Parties, after verification, considers that a company or industrial branch faces competition problems, as a result of imports from the other Contracting Party, including changes in the exchange regime, the affected Party will submit the matter to the attention of the Contracting Party. of the Permanent Mixed Commission, which may agree on the adoption or modification of quantitative measures applied to the products included in the exchange list or the exclusion of items from it. These agreements will enter into force from the date established by said Commission. At the request of one of the Contracting Parties, the Permanent Mixed Commission must meet within a period of 30 calendar days to decide on the adoption of the measures referred to in this Article. In the meantime, the affected party may adopt the transitory quantitative measures that it deems appropriate. If they do not meet within this term, the interested Party will consider that it has not been possible to reach an agreement and may decide on unilateral measures of a transitory nature, such as temporary suspension of the Treatment granted to the product or products in conflict, establishment of a quota or other restrictions, which will apply similarly to those indicated in this Article. In the event that the Permanent Mixed Commission meets and does not reach an agreement, the affected Party may resort to the establishment of transitory measures of a nature and application similar to those indicated below; until the Permanent Mixed Commission adopts the pertinent measures. In the event of temporary suspension of the treatment granted to the affected product or products, the adopted measure will enter into force 30 calendar days from the date of adoption of said measure. In the case of quotas or other restrictions, they will enter into force 30 calendar days from the date of adoption of said measures. In case of exclusion of the product or products benefited by the treatment granted, the adopted measure will enter into force 90 days after its adoption. ARTICLE 9 The natural or manufactured products originating from one of the Contracting Parties, which are exchanged in accordance with this Agreement, shall enjoy national treatment in the territory of the other Contracting Party in terms of taxes, fiscal or municipal contributions on production, sale, trade or consumption. . They will not be subject to any type of quantitative measure, with the exception of health, security or police controls applicable in the territories of the Contracting Parties. In the case of internal taxes established or that are established on specific products that are not produced in the importing country, said taxes will be prevented from becoming an import charge that tends to nullify trade. In any case, the importing country must tax, at least in the same amount and for the same concepts, the importation of similar products from third countries. ARTICLE 10 Taking into account that unfair trade detracts from the purposes for which this Agreement is signed, each of the Contracting Parties will avoid, through the legal means at its disposal, the export of merchandise at a price lower than its real cost of production, in order to to avoid distortions in production and trade in the importing country. When one of the Contracting Parties considers that there is evidence of unfair trade, it will submit the case to the consideration of the Permanent Mixed Commission so that the latter, within 30 days following the receipt of the request, decides on the matter, while allowing the importation only through the deposit of a bond for the amount of the customs duties established in the respective general tariffs. If the opinion of the Commission has not been obtained within the aforementioned 30 days, the affected Party may extend the deposit of the bond in any case. In the event that the Permanent Mixed Commission verifies the existence of unfair trade, In the event that the same unfair trade conditions remain, the payment of the tax established in the corresponding tariffs will continue to be required. ARTICLE 11 All payments resulting from commercial transactions carried out between the Contracting Parties will be made in United States dollars and through the Reciprocal Payment and Credit Compensation Agreement established between the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic and the National Bank of Panama. ARTICLE 12 The Contracting Parties shall grant full freedom of transit throughout their territory to merchandise destined for each country. Said transit will not be subject to discrimination or quantitative restriction of any other kind. Transit operations will be carried out through the routes legally authorized for this purpose and subject to the customs laws and regulations applicable to the territories of both Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 13 The Contracting Parties agree to grant each other the facilities available to them for commercial promotion in their respective territories, such as the exchange of missions and commercial delegations, as well as participation in fairs and exhibitions held in the territory of the other Contracting Party. In the same way, they will make effective, through the official institutions to which the attention of this Treaty is concerned, the exchange of information on the prospects offered by the markets of both countries in order to contribute to the strengthening of commercial exchange. The Contracting Parties agree to provide all the necessary help to businessmen who visit the other Contracting Party and the maximum support for the creation of a Dominican-Panamanian Bilateral Business Committee, in order to promote and facilitate commercial relations between the two countries. ARTICLE 14 In order to facilitate trade operations derived from this Agreement, the Contracting Parties will timely establish the necessary mechanisms to achieve full use of financial, transportation and storage facilities, as well as to implement a payment clearing system. ARTICLE 15 When one of the Contracting Parties modifies its Current Monetary System, it will notify the other Party in the most expeditious manner possible. ARTICLE 16 To coordinate the actions that will be carried out in compliance with this Treaty, the Contracting Parties agree to create a Permanent Mixed Commission, made up of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic and the Minister of Commerce and Industry of Panama or their representatives, who will preside over it. , and by the advisers from the public and private sectors that each Contracting Party designates. The decisions of said Commission shall bind the Signatory States. Said Commission will meet alternately in the Dominican Republic and Panama, at least once a year or at the request of one of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 17 The Permanent Mixed Commission will have the following powers: 1. Approve the lists and percentages of the tariffs in force and additional laws of the products to tariff preferences, their additions and their modifications. 2. Examine and approve quotas or import controls and other quantitative measures for the products that are exchanged through the Treaty. 3. Study and resolve problems and conflicts related to the application of this Treaty and unfair trade practices that affect the established exchange regime. 4. Propose to the Contracting Parties: 1. The modification or extension of this Agreement. 2. The approval of the Draft Regulation of this Treaty previously prepared by this Commission. 3. Approval of a Reciprocal Payment and Credit Compensation Agreement. 5. Meet once a year and when called by one of the Contracting Parties. 6. Preparation of the basic documents for the application and development of this Treaty. 7. Set the criteria and standards that will be adopted to determine the origin of the goods. 8. Recommend mechanisms that tend to promote joint investments for the development of new activities of particular interest to both countries. In addition, encourage the adoption of industrial complementarity agreements tending to facilitate and increase reciprocal commercial exchange. 9. Approve within a period of 90 days from the validity of this Treaty, the regulation by which its own organization and operation is regulated. 10. Carry out the functions, works and studies entrusted to it by the Contracting Parties, as well as those derived from this Treaty. ARTICLE 18 The Contracting Parties agree to resolve, within the spirit of this Agreement and in accordance with the provisions of its Regulations, any differences that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of any of its clauses. In the event that an agreement is not reached through the procedure established in the Regulations, the Contracting Parties undertake to name and accept the ruling of an Arbitration Commission. As long as the ruling does not occur, the effects of the matter in divergence will be suspended. ARTICLE 19 This Treaty will be submitted for ratification in accordance with the constitutional procedures established in each of the Contracting Parties and it will enter into force on the date on which the respective ratification instruments are exchanged. ARTICLE 20 This Treaty will have a duration of ten (10) years counted from the day of the exchange of the ratification instruments and will be automatically extended for a period of five (5) years, except in the case that one of the Contracting Parties expresses its desire to not extend it by notifying the other Contracting Party at least six (6) months before the end of the respective period. However, any of the Contracting Parties may denounce it at any time. In this case, the complaint will take effect one year after its presentation. The Contracting Parties may sign additional protocols and agreements that facilitate the execution of this Treaty, which shall enter into force at the time of the Exchange of Notes by their respective Foreign Ministries. ARTICLE 21 The provisions of this Treaty will continue to apply to all transactions entered into during its validity, the effects of which have not been fully fulfilled at the time of expiration of this Agreement. Transitory Article Within a maximum period of sixty (60) calendar days from the signing of this Treaty, the Permanent Mixed Commission must be constituted, in order to comply with the functions assigned to it in Article XVII. The resolutions adopted by the Permanent Mixed Commission will be valid once the treaty has been ratified. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Treaty, in two original copies, in Spanish, both of the same tenor and equally valid, in the City of Santo Domingo de Guzmán, National District, Capital of the Dominican Republic, on the seventeenth (sic) (17) day of the month of July of the year one thousand nine hundred and eighty-five (1985).

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
COMMERCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF PANAMA AND THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ANNEX - LIST OF PRODUCTS APPROVED AND INCLUDED IN THE TREATY The products listed in this annex, which are exchanged under the Treaty, must be backed by Certificates of Origin issued in accordance with the criteria established in Chapter III (including its Annexes) of the Regulations for the Application of the Commercial Agreement between the Republic of Panama and the Dominican Republic. ANNEX I OF CHAPTER III SPECIFIC RULES OF ORIGIN For the correct interpretation of the Specific Rules of Origin, the following general notes of interpretation: 1. Chapter shall mean the first two digits of a tariff code in terms of the Nomenclature of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (Harmonized System); departure, the four first digits of a tariff code in terms of the Harmonized System; subheading, first six digits of a tariff code in terms of the Harmonized System. 2. A change in tariff classification requirement is applicable only to non-originating materials. 3. When a specific rule of origin is defined with the criteria of change of tariff classification, and in its wording except for tariff positions at the level of the chapter, heading or subheading of the Harmonized System, will interpret that the materials corresponding to those tariff items must be originating so that the merchandise qualifies as originating. 4. When a tariff item or subheading is subject to optional specific rules of origin, it will suffice comply with one of them. 5. When a specific rule of origin establishes for a group of headings or subheadings a change from another heading or subheading, such change may be made within or outside the specified group of headings or subheadings in the rule, as the case may be, unless otherwise specified.
