MainText:
AGREEMENT establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey PREAMBLE DETERMINED to establish ever closer bonds between the Turkish people and the peoples brought together in the European Economic Community; RESOLVED to ensure a continuous improvement in living conditions in Turkey and in the European Economic Community through accelerated economic progress and the harmonious expansion of trade, and to reduce the disparity between the Turkish economy and the economies of the Member States of the Community; MINDFUL both of the special problems presented by the development of the Turkish economy and of the need to grant economic aid to Turkey during a given period; RECOGNIZING that the support given by the European Economic Community to the efforts of the Turkish people to improve their standard of living will facilitate the accession of Turkey to the Community at a later date ; RESOLVED to preserve and strengthen peace and liberty by joint pursuit of the ideals underlying the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community; HAVE DECIDED to conclude an Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey in accordance with Article 238 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, and to this end have designated as their Plenipotentiaries: TITLE I PRINCIPLES ARTICLE 1 By this Agreement an Association is established between the European Economic Community and Turkey. ARTICLE 2 1 . The aim of this Agreement is to promote the continuous and balanced strengthening of trade and economic relations between the Parties, while taking full account of the need to ensure an accelerated development of the Turkish economy and to improve the level of employment and the living conditions of the Turkish people . 2 . In order to attain the objectives set out in paragraph 1 , a customs union shall be progressively established in accordance with Article 3 , 4 and 5 . 3 . Association shall comprise : ( a ) a preparatory stage ; ( b ) a transitional stage ; ( c ) a final stage . ARTICLE 3 1 . During the preparatory stage Turkey shall, with aid from the Community, strengthen its economy so as to enable it to fulfil the obligations which will devolve upon it during the transitional and final stages. The detailed rules for this preparatory stage , in particular those for aid from the Community, are set out in the Provisional Protocol and in the Financial Protocol to this Agreement. 2 . The preparatory stage shall last five years, unless it should be extended in accordance with the conditions laid down in the Provisional Protocol. The change-over to the "transitional stage shall be effected in accordance with Article 1 of the Provisional Protocol. ARTICLE 4 1 . During the transitional stage the Contracting Parties shall, on the basis of - mutual -- and balanced obligations: — establish progressively -a customs union between Turkey and the Community ; — align the economic policies of Turkey and the Community - more closely - in order to ensure the proper functioning of the Association and the progress of the joint measures which this requires. 2 . This stage shall last-not more than twelve years, subject -to such exceptions as may be made by mutual agreement. The exceptions must not impede the final establishment of- the customs union within a reasonable period. ARTICLE 5 The final stage shall be based on the customs union and shall entail closer coordination of the economic policies of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 6 To ensure the implementation and the progressive development of the Association, the Contracting Parties shall meet in a Council of Association which shall act within the powers conferred upon it by this Agreement. ARTICLE 7 The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to ensure the fulfilment of the obligations arising from this Agreement. They shall refrain from any measures liable to jeopardize the attainment of the objectives of this Agreement. TITLE II IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TRANSITIONAL STAGE ARTICLE 8 In order to attain the objectives set out in Article 4, the Council of Association shall, before the beginning of the transitional stage and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 1 of the Provisional Protocol, determine the conditions, rules and timetables for the implementation of the provisions relating to the fields covered by- the Treaty establishing the Community which must be considered ; this shall apply in particular to such of those fields as* are mentioned under this Title and to any protective clause which may prove appropriate. ARTICLE 9 The Contracting Parties recognize that within the scope of this Agreement -and without prejudice to any special provisions which may be laid down pursuant to Article 8 , any discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited in accordance with the principle laid down in - Article 7 of the Treaty establishing the Community. Chapter 1 The customs union ARTICLE 10 1 . The customs union provided for in Article 2 ( 2) of this Agreement shall cover all trade in goods. 2. The customs union shall involve : — the prohibition between Member States of the Community and Turkey, of customs duties on imports and exports and of all charges having equivalent effect, quantitative restrictions and all other measures having equivalent effect which are designed to protect national production in a manner contrary to the objectives of this Agreement; — the adoption by Turkey of the Common Customs Tariff of the Community in its trade with third countries, and an approximation to the other Community rules on external trade. Chapter 2 Agriculture ARTICLE 11 1 . The Association shall likewise extend to agriculture and trade in agricultural products, in accordance with special rules which shall take into account the common agricultural policy of the Community. 2. 'Agricultural products' means the products listed in Annex II to the Treaty establishing the Community, as at present supplemented in accordance with Article 38 ( 3 ) of that Treaty. Chapter 3 Other economic provisions ARTICLE 12 The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles 48 , 49 and 50 of the Treaty establishing the Community for the purpose of progressively securing freedom of movement for workers between them. ARTICLE 13 The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles 52 to 56 and Article 58 of the Treaty establishing the Community for the purpose of abolishing restrictions on freedom of establishment between them. ARTICLE 14 The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles 55, 56 and 58 to 65 of the Treaty establishing the Community for the purpose of abolishing restrictions on freedom to provide services between them. ARTICLE 15 The rules and conditions for extension to Turkey of the transport provisions contained in the Treaty establishing the Community, and measures adopted in implementation of those provisions shall be laid down with due regard to the geographical situation of Turkey. ARTICLE 16 The Contracting Parties recognize that the principles laid down in the provisions on competition, taxation and the approximation of laws contained in -Title I of Part III of the Treaty establishing the Community must be made applicable in their relations within the Association. ARTICLE 17 Each State party to this Agreement shall pursue the economic policy needed to ensure the equilibrium of its overall balance of payments and to maintain confidence in its currency, while taking care to ensure a continuous, balanced growth of its economy in conjunction with stable prices. Each State party to this Agreement shall pursue a conjunctural policy, in particular a financial and monetary policy, which furthers these objectives. ARTICLE 18 Each State party to this Agreement shall pursue a policy with regard to rates of exchange which ensures that the objectives of the Association can be attained. ARTICLE 19 The Member States of the Community and Turkey undertake to authorize, in the curency of the country in ; which the creditor or the beneficiary resides, any payments or transfers connected with the movement of goods, services or capital, and any transfers of capital or earnings, to the extent that the movement of goods, services, capital and persons between them has been liberalized pursuant to this Agreement. ARTICLE 20 The Contracting Parties shall consult each other with a view to facilitating movements of capital between Member States of the Community and Turkey which will further the objectives of this Agreement. They shall actively seek all means of promoting the investment in Turkey of capital from countries of the Community which can contribute to Turkish economic development. With respect to arrangements for foreign capital residents of all Member States shall be entitled to all the advantages, in particular as regards currency and taxation, which Turkey accords to any other Member State or to a third country. ARTICLE 21 The Contracting Parties hereby agree to work out a consultation procedure in order ' to ensure coordination of their commercial policies towards third countries and mutual respect for their interests in this field, inter alia in the event of subsequent accession to or association with the Community, by third countries. TITLE III GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 22 1 . In order to attain the objectives of this Agreement the Council of Association shall have the power to take decisions in the cases provided for therein. Each of the Parties shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. The Council of Association may also make appropriate recommendations. 2. The Council of Association shall periodically review the functioning of the Association in the light of the objectives of this Agreement. During the preparatory stage, however, such reviews shall be limited to an exchange of views. Article 22 1 . In order to attain the objectives of this Agreement the Council of Association shall have the power to take decisions in the cases provided for therein. Each of the Parties shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. The Council of Association may also make appropriate recommendations. 2. The Council of Association shall periodically review the functioning of the Association in the light 3 . Once the transitional stage has been embarked on, the Council of Association ' shall adopt appropriate decisions where, in the course of implementation of the Association arrangements, attainment of an objective of this Agreement calls for joint action by the Contracting Parties but the requisite powers are not granted in this Agreement. ARTICLE 23 The Council of Association shall consist of members of the Governments of the Member States and members of the Council and of the Commission of the Community on the one hand and of members of the Turkish Government on the other. The members of the Council of Association may arrange to be represented in accordance with its rules of procedure. The Council of Association shall act unanimously. ARTICLE 24 The office of President of the Council of Association shall be- held for a term of six months by a representative of the Community and a representative of Turkey alternately. The term of office of the first President may be shortened by a decision of the Council of Association. The Council of Association shall adopt its rules of procedure. The Council of Association may decide to set up committees to assist in the performance of its tasks, and in particular a committee to ensure the continuing . cooperation necessary for the proper functioning of this Agreement. The Council of Association shall lay down the terms of reference of these committees. ARTICLE 25 1 . The Contracting Parties may submit to the Council of Association any dispute relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement which concerns the Community, a Member State of the Community, or Turkey. 2 . The Council of Association may settle the dispute by decision ; it may also decide to submit the dispute to the Court of Justice of the European Communities or to any other existing court or tribunal . 3 . Each Party shall be required to take the measures necessary to comply with such decisions. 4. Where the dispute cannot be settled in accordance with paragraphs 2 of this Article, the Council of Association shall determine, in accordance with Article 8 of this Agreement, the detailed rules for arbitration or for any other judicial procedure to which the Contracting Parties may resort during the transitional and final stages of this Agreement. ARTICLE 26 This Agreement shall not apply to products within the province of the European Coal and Steel Community. ARTICLE 27 The Council of Association shall take all appropriate steps to promote the necessary cooperation and contacts between the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and other organs of the Community on the one hand and the Turkish Parliament and the corresponding organs in Turkey on the other. During the preparatory state, however, such contacts shall be limited to relations between the European Parliament and the Turkish Parliament. ARTICLE 28 As soon as the operation of this Agreement has advanced ; far enough to ; justify envisaging . full acceptance by. Turkey of the obligations arising out of the Treaty establishing the Community, the Contracting Parties shall examine the possibility of the accession of Turkey to the Community. ARTICLE 29 1 . This Agreement shall apply to the European territories of the Kingdom of Belgium, of the Federal Republic of Germany, of the French Republic, of the Italian Republic, of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and of the Kingdom of the Netherlands on the one hand and to the territory of the Turkish Republic on the other. 2. The Agreement shall also apply to the French overseas departments so far as concerns those of the fields covered by it which are listed in the first subparagraph of Article 227 ( 2) of the Treaty establishing the Community. The conditions for applying to those territories the provisions of this Agreement relating to other fields shall be decided at a later date by agreement between the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 30 The Protocols annexed to this Agreement by common accord of the Contracting Parties shall form an integral part thereof. ARTICLE 31 This Agreement shall be ratified by the Signatory States in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements, and shall become binding on the Community by a decision of the Council taken in accordance with the Treaty establishing the Community and notified to the Parties to this Agreement. The instruments of ratification and the notifications of conclusion shall be exchanged at Brussels. ARTICLE 32 This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date of exchange of the instruments of ratification and the notification referred to in Article 31. ARTICLE 33 This Agreement is drawn up in two copies in the Dutch, French, German, Italian and Turkish languages, each of these texts being equally authentic.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX agreement establishing an association between the european economic community and turkey ANNEX ( signed at ankara, 12 september 1963 ) ANNEX preamble his majesty the king of the belgians , the president of the federal republic of germany, the president of the french republic, the president of the italian republic, her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg , her majesty the queen of the netherlands, and the council of the european economic community, ... of the one part, and the president of the republic of turkey, of the other part, determined to establish ever closer bonds between the turkish people and the peoples brought together in the european economic community; resolved to ensure a continuous improvement in living conditions in turkey and in the european economic community through accelerated economic progress and the harmonious expansion of trade, and to reduce the disparity between the turkish economy and the econo- mies of the member states of the community ; mindful both of the special problems presented by the development of the turkish economy and of the need to grant economic aid to turkey during a given period ; recognizing that the support given by the european economic community to the efforts of the turkish people to improve their standard of living will facilitate the accession of turkey to the community at a later date ; resolved to preserve and strengthen peace and liberty by joint pursuit of the ideals underlying the treaty establishing the european economic community; have decided to conclude an agreement establishing an association between the european economic community and turkey in accordance with article 238 of the treaty establishing the european economic community, and to this end have designated as their plenipotentiaries : no l 361 /30 official journal of the european communities 31 . 12 . 77 his majesty the king of the belgians : mr paul-henri spaak, deputy prime minister and minister for foreign affairs ; the president of the federal republic of germany : dr. gerhard schroder, minister for foreign affairs ; the president of the french republic : mr maurice couve de murville , minister for foreign affairs ; the president of the italian republic : mr emilio colombo , minister for the treasury ; her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg : mr eugene schaus , vice-president of the government and minister for foreign affairs ; her majesty the queen of the netherlands : mr joseph m. a. h. luns, minister for foreign affairs ; the council of the european economic community : mr joseph m. a. h. luns, president in office of the council of the european economic community and minister for foreign affairs in the netherlands ; the president of the republic of turkey : mr feridun cemal erkin, minister for foreign affairs ; who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed as follows : 31 . 12, 77 official journal of the european communities no l 361 / 31 ANNEX title i ANNEX principles article 1 article 4by this agreement an association is established 1. during the transitional stage the contractingbetween the european economic community and parties shall , on the basis of - mutual and balancedturkey. obligations : ANNEX - establish progressively -a customs union between article 2 turkey and the community ;1. the aim of this agreement is to promote the - align the economic policies of turkey and thecontinuous and balanced strengthening of trade and community - more closely - in order to ensure theeconomic relations between the parties , while taking proper functioning of the association and thefull account of the need to ensure an accelerated progress of the joint measures which this requires .development of the turkish economy and to improvethe level of employment and the living conditions ofthe turkish people . 2. this stage shall last-not more than twelve years , ANNEX subject -to such exceptions as may be made by mutual ANNEX agreement. the exceptions must not impede the final2. in order to attain the objectives set out in establishment of - the customs union within aparagraph 1 , a customs union shall be progressively reasonable period .established in accordance with article 3 , 4 and 5 .3. association shall comprise : article 5( a ) a preparatory stage ; the final stage shall be based on the customs union ANNEX and shall entail closer coordination of the economic( b ) a transitional stage ; policies of the contracting parties .( c ) a final stage . ANNEX article 6 article 3 ANNEX to ensure the implementation and the progressive1. during the preparatory stage turkey shall , with development of the association , the contractingaid from the community, strengthen its economy so parties shall meet in a council of association whichas to enable it to fulfil the obligations which will shall act within the powers conferred upon it by thisdevolve upon it during the transitional and final agreement .stages .the detailed rules for this preparatory stage , inparticular those for aid from the community, are setout in the provisional protocol and in the financial article PROTOCOL to this agreement. ANNEX the contracting parties shall take all appropriate ANNEX measures , whether general or particular, to ensure the2. the preparatory stage shall last five years, fulfilment of the obligations arising from thisunless it should be extended in accordance with the agreement .conditions laid down in the provisional protocol .the change-over to the "transitional stage shall be they shall refrain from any measures liable toeffected in accordance with article 1 of the jeopardize the attainment of the objectives of thisprovisional protocol . agreement . no l 361 /32 otficial journal of the european communities 31 . 12 . 77 ANNEX title ii implementation of the transitional stage article 8 chapter 2in order to attain the objectives set out in article 4, agriculturethe council of association shall , before the beginningof the transitional stage and in accordance writh the article 11procedure laid down in article 1 of the provisional PROTOCOL , determine the conditions , rules and 1. the association shall likewise extend totimetables for the implementation of the provisions agriculture and trade in agricultural products, inrelating to the fields covered by- the treaty accordance with special rules which shall take intoestablishing the community which must be account the common agricultural policy of theconsidered ; this shall apply in particular to such of community .those fields as* are mentioned under this title and toany protective clause which may prove appropriate . ANNEX 2. 'agricultural products' means the products listed ANNEX in annex ii to the treaty establishing the com- article 9 munity, as at present supplemented in accordance ANNEX with article 38 (3 ) of that treaty.the contracting parties recognize that within thescope of this agreement -and without prejudice to anyspecial provisions which may be laid down pursuant chapter 3to article 8 , any discrimination on grounds ofnationality shall be prohibited in accordance with the other economic provisionsprinciple laid down in - article 7 of the treatyestablishing the community. article 12 ANNEX the contracting parties agree to be guided by ANNEX articles 48 , 49 and 50 of the treaty establishing the chapter 1 community for the purpose of progressively securing ANNEX freedom of movement for workers between them . the customs union ANNEX article 13 article 10 ANNEX the contracting parties agree to be guided by ANNEX articles 52 to 56 and article 58 of the treaty1. the customs union provided for in article 2 (2) establishing the community for the purpose ofof this agreement shall cover all trade in goods . abolishing restrictions on freedom of establishment ANNEX between them .2. the customs union shall involve :- the prohibition between member states of the article 14 community and turkey, of customs duties on imports and exports and of all charges having the contracting parties agree to be guided by equivalent effect, quantitative restrictions and all articles 55 , 56 and 58 to 65 of the treaty establishing other measures having equivalent effect which are the community for the purpose of abolishing designed to protect national production in a restrictions on freedom to provide services between manner contrary to the objectives of this them . agreement ;- the adoption by turkey of the common customs article is tariff of the community in its trade with third countries , and an approximation to the other the rules and conditions for extension to turkey of community rules on external trade . the transport provisions contained in the treaty 31 . 12. 77 official journal of the european communities no l 361 /33establishing the community, and measures adopted in ; which the creditor or the beneficiary resides, anyin implementation of those provisions shall be laid payments or transfers connected with the movementdown with due regard to the geographical situation of goods , services or capital, and any transfers ofof turkey. capital or earnings, to the extent that the movement ANNEX of goods, services, capital and persons between them ANNEX has been liberalized pursuant to this agreement. article 16the contracting parties recognize that the principleslaid down in the provisions on competition, taxation article 20and the approximation of laws contained in -title i ofpart iii of the treaty establishing the communitymust be made applicable in their relations within the the contracting parties shall consult each other withassociation . a view to facilitating movements of capital between ANNEX member states of the community and turkey which ANNEX will further the objectives of this agreement. article - 17 ANNEX they shall actively seek all means of promoting theeach state party to this agreement shall pursue the investment in turkey of capital from countries of theeconomic policy needed to ensure the equilibrium of community which can contribute to turkishits overall balance of payments and to maintain economic development.confidence in its currency, while taking care to ensurea continuous, balanced growth of its economy inconjunction with stable prices . with respect to arrangements for foreign capital ANNEX residents of all member states shall be entitled to alleach state party to this agreement shall pursue a the advantages, in particular as regards currency andconjunctural policy, in particular a financial and taxation, which turkey accords to any othermonetary policy, which furthers these objectives . member state or to a third country. article 18 ANNEX article 21each state party to this agreement shall pursue apolicy with regard to rates of exchange which ensuresthat the objectives of the association can be attained . the contracting parties hereby agree to work out a ANNEX consultation procedure in order ' to ensure ANNEX coordination of their commercial policies towards article 19 third countries and mutual respect for their interests ANNEX in this field , inter alia in the event of subsequentthe member states of the community and turkey accession to or association with the community, byundertake to authorize, in the curency of the country third countries . ANNEX title 111 ANNEX general and final provisions article 22 of the objectives of this agreement. during the ANNEX preparatory stage, however, such reviews shall be1. in order to attain the objectives of this limited to an exchange of views .agreement the council of association shall have thepower to take decisions in the cases provided fortherein . each of the parties shall take the measures 3. once the transitional stage has been embarkednecessary to implement the decisions taken . the on, the council of association ' shall adoptcouncil of association may also make appropriate appropriate decisions where, in the course ofrecommendations . implementation of the association arrangements, ANNEX attainment of an objective of this agreement calls for2. the council of association shall periodically joint action by the contracting parties but thereview the functioning of the association in the light requisite powers are not granted in this agreement. no l 361 /34 official journal of the european communities 31.-12 . 77 article 23 for arbitration or for any other judicial procedure to ANNEX which the contracting parties may resort during thethe council of association shall consist of members transitional and final stages of this agreement.of the governments of the member states andmembers of the council and of the commission of ANNEX article 26the community on the one hand and of members ofthe turkish government on the other . this agreement shall not apply to products within ANNEX the province of the european coal and steelthe members of the council of association may community.arrange to be represented in accordance with its rulesof procedure. article 27the council of association shall act unanimously. the council of association shall take all appropriate ANNEX steps to promote the necessary cooperation and ANNEX contacts between the european parliament, the article 24 economic and social committee and other organs of ANNEX the community on the one hand and the turkishthe office of president of the council of association parliament and the corresponding organs in turkey ANNEX on the other.shall be- held for a term of six months by arepresentative of the community and a representativeof turkey alternately. the term of office of the first during the preparatory state, however, such contactspresident may be shortened by a decision of the shall be limited to relations between the europeancouncil of association . parliament and the turkish parliament.the council of association shall adopt its rules of article 28procedure. ANNEX as soon as the operation of this agreement hasthe council of association may decide to set up advanced ; far enough to ; justify envisaging . fullcommittees to assist in the performance of its tasks, acceptance by . turkey of the obligations arising outand in particular a committee to ensure the of the treaty establishing the community, thecontinuing . cooperation necessary for the proper contracting parties shall examine the possibility offunctioning of this agreement. the accession of turkey to the community.the council of association shall lay down the terms article 29of reference of these committees . ANNEX 1 . this agreement shall apply to the european ANNEX territories of the kingdom of belgium , of the federal article 25 republic of germany, of the french republic, of the ANNEX italian republic, of the grand duchy of luxembourg ANNEX and of the kingdom of the netherlands on the one1 . the contracting parties may submit to the hand and to the territory of the turkish republic oncouncil of association any dispute relating to the the other .application or interpretation of this agreement whichconcerns the community, a member state of the 2. the agreement shall also apply to the frenchcommunity, or turkey. overseas departments so far as concerns those of the ANNEX fields covered by it which are listed in the first2 . the council of association may settle the subparagraph of article 227 (2) of the treatydispute by decision ; it may also decide to submit the establishing the community.dispute to the court of justice of the europeancommunities or to any other existing court or the conditions for applying to those territories thetribunal . provisions of this agreement relating to other fields ANNEX shall be decided at a later date by agreement between3. each party shall be required to take the the contracting parties .measures necessary to comply with such decisions . ANNEX article 304. where the dispute cannot be settled inaccordance with paragraphs 2 of this article, the the protocols annexed to this agreement bycouncil of association shall determine, in accordance common accord of the contracting parties shall formwith article 8 of this agreement, the detailed rules an integral part thereof. 31 . 12. 77 official journal of the european communities no l 361 /35 article 31 article 32this agreement shall be ratified by the signatory this agreement shall enter into force on the first daystates in accordance with their respective of the second month following the date of exchangeconstitutional requirements, and shall become of the instruments of ratification and the notificationbinding on the community by a decision of the referred to in article 31 .council taken in accordance with the treatyestablishing the community and notified to theparties to this agreement. article 33 ANNEX this agreement is drawn up in two copies in thethe instruments of ratification and the notifications dutch , french, german, italian and turkishof conclusion shall be exchanged at brussels. languages, each of these texts being equally authentic. ANNEX protocol no 1 ANNEX provisional protocol the contracting parties, recognizing the importance to the turkish economy, particularly in the preparatory stage, of exports of tobacco, dried grapes, dried figs and hazelnuts ; desiring to adopt the provisional protocol provided for in article 3 of the agreement of association , have agreed as follows : article 1 or until the end of the tenth year, whichever is the ANNEX earlier .1. four years after the entry into force of thisagreement, the council of association shall considerwhether, taking into account the economic situation if, however, the additional protocol has been adoptedof turkey, it is able to lay down , in the form of an but has not entered into force by the end of the tenthadditional protocol, the provisions relating to the year, this provisional protocol shall be extended forconditions , detailed rules and timetables for not more than one year.implementing the transitional stage referred to in ARTICLE 4 of the agreement. ANNEX should the additional protocol not have beenthe additional protocol shall be signed by the adopted by the end of the ninth year, the council ofcontracting parties and shall enter into force after association shall decide on the arrangements to becompletion of the respective constitutional applied in respect of the preparatory stage from theprocedures . end of the tenth year.2. if the additional protocol has not been adoptedby the end of the fifth year, the procedure laid downin paragraph 1 shall be set in motion again after a article 2period which shall be fixed by the council ofassociation and which shall not exceed three years. from the date of the entry into force of this protocol, ANNEX the member states of the community shall open the3. the provisions of this protocol shall continue to following annual tariff quotas for imports originatingapply until the additional protocol enters into force in and coming from turkey : no l 361 /36 official journal of the european communities 31 . 12 . 77( a ) 24.01 - unmanufactured tobacco : tobacco if this provisional protocol should still be in refuse force at the date when the national rates of duty ANNEX of member states are finally aligned on the belgo-luxembourg economic common customs tariff, the community shall union 1 250 metric tons adopt, for dried figs , the tariff measures necessary federal republic of germany 6 600 metric tons ANNEX to ensure that turkey retains commercial ANNEX advantages equivalent to those which it has france ^ 2 550 metric tons under the preceding paragraph, taking into ANNEX account the provisions of article 3 . italy 1 500 metric tons netherlands 600 metric tons ANNEX ( d) ex 08.05 - nuts, fresh, or dried, shelled or not : ANNEX hazelnuts each member state shall apply to products imported under these tariff quotas the customs belgo-luxembourg economic duty which it applies to imports of like products union 540 metric tons within the framework of the agreement of association signed by the community on 9 july federal republic of germany 14 500 metric tons 1961 . france 1 250 metric tons ANNEX netherlands 710 metric tons( b ) ex 08.04 - dried grapes (in containers of a net content not exceeding 15 kg) each member state of the community , shall belgo-luxembourg economic apply an ad valorem customs duty of 2-5 % to union 3 250 metric tons products imported under this tariff quota . federal republic of germany 9 750 metric tons furthermore, on the entry into force of this france 2 800 metric tons agreement, the member states of the ANNEX community shall abolish all intra-community italy 7 700 metric tons customs duties on this product and shall apply ANNEX the common customs tariff in its entirety. netherlands 6 500 metric tons each member state shall apply to products article 3 imported under these tariff quotas the customs duty which it applies to imports of like products within ; the framework of the agreement of from the date of the final alignment of the national association signed by the community on 9 july duties applied by member states of the community 1961 . to products mentioned in article 2 with those of the ANNEX common customs tariff, the community shall each ANNEX year open tariff quotas in favour of turkey equal to( c ) ex 08.03 - dried figs (in containers of a net the total of the national quotas open at the date of content not exceeding 15 kg) that final alignment. this procedure shall be ANNEX implemented without prejudice to any decisions belgo-luxembourg economic which may have been taken by the council of union 840 metric tons association pursuant to article 4 in respect of the federal republic of germany 5 000 metric tons following calendar year. france 7 000 metric tons as regards hazelnuts, however, this procedure shall netherlands 160 metric tons not be implemented until the national duties of ANNEX member states of the community for all the three ANNEX other products have been brought into line with in the case of dried figs imported under these those of the common customs tariff. tariff quotas each member state shall, pending the final alignment of the national rates of duty of the member states of the community on those article 4 of the common customs tariff, apply a customs duty for dried figs equal to the basic duty within the meaning of article 14 ( 1 ) of the treaty from the second year following the entry into force establishing the community, less 'half the of this agreement, the council of association may reduction of duty which member states of the decide to increase the tariff quotas referred to in community allow to one another. articles 2 and 3 . unless the council of association 31 . 12 . 77 official journal of the european communities no l 361 / 37should decide otherwise, these increases shall remain ensure- that turkey retains export openingsin force. any increase shall take effect only from the equivalent to those which it has under this protocol ,beginning of the next calendar year. taking into account - the arrangements laid down for ANNEX that common agricultural policy. article 5 ANNEX article 8if this agreement does not enter into force at thebeginning of a calendar year, member states of the if the community should open tariff quotas forcommunity shall , for the period from the date of products mentioned in article 2 of this protocol,entry into force of this agreement until the beginning turkey shall not, as regards the rates of customs dutyof the next calendar year, open tariff quotas of one chargeable within the framework of those tarifftwelfth of the tonnages mentioned in article 2 for quotas, be treated less favourably than a countryeach month between the date of entry into force of which is not party to this agreement.this agreement and the beginning of the nextcalendar year. ANNEX article 9from the date of entry into force of this agreement,however, the council of association may decide to turkey shall endeavour to extend to all memberincrease the tariff quotas opened pursuant to the states of the community the most favourablepreceding paragraph so as to take into account the treatment which it grants to one or more of them .seasonal nature of exports of the products inquestion . ANNEX article 10 article 6 ANNEX from the beginning of the preparatory stage eachat the end of the third year after the entry into force contracting party may bring before the council ofof this agreement, the council of association may association any difficulties regarding the right oftake appropriate measures to promote the disposal establishment, the provision of services, transport oron the community market of products other than competition . where necessary, the council ofthose mentioned in article 2 . association may put forward to the contracting ANNEX parties any appropriate recommendations for the ANNEX solution of such difficulties . article 7once a common agricultural policy has been article 11introduced for tobacco , hazelnuts or dried figs, thecommunity shall take any measures necessary to this protocol shall be annexed to the agreement. ANNEX protocol no 2 ANNEX financial protocol the contracting parties , desiring to promote the accelerated development of the turkish economy in furtherance of the objectives of the agreement of association, have agreed as follows : no l 361 /38 official journal of the european communities 31 . 12 . 77 article 1 tendering procedures . participation in such ' public ANNEX invitations to tender or other tendering proceduresrequests for the financing of investment projects shall be open on equal terms to all natural and legalwhich will serve to increase the productivity of the persons who are nationals of turkey or of memberturkish economy and further the objectives of the states of the community.agreement of association, and which are part of theturkish development plan, may be submitted by theturkish state and by turkish undertakings to the 2. loans may be used to cover expenditure oneuropean investment bank, which shall inform them imports or domestic expenditure, _ where suchof the action taken thereon . expenditure is necessary: for carrying out approved ANNEX investment projects . article 2 ANNEX 3. the bank shall ensure that the funds are used in ANNEX the most judicious manner and in accordance withprojects for which requests are approved shall be the objectives of this agreement.financed by loans. these loans may be contracted upto a total of 175 million units of account, which maybe committed in the five years following the entryinto force of this agreement. article 6 article 3 turkey undertakes to allow recipients of these loans ANNEX to obtain the currency necessary for the repayment of ANNEX the loans and of interest thereon .requests for financing submitted by turkishundertakings shall not be approved without theagreement of the turkish government. ANNEX article 7 article 4 ANNEX assistance provided under this protocol for carrying1. loans shall be granted on the basis of the out certain projects may take the form : ofeconomic features of the . projects which they are to participation in . financing operations in which, infinance . particular, third countries, international finance ANNEX organizations or credit and development authorities2. loans, especially = those for investment projects and institutions of turkey or of member states of ANNEX the community-may be concerned .the return on which is indirect or long term, may bemade on special terms such as reduced rates ofinterest, extended repayment periods, interest-freeperiods and, where appropriate, any other special ANNEX article 8repayment terms which mgy facilitate the servicing ofsuch loans by turkey . ANNEX aid to turkish economic and social development3. any loan granted to an undertaking or to an under the conditions set out in this agreement and inauthority other than the turkish state shall be this protocol shall be supplementary to thesubject to a guarantee from the turkish state. endeavours of the turkish state . article 5 ANNEX article 91. the bank may make the granting of these loanssubject to public invitation to tender or other this protocol shall be annexed to this agreement. 31 . 12 . 77 official journal of the european communities no l 361 / 39 in : witness whereof, the undersigned plenipotentiaries have signed this agreement. done at ankara this twelfth day of september in the year one- thousand nine hundred and sixty-three. for his majesty the king of the belgians, for the president of the federal republic of germany, for the president of the french republic* for the president of the italian republic, for. her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg, for her majesty the queen of the netherlands . no l 361 /40- official journal of the european communities 31 . 12 . 77 ANNEX final act the plenipotentiaries of his majesty the king of the belgians, the president of the federal republic of germany, the president of the french republic, the president of the italian republic, her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg, her majesty the queen of the netherlands, and the council of the european economic community, of the one part, and the president of the republic of turkey, of the other part, ANNEX * meeting at ankara, on the twelfth day of september in the year one thousand nine hundred and sixty-three, for the signature of the agreement establishing an association between the european economic community and turkey, have adopted the following texts : agreement establishing an association between the european economic community and turkey and the protocol listed below : protocol no 1 : provisional protocol protocol no 2 : financial protocol the plenipotentiaries have furthermore : - adopted the declarations which are listed below and annexed to this act (annex i): 1 . declaration of intent on dried grapes, in connection with article 2 of the provisional protocol , 2 . interpretative declaration on the value of the unit of account referred to in article 2 of the financial protocol, 3 . interpretative declaration on the definition of ' contracting parties' used in the agreement of association, 31 . 12 . 77 official journal of the european communities no l 361 /41 - and taken note of the declarations of the government of the federal republic of germany which are listed below and annexed to this act (annex ii) : 1 . declaration on the definition of the expression ' german national', 2. declaration on the application of the agreement to berlin . the plenipotentiaries have agreed that the declarations annexed to this act shall be subjected, in the same manner as, for the agreement establishing an association between the european economic community and turkey, to any procedures that may be necessary to ensure their validity . in witness whereof, the undersigned plenipotentiaries have signed this final act. done at ankara, on the twelfth day of september in the year one thousand nine hundred and sixty-three. for his majesty the king of the belgians, for the president of the federal republic of germany, for the president of the french republic, for the president of the italian republic, for her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg, for her majesty the queen of the netherlands. no l 361 /42 official journal of the european communities 31 . 12 . 77- declaration of intention concerning dried grapes with reference to article 2 of the ANNEX provisional protocol the community declares that it does not envisage the establishment of a common organization of the market in dried grapes . interpretative declaration on the value of the unit of account in the context of article 2 ANNEX of the financial protocol the contracting parties declare that : 1 . the value of the unit of account used to express the amount mentioned in article 2 of the financial protocol shall be 0-88867088 grammes of fine gold . 2. the parity of the currency of a member state of the community in relation to the unit of account defined in paragraph 1 shall be the relation between the weight of fine gold contained in the unit of account and the weight of fine gold corresponding to the par value of that currency communicated to the international monetary fund. if no par value has been communicated, or if exchange rates differing from the par value by a margin exceeding that authorized by the international monetary fund are applied to current payments, the weight of fine gold corresponding to the parity of the currency shall be calculated on the basis of the exchange rate for a currency directly or indirectly expressed in and convertible into gold which is applied in the member state to current payments, on the day of the calculation, and on the basis of the par value communicated to the international monetary fund for that con- vertible currency. 3 . the unit of account defined in paragraph 1 shall remain unchanged throughout the period in which the financial protocol is in force. if, however, before the end of that period a uniform proportionate change in the par values of all currencies in relation to gold should be decided by the international monetary fund under article 4, section 7, of its articles of agreement, the weight of fine gold contained in the unit of account shall alter in inverse ratio to that change. if one or more member states do not apply the decision taken by the international monetary fund as referred to in the preceding subparagraph, the weight of fine gold contained in the unit of account shall alter in inverse ratio to the change decided by the international monetary fund . the council of the european com- munities shall, however, examine the situation thus created and shall take the necessary measures, acting by a qualified majority, after receiving a proposal from the commission and the opinion of the monetarv committee . 31 . 12 . 77 official journal of the european communities no l 361 /43 interpretative declaration on the definition of the expression 'contracting parties' used ANNEX in the agreement of association the contracting parties agree that for the purposes of the agreement of association ' contracting parties' means the community and the member states or alternatively the member states alone or the community alone on the one hand, and the turkish republic on the other. the meaning to be given to this expression in each particular case is to be deduced from the context of the agreement and from the corresponding provisions of the treaty establishing the community. in certain circumstances ' con- tracting parties' may ; during the transitional period of the treaty establishing the community, mean the member states, and after the expiry of that period mean the community. declarations by the government of the federal republic of germany 1 . declaration on the definition of the expression 'german national' all germans as defined in the basic law for the federal republic of germany shall be considered nationals of the federal republic of germany. 2, declaration on the application of the agreement to berlin the agreement of association shall apply equally to land berlin unless the govern- ment of the federal republic of germany makes a declaration to the contrary to the other contracting parties within the three months following the entry into force of the agreement.
