MainText:
The Plenipotentiaries of the Republic of Guatemala and the Republic of Venezuela, duly authorized by their respective Governments, according to powers presented in good and due form. WHEREAS the Republic of Venezuela is a signatory to the 1980 Montevideo Treaty; Articles 7, 8, and 9 of Section III refer to Partial Scope Agreements and Article 25 of the same instrument authorizes the conclusion of said Agreements with other countries not members of ALADI and economic integration areas of America Latin; as well as the provisions of the Resolution of the Council of Ministers that establishes the general rules for these Agreements: That the Republic of Guatemala is an integral part of the Central American Common Market and that the execution of this Partial Scope Agreement does not contravene the commitments acquired by virtue of the current regional Agreements; That in the results of the 11th. Meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Latin American Integration Association, the recommendations of the Quito Action Plan, approved during that Latin American Economic Conference on economic cooperation, expansion and diversification of trade and the elimination of non-tariff restrictions, were addressed. They agree: CHAPTER I Object of the Agreement ARTICLE 1 The purpose of this Agreement, taking into account the degree of economic development of both Parties, is the granting of tariff preferences and the elimination or reduction of non-tariff restrictions that make it possible to strengthen and stimulate their trade flows in a manner compatible with their respective economic policies, and contribute to the consolidation of the Latin American integration process. CHAPTER II Definitions ARTICLE 2 In this Agreement and its respective annexes, which form an integral part thereof: 2.1 Taxes shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects that affect imports. Similar rates and surcharges will not be included in this concept when they correspond to the approximate cost of the services rendered. 2.2 Preferences will be understood as the advantages granted by the signatory countries, consisting of percentage reductions whose magnitudes are agreed upon in this Agreement and will be applied on the level of the National Tariff. 2.3 Restrictions shall be understood as any non-tariff measure, of any nature, through which a signatory country unilaterally prevents or hinders imports from another signatory country. CHAPTER III Tariff Preferences and Non-Tariff Restrictions ARTICLE 3 The signatory countries agree, within the spirit of Article 1, to reduce or eliminate taxes and other restrictions applied to the importation of the products included in this Agreement and its respective Annexes in the terms, scope and modalities established therein. Tariff preferences ARTICLE 4 The signatory countries agree to grant. on the current taxes, the tariff preferences indicated for the products included in the Annexes. ARTICLE 5 The Annexes that are part of this Agreement record the preferences agreed by the signatory countries for the importation of the negotiated products, originating and coming from their respective territories, classified in accordance with their Tariff Nomenclature. ARTICLE 6 The signatory countries will refrain from modifying the tariff preferences registered in said Annexes, when this means a less favorable situation than the one existing at the entry into force of this Agreement. ARTICLE 7 In the cases in which validity periods have been established for the tariff preferences, once these have expired, the provisions of the respective national legislations will be applied. Non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 8 The signatory countries may negotiate existing non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 9 The annexes record the terms of the conditions agreed upon in the negotiation of non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 10 The signatory countries will refrain from applying new non-tariff restrictions to the import of negotiated products, or from making those declared more restrictive, except for measures aimed at: a) Protection of public morality; b) Application of safety laws and regulations; c) Regulation of imports or exports of arms, ammunition and other war materials and in exceptional circumstances, of all other military articles; d) Protection of life and health of people, animals and plants; e) Import and export of metallic gold and silver; f) Protection of the national patrimony of artistic, historical and archaeological value; Y g) Export, use and consumption of nuclear materials, radioactive products and any other material usable in the development or use of nuclear energy. ARTICLE 11 The signatory countries will periodically review the non-tariff restrictions applied under the terms of this Agreement in order to proceed by mutual agreement to their elimination or reduction. Preservation of the Agreed Preferences ARTICLE 12 The signatory countries undertake to maintain the application of the agreed percentage preference regardless of the level of their current tariff for third countries. In the event that one of them raises or lowers its tariff for third countries, it will proceed immediately to adjust the tax for the importation of the negotiated products from the other signatory countries, in order to maintain the agreed percentage preference. ARTICLE 13 If a signatory country grants a developing country that is not a member of ALADI a tariff or non-tariff preference higher than that agreed with the other signatory country in a way that affects it, the preference will be immediately readjusted in order to maintain what was agreed ARTICLE 14 The signatory countries agree that the tariff preferences agreed in this Agreement do not mean consolidation of tariffs against third countries. CHAPTER IV Origin Regime ARTICLE 15 The benefits derived from the preferences granted in this Agreement will be applied exclusively to products originating in and coming from the territory of the signatory countries in accordance with the following provisions. ARTICLE 16 The following will be considered originating from the signatory countries: a) Those goods that have been totally produced within their territories using inputs originating from them. b) Those goods that belong to the animal, vegetable or mineral kingdom and have been extracted, harvested, collected, or have been born or cultivated in the territory of the signatory countries or in their territorial waters. c) Those goods made with inputs from third countries, when these have undergone substantial transformation in the territory of the signatory countries and as long as the final product is classified in a different four-digit position in the Tariff Nomenclature of the exporting country. However, when such processes consist exclusively of simple assembly, packaging, separation, selection, classification, brands or other equivalents, such goods will not be considered originating. d) Those goods assembled in any of the signatory countries that use inputs imported from third countries, when the CIF value of the latter is less than 50% of the FOB value of the former. e) Those goods for which either of the parties uses in their production inputs originating from the other party and/or from Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua. ARTICLE 17 The signatory countries may adopt by common agreement origin requirements that complement those established in the previous numeral. ARTICLE 18 The signatory countries may agree on specific origin requirements for those products that so require, in order to adapt them to their productive structures and those commitments assumed with other countries. ARTICLE 19 For the purposes of determining the origin of the products exchanged within the framework of this Agreement, the parties agree to adopt the origin regime established in all relevant Resolutions in force in the Latin American Integration Association. ARTICLE 20 In the documentation corresponding to the imports of the negotiated products, there must be a declaration that accredits the fulfillment of the origin requirements established in this Agreement. Said declaration must be issued by the final producer or exporter in question, certified by an official body or authorized entity, or that works with legal authorization from the exporting country. ARTICLE 21 The signatory countries will inform each other of the respective government entities that will authorize the declarations of origin and of the signatures and stamps respectively authorized. Any modification of these conditions, signatures and seals, must be communicated within thirty days following the modification. ARTICLE 22 In case of doubt about the authenticity of the certificates of origin or presumption of non-compliance with the origin requirements declared in accordance with this Agreement, the importing country may request the corresponding additional tests and adopt the measures it considers necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest, but without stopping the processing of imports of the product or products in question. The additional tests that are required may be provided by the final producer or by the exporter, as appropriate, through the competent authorities of their country, which will send them the information resulting from the verifications they carry out on a confidential basis. ARTICLE 23 In all cases, the standard form for the qualification of origin that appears in the Annexes will be used. CHAPTER V Saving clause ARTICLE 24 The Safeguard clauses will only be applicable one year after the entry into force of the tariff preferences in question or their last revision. ARTICLE 25 The signatory countries of this Agreement may temporarily impose restrictions on the import of negotiated products, when imports occur in quantities or under such conditions that cause or threaten to cause serious damage. It will be considered that there are serious damages whenever imports of the negotiated product or products occur, in amounts or values such that they cause or threaten to cause a reduction in the national productive activity, measured by the employment index of the sector in question and by the relative drop in its production for the domestic market compared to the product imported under the preferences granted. ARTICLE 26 The signatory countries may extend to the importation of negotiated products, temporarily and in a non-discriminatory manner, the general measures that they have adopted in order to correct the imbalances in their Balance of Payments. In the application of the safeguard clause for reasons of Balance of Payments, the different degrees of economic development will be taken into account, for which purpose the necessary consultations will be carried out. In said consultations, the amount of the commercial exchange of the products negotiated in this Agreement will be taken into account. ARTICLE 27 Said restrictions may be adopted, in cases of emergency, unilaterally for a period of one year, upon expiration of which the interested countries will hold consultations in order to achieve definitive solutions if their application were to be extended for more than one year. If the causes that gave rise to its application are overcome before the expiration of the previous term, the country invoking the clause will immediately notify the other signatory country. ARTICLE 28 The safeguard clauses adopted unilaterally must be immediately communicated to the affected country within a period of 72 hours. Said communication must specify the restrictive measures adopted, as well as the grounds that determined their adoption. The unilateral adoption of a safeguard clause commits the importing country to make efforts to maintain an import quota subject to the agreed preferences. ARTICLE 29 The consultations referred to in article 27 must be made to the directly affected country as a prerequisite for obtaining the extension. In its consultation, the importing country must present information that allows for an exhaustive analysis of the situation that motivates it, fundamentally of the imports that cause or threaten to cause serious damage to its national production, indicating the origin and provenance of the same. By agreement, the period during which the adopted measures that have been agreed upon will continue to be applied. ARTICLE 30 The measures adopted under the safeguard clauses will expire at the expiration of the term agreed in accordance with the preceding paragraph. If at the expiration of the extension period the causes that led to the adoption of safeguard clauses persist, the importing country must initiate the procedures related to negotiation or withdrawal of the preferences granted to the affected products. For these purposes, you will have a period of thirty (30) days from the aforementioned expiration, maintaining the safeguard clauses until their solution. ARTICLE 31 The previous measures in the previous articles will not be applied to the goods already shipped abroad on the date of their communication. Neither will it be applied to those goods whose bills of lading or air waybills are dated on or before the effective date of the adoption of said measures. Likewise, those products whose tariff preferences have been agreed with quota conditions or with validity less than the period foreseen for the revision of the Agreement will be exempted from the application of the measures provided for in said provisions. CHAPTER VI Differential Treatments ARTICLE 32 In this Agreement, differential treatment is understood as the application of a principle of community solidarity that allows the equitable use of benefits, taking into account the same economic development of the countries, especially those with less relative economic development, for take advantage of integration stimuli. ARTICLE 33 If any of the signatory countries grant an equal or greater tariff preference, on one of the products negotiated in this Agreement, to another non-signatory country with a higher degree of development than the country receiving the preference, it will be adjusted to favor of the signatory country, in such a way as to maintain a differential margin with respect to the country with the least degree of development that preserves the effectiveness of the preference. The magnitude of said preferential margin will be agreed through negotiations between the signatory countries, which will begin within thirty (30) days from the date of the claim by the affected country and will be concluded within sixty (60) days of said date. date. Differential treatment may be reinstated, indistinctly, through negotiation on any other element of the Agreement. ARTICLE 34 If a more favorable treatment is granted to an ALADI member country of the same development category as the preference beneficiary, negotiations will be held between the signatory countries to grant the beneficiary an equivalent treatment within the terms established in Article 34. previous article. ARTICLE 35 If no agreement is reached in the negotiations provided for in the previous articles, the signatory countries will proceed to review this Agreement. CHAPTER VII Withdrawal of Preferences ARTICLE 36 During the validity of this Agreement, the withdrawal of agreed tariff and non-tariff preferences shall not proceed, except as provided in the previous articles. ARTICLE 37 The exclusion of a preference that may occur as a consequence of the negotiations for the revision of this Agreement does not constitute withdrawal. Neither does the elimination of the preferences agreed to term constitute withdrawal, if the renewal has not been carried out at the expiration of the respective terms of validity. CHAPTER VIII Accession ARTICLE 38 This Agreement will be open to the accession of any Latin American country after negotiation. ARTICLE 39 The accession will be formalized, once the terms of the same have been negotiated between the signatory countries and the adhering country, through the signing of a legal instrument of the same nature as the present one. For the purposes of this Agreement and of the additional legal instruments that are signed, the signatory country will be understood as the admitted adherent. CHAPTER IX Validity ARTICLE 40 This Agreement will enter into force once the legal provisions established in the respective laws of the signatory countries are fulfilled. ARTICLE 41 This Agreement will have a duration of three (3) years, automatically extendable for equal periods, unless expressly notified to the contrary by one of the signatory countries six (6) months before its expiration. CHAPTER X Revision ARTICLE 42 Every year from the validity of this Agreement and during the course of the last month, the signatory countries will carry out a joint assessment of its progress, in order to evaluate the results obtained, making them compatible with the objectives set and introducing the necessary adjustments. for such purposes. ARTICLE 43 Without prejudice to what is established in the previous article, at the request of the party and at any time, the signatory countries of this Agreement may make the adjustments they deem appropriate, considering, among others, the modification of the lists of products, the establishment of new preferences and, in general, of any aspect that contributes to its better functioning and development. CHAPTER XI Complaint ARTICLE 44 Any of the signatory countries of this Agreement may denounce it after one year of their participation in it. For this purpose, it must communicate its decision to the other signatory countries at least 60 days in advance. Once the denunciation has been formalized, the rights acquired and obligations contracted under this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country, except those referring to preferences received or granted, which will continue in force for a term of one year from the date of the deposit of the instrument of denunciation. CHAPTER XII Agreement Administration ARTICLE 45 For the administration and in order to achieve the best functioning of this Agreement, the signatory countries agree to constitute a Mixed Commission made up of government representatives from both countries. ARTICLE 46 The Commission referred to in the previous article will meet as many times as necessary and will have the following attributions, among others: 1. Propose to the signatory countries the inclusion of new products or the granting of greater preferences on the negotiated products. 2. Formulate to the Governments of the signatory countries the recommendations it deems appropriate to resolve the differences that may arise from the interpretation and application of this Agreement. 3. Proceed in accordance with the provisions of the articles, regarding the review of the products granted. 4. Analyze the origin requirements and other rules established in this Agreement. 5. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. 6. Submit to the Governments of the signatory countries a periodic report on the evaluation and operation of this Agreement. 7. Any other attribution that the parties consider necessary and that results from the application of this Agreement. CHAPTER XIII Commercial Promotion ARTICLE 47 In order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement in the most efficient way, the Parties agree to grant each other the greatest possible facilities for commercial promotion in their respective territories, such as the exchange of missions and commercial delegations, as well as participation in fairs and exhibitions held in the territory of the other signatory party. Similarly, both countries will promote business meetings in order to promote and facilitate trade relations between the two countries. Through their competent official institutions, they will make effective the exchange of information on the perspectives offered by the markets of the Parties, in order to strengthen commercial exchange. CHAPTER XIV Final Provisions ARTICLE 48 Modifications to this Agreement must be formalized by signing Additional Protocols. ARTICLE 49 The commitments derived from the revisions and adjustments in the annexes of this Agreement will be made through the exchange of notes from the respective administrative institutions, following the opinion of the Mixed Commission. ARTICLE 50 With the purpose of establishing a direct information channel that facilitates the application and better achievement of the objectives of this Agreement, the Governments of the signatory countries will name a contact body, so that it permanently attends to the consultations of any of the parties and administer the provisions of this Agreement. ARTICLE 51 The tariff preferences granted by the Member Countries of the Latin American Integration Association in this Agreement, will be automatically extended without the granting of compensation, to Bolivia, Ecuador and Paraguay, regardless of negotiation or adhesion to it. ARTICLE 52 Guatemala will inform the Permanent Secretariat of the General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration about the execution and operation of this Agreement, and the modifications to it. Done in Guatemala on the thirtieth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and eighty-five. (Signed) For the Government of the Republic of Venezuela: Germán Nava Carrillo, General Director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; For the Government of the Republic of Guatemala: Fernando Andrade Díaz-Durán, Minister of Foreign Affairs.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
