MainText:
The Plenipotentiaries of the Republic of Honduras and the Republic of Venezuela, duly authorized by their respective Governments, according to powers presented in good and due form. WHEREAS the Republic of Venezuela is a signatory to the 1980 Montevideo Treaty; Articles 7, 8 and 9 of Section III refer to partial scope agreements and Article 25 of the same instrument authorizes the signing of such agreements with other countries not members of ALADI and economic integration areas of Latin America ; as well as the provisions of Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers that establishes the general rules for these agreements; Y That the Republic of Honduras, based on article 21 of its Constitution and, on article No. 3 of Decree No. 97 of December 31, 1970, can sign trade agreements with countries of the Central American area and the rest of the world, AGREE: CHAPTER I Objective of the Agreement ARTICLE 1.- The purpose of this Agreement is, taking into account the degree of economic development of both parties, the granting of tariff preferences and the elimination or reduction of non-tariff restrictions, which allow for the strengthening and revitalization of their trade flows in a compatible manner. with their respective economic policies and contribute to the consolidation of the integration process in Latin America. CHAPTER II . Definitions ARTICLE 2.- In this Agreement and its respective annexes that form an integral part of it. 2.1 Taxes shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether of a fiscal, monetary or exchange nature, that affect imports. Unless otherwise decided by the signatory countries for the purposes of their negotiation, similar rates and surcharges will not be included in this concept when they respond to the approximate cost of the services rendered. 2.2Tariff preferences shall be understood as the advantages granted to the signatory countries, consisting of percentage reductions whose magnitudes are agreed upon in this Agreement and shall be applied on the level of the national tariff. 2.3 Non-tariff restrictions shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate or of any nature, through which a signatory country prevents or hinders its imports by unilateral decision. CHAPTER III Tariff preferences and non-tariff restrictions ARTICLE 3.- The signatory countries agree, within the spirit of Article 1, to reduce or eliminate taxes and other restrictions applied to the importation of the products included in this Agreement and its respective Annexes in the terms, scope and modalities established therein. . Tariff preferences ARTICLE 4.- The signatory countries agree to grant each other, on the current taxes, the tariff preferences indicated for the products included in the Annexes. ARTICLE 5.-The Annexes that are part of this Agreement record the preferences agreed by the signatory countries for the importation of negotiated products, originating in and coming from their respective territories, classified in accordance with their national tariff nomenclature. ARTICLE 6.- The signatory countries will refrain from modifying the tariff preferences registered in said annexes, when this means a less favorable situation than the one existing at the entry into force of this Agreement. ARTICLE 7.- In the cases in which validity periods have been established for the tariff preferences, once these have ended, what is established in the respective national legislations will be applied. Non-tariff restrictions ARTICLE 8.- The signatory countries may negotiate non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 9.- The annexes record the terms of the conditions agreed upon in the negotiation of non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 10.- The signatory countries will refrain from applying non-tariff restrictions to the importation of negotiated products, or from making those declared more restrictive, except for measures aimed at: a) protection of public morality; b) enforcement of safety laws and regulations; c) regulation of imports or exports of arms, ammunition and other war materials, and in exceptional circumstances, of all other military articles; d) protection of life and health of people, animals and plants; e) import and export of metallic gold and silver; f) protection of the national patrimony of artistic, historical or archaeological value; and g)export, use and consumption of nuclear materials, radioactive products and any other material usable in the development or use of nuclear energy. ARTICLE 11.- The signatory countries will periodically review the non-tariff restrictions applied under the terms of this Agreement in order to proceed by common agreement to their elimination or reduction Preservation of the agreed preferences ARTICLE 12.- The signatory countries undertake to maintain the application of the agreed percentage preference regardless of the current tariff level for third countries. In the event that one of them raises or lowers its tariff for third countries, it will proceed immediately to adjust the tax for the importation of the negotiated products from the other signatory countries, in order to maintain the agreed percentage preference. ARTICLE 13.-If a signatory country grants a developed country that is not a member of ALADI a tariff or non-tariff preference higher than that agreed with the other signatory country in a way that affects it, the preference will be readjusted immediately in order to maintain the agreement. ARTICLE 14.- The signatory countries agree that the tariff preferences agreed in this Agreement do not mean consolidation of tariffs against third countries. CHAPTER IV Regime of origin ARTICLE 15.- The benefits derived from the preferences granted in this Agreement will be applied exclusively to products originating in and coming from the territory of the signatory countries in accordance with the following provisions. ARTICLE 16.- The following will be considered originating from the signatory countries: a) Those goods that have been totally produced within their respective territories using inputs originating from them; b) Those goods that belong to the animal, vegetable or mineral kingdom and have been extracted, harvested, collected, or have been born or cultivated in the territory of the signatory countries or in their territorial waters; c)Those goods made with inputs from third countries, when these have undergone substantial transformation in the territory of the signatory countries and as long as the final product is classified in a different four-digit position in the tariff nomenclature of the exporting country. However, when such processes consist exclusively of simple assembly, packaging, separation, selection, classification, brands or other equivalents, such goods will not be considered originating; d) Those goods assembled in any of the signatory countries that use inputs imported from third countries, when the CIF value of the latter is less than 50 percent of the FOB value of the former; and e)Those goods for which either of the parties uses in their production inputs originating from the other party and/or from Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua. ARTICLE 17.- The signatory countries may adopt by common agreement origin requirements that differ from those established in the previous numeral. ARTICLE 18.- The signatory countries may agree on specific origin requirements for those products that require it, in order to adapt them to their productive structures and to those commitments assumed with other countries. ARTICLE 19.- The criterion of maximum use of materials originating from the signatory countries of this Agreement may not be used to set requirements that imply their imposition when they do not meet adequate supply, quality and price conditions in the opinion of the signatory countries. It will be understood that the expression "materials" includes, in all cases, the raw materials, intermediate products and the parts and pieces, used in the elaboration of the merchandise in question. ARTICLE 20.- The products resulting from operations or processes carried out in their respective territories will not be considered originating from the signatory countries, for which reason they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed, when in said processes they exclusively use materials that originate from non-EU countries. signatories and from third countries and consist only of assemblies or assemblies, division of lots or volumes, selection, classification, marking, composition of merchandise assortments or other similar operations or processes. ARTICLE 21.- In the documentation corresponding to the imports of the negotiated products, there must be a declaration that accredits the fulfillment of the origin requirements established in this Agreement. Said declaration must be issued by the final producer or exporter of the merchandise in question, certified by an official body or authorized entity, with legal status and that operates with the legal authorization of the exporting country. ARTICLE 22.- The signatory countries will inform each other of the respective government entities that will authorize the declarations of origin and of the signatures and stamps respectively authorized. Any modification of these conditions, signatures and seals, must be communicated within thirty days following the modification. ARTICLE 23.- In case of doubt about the authenticity of the certificates of origin or presumption of non-compliance with the origin requirements declared in accordance with this Agreement, the importing country may request the corresponding additional tests and adopt the measures that considered necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest, but without stopping the processing of imports of the product or products in question. The additional tests that are required may be provided by the final producer or by the exporter, as appropriate, through the competent authorities of their country, which will send them the information resulting from the verifications that they carry out on a confidential basis. ARTICLE 24.- In all cases, the standard form that appears in the Annexes will be used. CHAPTER V Saving clause ARTICLE 25.- The safeguard clauses will only be applicable one year after the entry into force of the tariff and non-tariff preferences in question or their last revision. ARTICLE 26.- The signatory countries of this Agreement may temporarily impose restrictions on the importation of negotiated products, when imports occur in quantities or under conditions such that they cause or threaten to cause serious damage. It will be considered that there are serious damages whenever imports of the negotiated product or products occur, in amounts or values ​such that they cause or threaten to cause a reduction in the activity of national producers measured by the employment index of the company in question and due to the relative drop in its production for the domestic market compared to the product imported under the protection of the preferences granted. ARTICLE 27.- The signatory countries may extend to the importation of products negotiated temporarily and in a non-discriminatory manner, the general measures that they have adopted in order to correct the imbalances in their balance of payments. In the application of the safeguard clause for balance of payments reasons, the different degrees of economic development will be taken into account for which purpose the necessary consultations are carried out. In said consultations, the amount of the commercial exchange of the products negotiated in this Agreement will be taken into account. ARTICLE 28.- Said restrictions may be adopted, as established in the previous articles, unilaterally for a term of one year, upon expiration of which the interested countries will carry out consultations in order to achieve definitive solutions if their application were to be prolonged for more than one year. ARTICLE 29.-The safeguard clauses adopted unilaterally must be immediately communicated to the affected country within a period of 72 hours. Said communication must specify the restrictive measures adopted, as well as the grounds that determined their adoption. The unilateral adoption of the safeguard clause commits the importing country to make efforts to maintain an import quota subject to the agreed preferences. ARTICLE 30.- The consultations referred to in article 28 must be made to the directly affected country as a prerequisite for obtaining the extension. In its consultation, the importing country must present information that allows for an exhaustive analysis of the situation that motivates it, fundamentally of the imports that cause or threaten to cause serious damage to its national production, indicating the origin and provenance of the same. By agreement, the period during which the adopted measures that have been agreed will continue to be applied will be established. ARTICLE 31.- The measures adopted under the safeguard clauses will expire at the expiration of the term agreed in accordance with the previous article. If at the expiration of the extension period the causes that motivated the adoption of safeguard clauses persist, the importing country must initiate the procedures related to negotiation or withdrawal of the preferences granted to the affected products. For these purposes, you will have a period of thirty (30) days from the aforementioned expiration, maintaining the safeguard clauses until their solution. ARTICLE 32.- The measures provided for in the previous articles will not be applied to the goods already shipped abroad on the date of their communication. Neither will it be applied to those goods whose bill of lading or air waybill is dated equal to or prior to the effective date of the adoption of said measures. Likewise, those products whose tariff preferences have been agreed with quota conditions or with validity less than the period foreseen for the revision of the Agreement will be exempted from the application of the measures provided for in said provisions. CHAPTER VI Differential Treatments ARTICLE 33.- In this Agreement, differential treatment is understood as the application of a principle of community solidarity that allows the equitable use of benefits, taking into account the degree of economic development of the countries, especially those with less relative economic development, to take advantage of the stimuli of integration. ARTICLE 34.-If any of the signatory countries grant an equal or greater tariff preference, on one of the products negotiated in this Agreement, to a non-signatory country with a higher degree of development than the country that benefits from the preference, it will be adjusted in favor of the country signatory, in such a way as to maintain a differential margin with respect to the country with the least degree of development that preserves the effectiveness of the preference. The magnitude of said differential margin will be agreed through negotiations between the signatory countries, which will begin within thirty (30) days from the date of the claim by the affected country and will be concluded within sixty (60) days of said date. date. Differential treatment may be reinstated, indistinctly, through negotiation on any other element of the Agreement. ARTICLE 35.- If a more favorable treatment is granted to a non-signatory country of the same development category as the preference beneficiary, negotiations will be held between the signatory countries to grant the beneficiary an equivalent treatment within the terms provided in article former. CHAPTER VII Withdrawal of preferences ARTICLE 36.- During the term of this Agreement, the withdrawal of agreed tariff and non-tariff preferences is not applicable, except as provided in the previous articles. ARTICLE 37.- The exclusion of a preference that may occur as a consequence of the negotiations for the revision of this Agreement does not constitute withdrawal. Neither does the elimination of the preferences agreed to term constitute withdrawal, if the renewal has not been carried out at the expiration of the respective terms of validity. CHAPTER VIII Accession ARTICLE 38.- This Agreement is open to the accession of any Latin American country after negotiation. ARTICLE 39.- The accession will be formalized, once the terms and conditions of the same have been negotiated between the signatory countries and the adhering country, through the signing of a legal instrument of the same nature as the present one. For the purposes of this Agreement and of the additional legal instruments that are signed, the signatory country will be understood as the admitted adherent. CHAPTER IX Validity ARTICLE 40.- This Agreement will enter into force once the legal provisions established in the respective laws of the signatory countries are fulfilled. ARTICLE 41.- This Agreement will have a duration of three (3) years, automatically extendable for equal periods, unless expressly notified to the contrary by one of the signatory countries six (6) months before its expiration. CHAPTER X Revision ARTICLE 42.- Every year from the validity of this Agreement and during the course of the last month, the signatory countries will evaluate the results obtained, making them compatible with the objectives set and introducing the necessary adjustments for such purposes. ARTICLE 43.- Without prejudice to what is established in the previous article, at the request of the party and at any time, the signatory countries of this Agreement may make the adjustments they deem appropriate, considering, among others, the modification of the lists of products, the establishment of new preferences and, in general, of any aspect that contributes to its better functioning and development. CHAPTER XI Complaint ARTICLE 44.- Any of the signatory countries of this Agreement may denounce it after one year has elapsed since its participation in it. For this purpose, it must communicate its decision to the other signatory countries, at least sixty (60) days in advance. Once the denunciation has been formalized, the rights acquired and obligations contracted under this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country, except those referring to preferences received or granted, which will continue in force for a period of one year from the date of the denunciation. deposit of the instrument of denunciation. CHAPTER XII Agreement Administration ARTICLE 45.- For the administration and in order to achieve the best functioning of this Agreement, the signatory countries agree to establish a Mixed Commission made up of government representatives from both countries. ARTICLE 46.- The Commission referred to in the previous article will meet as many times as necessary and will have the following attributions, among others: a) Propose to the signatory countries the inclusion of new products or the granting of greater preferences on the negotiated products; b) Formulate to the governments of the signatory countries the recommendations it deems appropriate to resolve the differences that may arise from the interpretation and application of this Agreement; c) Proceed in accordance with the provisions of the articles, regarding the review of the products granted; d) Analyze the origin requirements and other norms established in this Agreement; e) Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement; F)Submit to the Governments of the signatory countries a periodic report on the evaluation and operation of this Agreement; and g) Any other attribution that the parties consider necessary and that results from the application of this Agreement. CHAPTER XIII Commercial promotion ARTICLE 47.- In order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement in the most efficient way, the Parties agree to grant each other the greatest possible facilities for commercial promotion in their respective territories, such as the exchange of missions and commercial delegations, as well as participation in fairs and exhibitions held in the territory of the other signatory party. Similarly, both countries will promote business meetings in order to promote and facilitate trade relations between the two countries. Through their competent official institutions, they will make effective the exchange of information on the prospects offered by the markets of the parties, in order to strengthen commercial exchange. CHAPTER XIV Final Provisions ARTICLE 48.- Modifications to this Agreement must be formalized by signing additional protocols. ARTICLE 49.- The commitments derived from the revisions and adjustments to the annexes of this Agreement will be made through the exchange of notes from the respective administrative institutions, following the opinion of the Mixed Commission. ARTICLE 50.- With the purpose of establishing a direct information channel that facilitates the application and better achievement of the objectives of this Agreement, the governments of both signatory countries will name a contact body, so that it permanently attends to the queries of any of the parties and administer the provisions of this Agreement. ARTICLE 51.-When a signatory country considers itself affected by dumping and other unfair trade practices carried out from third countries, it will resort to the Commission where the situation will be analyzed and the adoption of the pertinent measures will be suggested to resolve the situation. ARTICLE 52.- The tariff preferences granted by the member countries of the Latin American Integration Association in this Agreement will be automatically extended without the granting of compensation to Bolivia, Ecuador and Paraguay, regardless of negotiation or adherence to it. IN WITNESS WHEREOF,the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Agreement in the city of Tegucigalpa, Honduras, on February 20, 1986, in two originals in the Spanish language of the same tenor and equally authentic. For the Government of the Republic of Venezuela: Dionisio Marcano, Ambassador of Venezuela in Honduras. For the Government of the Republic of Honduras: Reginaldo Panting, Minister of Economy and Commerce.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEXES PARTIAL SCOPE AGREEMENTS CONSOLIDATED LIST OF PRODUCTS 1. NABANDINA tariff code 2. Product description 3. current lien 4. Legal regime: Note 2: Import reserved to the National Government Note 5: Health certificate from the country of origin. Note 6: Sanitary permit from the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock of Venezuela. Note 2: Import reserved to the National Government . Note 5: Sanitary certificate from the country of origin. Note 6: Sanitary permit from the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock of Venezuela. 5. preference granted 6. Central American countries beneficiary of the preferences: CR: Costa Rica ES. El Salvador G: Guatemala H: Honduras N: Nicaragua 7. Observations: (*) Product that will be subject to Note. (¨**) Note 2 will be eliminated. REO: Specific regime of origin. Quota: A quota will be granted for the importation of the product.
