MainText:
1 Economic, commercial and technical cooperation agreement between Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of the State of Kuwait Confirmation of the national ties and consolidation of the bonds of Arab brotherhood that unite the two brotherly countries Believing in the common Arab destiny. And a desire to strengthen and develop cooperation relations economic, commercial and technical cooperation between them and in accordance with the Charter of the League of Arab States and the Arab Economic Unity Agreement. The governments of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the State of Kuwait, referred to hereinafter The Contracting Parties have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 1 The two contracting parties shall endeavor to strengthen and deepen the commercial and economic ties between them By all means and possibilities. Including expanding the fields of work in various activities commercial and economic affairs for natural and legal persons in their countries, in accordance with development requirements of each. second subject The two contracting parties shall take every measure that would increase and diversify the volume of trade exchange between them and remove all obstacles that prevent this in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in both countries the two countries. ARTICLE 2 NOT FOUND ARTICLE 3 - Full exemption from customs tariff and import duties for products. Agricultural, animal and natural resources originating from one of the contracting parties. Industrial products that are exempted from customs duties and other fees Originating from one of the contracting parties and imported by the other contracting party Except for the products listed in the schedules agreed upon by the contracting parties. - The products mentioned in the tables mentioned in paragraph ( ) are gradually exempted At the rate of 20% annually, within a maximum period of five years from the effective date of these provisions Convention. ARTICLE 4 For the purposes of this agreement, each product is considered an industrial product of Kuwaiti-Jordanian origin Industrial The cost of raw materials of Arab origin, local labor, and costs are reduced The other local production involved in the workmanship shall be about (40%) of its total production costs Products and manufactures imported from and to the country of one of the contracting parties to the country of the other party The other contractor with a certificate of origin issued by the competent government authorities in the exporting country. ARTICLE 5 The two contracting parties shall encourage the establishment of permanent and temporary exhibitions. And specialized in each of the two countries to increase the definition of their products. as well as encourage exchange Official and unofficial delegations and the exchange of information on foreign trade as well Enhancing the role of commercial centers and the importance of establishing them in both countries in accordance with laws and regulations sponsored in them. 3 ARTICLE 6 Each Contracting Party shall encourage the investments of the other Contracting Party in its country and shall accept such investments Investments in the areas permitted in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations in each of the following: My two contracting parties. The two contracting parties work to encourage the establishment of joint projects through The public sector and the private sector in various fields of economic activity in a way that serves the interests The joint venture between the two contracting parties and Arab economic integration. ARTICLE 7 Investments and investment returns employed by one of the two contracting parties are granted, or Natural or legal persons affiliated to him in the country of the other contracting party Less priority than that granted to investments and returns of investments previously employed Any third country, in accordance with the laws in force in each of the two countries. How useful is this Investments are among the advantages of encouragement and protection prescribed for incoming capital in accordance with the laws Encouraging investment in force in both countries and in accordance with the related agreements By investing Arab capital in the Arab countries held within the scope of the League of States Arabic and ratified by each of the contracting parties. Appropriate facilities, incentives and other forms of encouragement are also provided for these investments Including tax exemptions within the limits and conditions that are approved from time to time. By agreement of the contracting parties. Each contracting party shall allow the transfer of profits, interests and other revenues Due for the investments shown above, as well as the re-transfer of capital And the funds due for the total or partial liquidation of these investments, with the same The type of currency in which the capital was originally received for investment purposes, or in any other currency Transferable freely and without delay. 4 ARTICLE 8 It is permissible to nationalize, expropriate, or subjugate the investments of one of the two contracting parties, or Natural or legal persons affiliated to either of them for measures equivalent in effect to nationalization Or expropriation within the borders of the other contracting party, except for reasons of public interest Therefore, the contracting party and in return for fair and timely compensation, and the value of compensation is estimated at the value of Investments at the time of expropriation, and the value of compensation is transferred in the same currency that was received In it for investment purposes or in any other convertible currency. ARTICLE 9 For the purposes of this agreement, exchange rates shall be determined according to the agreed official rates In the International Monetary Fund or in the absence of such rates according to the rates The official exchange rate of the Special Drawing Rights or any convertible currency agreed upon between the contracting parties. ARTICLE 10 Full cooperation takes place between the two contracting parties in the field of manpower transfer And their exchange, including the exchange of experiences in the field of vocational training and social insurance health and labor safety in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in both countries. ARTICLE 11 The two contracting parties are making effective and joint efforts in the field of developing sectors Different productivity and maximum benefit from all the experiences available in both countries Through the exchange of scientific and technical studies and research, legislation and necessary information the other. Encourage exchange visits Delegations for these purposes are receiving and sending trainees Specialist and technical experts, according to the programs that are prepared and agreed upon between The concerned institutions in the countries of the two contracting parties, as the two contracting parties are working on Benefit from each other's experiences in various fields and work to benefit from each other's experiences Services of specialized institutes and institutions in preparing the necessary cadres. 5 ARTICLE 12 Each of the contracting parties shall encourage tourism between the two countries by facilitating travel procedures Encouraging excursions and mass tourism, and taking all measures to increase tourism Between the two countries . The two contracting parties also seek to achieve cooperation in the fields of tourism In general, within the limits of the prevailing laws and regulations in both countries. ARTICLE 13 The two contracting parties shall provide all capabilities and means to facilitate the movement of transport Land, sea and air, as well as transit transportation between the two countries, in accordance with Laws and regulations in force in both countries. The two contracting parties shall also encourage and enhance the exchange of technical expertise in the fields different transportation. The two contracting parties are also working on developing cooperation in the field of transportation Telecommunications. ARTICLE 14 The two contracting parties allow private and public chartered passenger transport And large intercontinental passenger transport vehicles, as well as means of transport belonging to institutions government or private tourism in either of the two contracting parties to enter the territory the other contracting party, passing through and crossing it, as well as expelling them from its territory in accordance with The laws and regulations in force for both contracting parties. 6 ARTICLE 15 A joint committee of representatives of the two contracting parties shall be formed, and its tasks shall be the following: Follow up on the implementation of the provisions of this agreement and the resulting joint protocols between the two countries. - Addressing any difficulties or disputes that may arise from the interpretation or application of this agreement. Approval of recommendations to enhance and develop economic, commercial and technical cooperation between the two countries The two contracting parties and everything that enhances economic relations and increases the volume of trade exchange between them. - Reconsidering the tables referred to in Article Three, paragraph ( ) and amending them accordingly patrol. E- The joint committee may form specialized sub-committees as necessary It studies the matters referred to it. - The joint committee meets during the last quarter of each year and periodically in Amman Kuwait alternately and meets whenever necessary and by agreement of the two contracting parties. 7 ARTICLE 16 - This agreement is subject to ratification by both contracting parties, each in accordance with its regulations Constitutional and enforceable as of the date of exchange of ratification documents. - This agreement is valid for a period of ten years from the date of its entry into force, and is automatically renewed for one or more years Other equal periods unless one of the contracting parties notifies the other contracting party In writing six months before the expiry of the first period or any of the subsequent periods of his desire to Non-renewal of the agreement, provided that the provisions of this agreement remain in force for all agreements And the contracts resulting from it and the investments that arose during its implementation period The full obligations of both contracting parties and liquidation of rights related to them, provided that: This exceeds a period of twenty years from the date of termination of the agreement. This agreement was signed in the State of Kuwait on Safar 15, 1407 AH, corresponding to 19 October 1986 in two original copies in the Arabic language, each of which has full authenticity. For the Government of the State of Kuwait For the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
