MainText:
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA ON FREE TRADE BETWEEN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA (Belgrade, August 28, 2000) The Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, hereinafter referred to as the Contracting Parties, seeking to freely develop and deepen mutual economic and trade cooperation, reaffirming commitment to the principles of the market economy as the basis of trade and economic relations, reaffirming their intention to actively participate and encourage the expansion of mutually advantageous trade and economic relations, creating necessary conditions for the free movement of goods and capital in accordance with the current in each state laws and the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO), have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 1 General provisions The Contracting Parties liberalize mutual trade in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and the WTO rules in order to establish a free trade regime. ARTICLE 2 Objectives if this Agreement The objectives of this Agreement are: expansion and promotion of mutual trade and economic relations aimed at fostering of the economic development of both States, improvement of living and working conditions, increase in employment in the sphere of production, achievement of production and financial stability of both States; ensuring conditions for fair competition between economic entities of both States; harmonization of customs procedures and order of application of rules of origin of goods, relevant to standards of international practice, harmonization of rules of control of origin of goods by the customs authorities of both States. ARTICLE 3 Scope of application Provisions of this Agreement will apply to goods, specified in groups from 1 to 97 of the nomenclature of the Harmonized commodity description and coding system, adopted in accordance with the International Convention on the Harmonized system of description and coding of goods (Brussels, June 14, 1983), or in customs tariffs of each State. ARTICLE 4 Import customs duties and other charges The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to within the five-year period to take agreed measures to phase out in the mutual trade import customs duties and equivalent to them charges in respect of goods, originating from the customs territory of the States of the Contracting Parties. The Contracting Parties annually agree on withdrawal from the regime, provided for in Article 1 of this Agreement, which will be applied on the basis of bilateral Protocols signed by the Contracting Parties in accordance with the legislation of their States. Fees for customs clearance of goods will be levied in accordance with the laws of the States of each of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 5 Technical regulation The Contracting Parties shall cooperate and exchange information in the field of standardization, metrology and establishment of compliance of goods to prevent the creation of any technical obstacles in the mutual trade. In order to implement the provisions of this Agreement the Contracting Parties shall conclude agreements on mutual recognition of the acts of testing, conformity certificates or other documents that are directly or indirectly relate to the goods which are the subject of trade between the two States. Conditions and methods of compliance of the goods to regulations are determined by the authorised organisations of the Contracting Parties in accordance with the legislation of the importing State. ARTICLE 6 Sanitary and hygienic, veterinary and phytosanitary measures The Contracting Parties shall apply regulations of their States in the area of veterinary, quarantine and plant protection in part of the competence of the relevant international institutions, providing information about the spread of contagious diseases in domestic animals and quarantine diseases, pests and weeds plants with the coordination of the necessary documents for mutual deliveries and transit of goods. The Contracting Parties shall apply regulations of their States in the area of veterinary, protection of plants and animals on the non-discriminatory basis in accordance with the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on cooperation in the field of agro-industrial complex, the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on cooperation in the field of veterinary and the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on cooperation in the field of quarantine and protection of plants, signed in the city. Belgrade, October 31, 1996. ARTICLE 7 Rules of origin The origin of the goods shall be determined on the basis of the rules, provided for by the legislation of the importing State. The Contracting Parties will exchange the rules of origin of goods, determined by the legislation of their States at the time of signature of this Agreement. In case of such amendments to the rules of origin of goods, the Contracting Party which made these changes, shall notify in writing the other Contracting Party. The other Contracting Party within fifteen days after receiving the notice, shall notify the interested participants of the foreign economic activities of its State. ARTICLE 8 Transit of goods The Contracting Parties shall ensure free transit of goods originating from the customs territory of the state of one Contracting Party and transported through the territory of the other Contracting Party, in accordance with the legislation of their States. ARTICLE 9 Re-export of goods One Contracting Party shall not allow unauthorized re-export of goods originating from the customs territory of the state of the other Contracting Party, which apply measures of tariff and non tariff regulation in respect of exports. ARTICLE 10 General exceptions This Agreement shall not preclude the right of each of the Contracting Parties to apply the prohibitions or restrictions on import, export or transit of goods, justified from the point of view of public morals, public order or state security, protection of life and health of humans, animals or plants and the environment, protection ofartistic, historical or archaeological values that are national property, protection of intellectual property, standards relating to import or export of gold or silver, keeping of irreplaceable natural resources, if such measures are carried out simultaneously with the limitations of domestic production or consumption. These prohibitions or restrictions must not be a means of intentional discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the States of the Contracting Parties. The Contracting Parties shall not exclude application of measures of surveillance and control of export and import of goods, as well as under international control technologies, originating from the customs territory of the States of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 11 Security exceptions Nothing in this Agreement shall not be interpreted as a requirement for one of the Contracting Parties to provide any information, disclosure of which is considered by the Contracting Party as contra dictionary to the interests of its national security or as preventing the Contracting Party to take measures, as it deems necessary for the protection of the interests of its security in respect of fissionable materials or the materials from which they are produced, in regard to the traffic of arms, munitions and war material, as well as other trade of goods and materials, if such trade is directly or indirectly carried out for the purpose of supplying the armed forces and/or if such measures are taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations. In respect of goods, which export or import falls under the authorisation regime, stipulated by international treaties, which States of the Contracting Parties are parties to, competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall issue permission for their export or import, in accordance with the legislation of their States. ARTICLE 12 Protection of intellectual property For the purposes of this Agreement "protection of intellectual property" means of protection of copyright and related rights, including protection of computer programs and databases, inventions, useful models and industrial samples, trade marks and service marks and names of places of origin of goods, topologies of integrated circuits and confidential information. The Contracting Parties shall promote the protection of intellectual property rights, including the procedure of obtaining such rights and remedies against any violations. Such protection will be ensured in accordance with the regulatory issues of intellectual property international treaties, which States of the Contracting Parties are parties to. In case, if States of one or both of the Contracting Parties are not parties to these treaties, the principle of reciprocity and non-discrimination will apply. ARTICLE 13 Payments All payments between the States of the Contracting Parties are carried out in accordance with Article 4 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Union Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on trade and economic cooperation as of August 24, 1994. Payments related to trade in goods between the economic entities of the States of the Contracting Parties, and transfer of such payments to the territory of one of these States at the place of location of the creditor are not subject to restrictions. The Contracting Parties will refrain from administrative restrictions in the provision of or repayment of short-term or medium-term loans that provide trade operations of economic entities of their own States. ARTICLE 14 Anti-dumping and countervailing measures The provisions of this Agreement in any way shall not limit the right of the Contracting Parties to make, after the relevant procedures, the decision on application of anti-dumping or countervailing measures in accordance with the legislation of their States on conditions and/or according to the procedure, established by Article 16 of this Agreement. ARTICLE 15 Safeguard measures If any goods are imported to the customs territory of the State of one of the Contracting Parties in such quantities or under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause substantial damage to domestic producers of like or competing goods in the importing State, each of the Contracting Parties, depending on whether its interests were affected after conducting an appropriate procedure, may take appropriate measures under the law applicable in each State of the Contracting Parties on the conditions and/or according to the procedure established by the article 16 of this Agreement. ARTICLE 16 Procedure of application of trade remedies Prior to the application of measures stipulated in Articles 14 and 15 of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall endeavour to resolve the dispute by holding direct consultations in the framework of the working group on development of trade and economic cooperation and improvement of mechanism of intergovernmental Russian-Yugoslav Committee on trade, economic and scientific-technical cooperation, established in accordance with the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the establishment of the intergovernmental Russian-Yugoslav Committee on trade, economic and scientific-technical cooperation, as of August 24, 1994. (hereinafter - the working group), in order to find a mutually acceptable solution. A Contracting Party, which has taken the decision about the beginning of procedures preceding the imposition of anti-dumping, countervailing or safeguard measures provided for by Articles 14 and 15 of this Agreement, shall inform the other Contracting Party and provide the information envisaged by the laws of the State of the Contracting Party, which initiated the procedure. If the Contracting Parties fail to reach a mutually acceptable solution within 30 days from the beginning of consultations in the framework of the working group, the Contracting Party, initiating the procedure, prior to the introduction of anti-dumping, countervailing or safeguard measures shall have the right after the appropriate procedures to apply measures on elimination the consequences of substantial damage or threat of substantial damage, informing about this the other Contracting Party. The volume and period of application of the said measures should be limited, necessary to remedy the damage. When choosing the measures provided for in Articles 14 and 15 of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall give preference to those of them, which would cause least damage to the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement. In exceptional cases, when the delay in the adoption of measures, stipulated in Articles 14 and 15 of this Agreement, may lead to damage that is hard to remedy, the Contracting Party which initiated the procedure of application of trade remedies, may impose interim measures before the consultations, on the condition that these consultations are requested to take place immediately after the application of such measures. ARTICLE 17 Non-fulfillment of obligations If one of the Contracting Party finds that the other Contracting Party has not fulfilled any of the given obligations under this Agreement, at the end of the consultation or by the end of three months period from the date of informing the other Contracting Party, it may take appropriate measures in order to eliminate the consequences of the damage. ARTICLE 18 The influence of balance of payments In case if one of the Contracting Parties is under serious difficulties in the field of balance of payments or there is a risk of any of such difficulties, it may introduce restrictive measures, including measures related to imports of goods, for a period of these difficulties. The Contracting Party shall promptly inform the other Contracting Party of the intention to enter the restrictive measures, the period of validity and cancellation. ARTICLE 19 Development of the Agreement If one of the Contracting Parties considers it advisable to extend the provisions of this Agreement in the field of trade-economic cooperation, not provided in this Agreement, then it gives the other Contracting Party the reasonable suggestion. After the adoption of this proposal the present Agreement may be amended in accordance with the laws of the State of each of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 20 Control over the application of the Agreement Control over the application of this Agreement is entrusted to the working group, referred to in Article 16 of this Agreement. The working group shall hold its meetings on the review of the implementation of this Agreement and contentious cases to the extent necessary, but not less than two times a year. ARTICLE 21 Entry into force and period of validity The present Agreement shall be applied provisionary from the date of its signing and shall enter into force on the date of the last written notification on completion by the Contracting Parties of internal procedures required for its entry into force. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite term and shall cease to have effect six months after the date of written notification of one of the Contracting Parties of its intention to terminate it. The contracts concluded in the framework of this Agreement, but not executed to the moment of its termination remain in force until their full implementation in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement. Done in the city of Belgrade, August 28, 2000, in two original copies, each in Russian and Serbian languages, both texts being equally authentic. (Signature)

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX 1 protocol on the exceptions to free trade regime to the agreement between the government of the russian federation and the federal government of the federal republic of yugoslavia on free trade between the russian federation and the federal republic of yugoslavia (Belgrade, August 28, 2000) The Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, hereinafter referred to as the Parties, have concluded this Protocol on the following. ARTICLE 1 Exceptions provided by part two of Article 4 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade as of August 28, 2000, hereinafter referred to as the Agreement, shall apply to: goods in accordance to Annexes No. 1, 2 and 3 to this Protocol; goods subject to the legislation of the Russian Federation on export tariff, licensing and quoting of exportation of goods (works, services). ARTICLE 2 Medicaments, imported on the territory of the Russian Federation from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in accordance to Annex No. 2 to this Protocol, are imported duty free or special (reduced) customs duty rates shall apply, indicated in Annex No. 2. ARTICLE 3 The Parties shall notify each other on introduction of exceptions to free trade regime on goods, listed in Annexes No. 1, 2 and 3 to this Protocol, as well as on the application of import customs duty rates in accordance with Article 2 to this Protocol no less then two months prior to its introduction. ARTICLE 4 This Protocol and all the Annexes to it shall be integral part of the Agreement. ARTICLE 5 The present Protocol shall be applied provisionary from the date of its signing, shall enter into force on the date of the Agreement enters into force and shall be valid till the new Protocol between the Parties on the issues, regulated by this Protocol, will be signed as provided by part two of Article 4 of the Agreement. Done in the city of Belgrade, August 28, 2000, in two original copies, each in the Russian and Serbian languages, both texts being equally authentic. Annex No.1 to the Protocol on the Exceptions to free trade regime to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia LIST OF GOODS, IMPORTED INTO THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION FROM THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA, SUBJECT TO EXCEPTION FROM FREE TRADE REGIME ON GOODS + Annex No. 3 to the Protocol on the Exceptions to free trade regime to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslav ANNEX 2 protocol between the government of the russian federation and the government of the republic of serbia on the exceptions to free trade regime to the agreement between the government of the russian federation and the federal government of the federal republic of yugoslavia on free trade between the russian federation and the federal republic of yugoslavia as of august 28, 2000 (Belgrade, April 3, 2009) The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Serbia, hereinafter referred to as the Parties, have concluded this Protocol on the following. ARTICLE 1 Exceptions provided by part two of Article 4 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade as of August 28, 2000, hereinafter referred to as the Agreement, shall apply to: goods in accordance to Annexes No. 1 and 2 to this Protocol; goods subject to export customs duty, as well as the goods, subject to licensing and quoting in accordance to the legislation of the Russian Federation on state regulation of foreign-trade activities on the date of its customs declaration. ARTICLE 2 The Parties shall notify each other on introduction of exceptions to free trade regime on goods, listed in Annexes No. 1 and 2 to this Protocol, no less then two months prior to its introduction. ARTICLE 3 The present Protocol shall be applied provisionary from the date of its signing, shall enter into force on the date of the Agreement enters into force and shall be valid till the new Protocol between the Parties on the issues, regulated by this Protocol, will be signed as provided by part two of Article 4 of the Agreement. From the date of the signing this Protocol shall substitute the relations between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Serbia the Protocol on exceptions to free trade regime to Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade, signed on August 28, 2000 Done in the city of Belgrade, April 3, 2009, in two original copies, each in the Russian and Serbian languages, both texts being equally authentic. (Signature) Annex No.1 to the Protocol between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Serbia on the Exceptions to free trade regime to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslav as of August 28, 2000 Annex No. 2 to the Protocol between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Serbia on the Exceptions to free trade regime to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the russian federation and the federal republic of yugoslav as of august 28, 2000 ANNEX 3 protocol between the government of the russian federation and the government of the republic of serbia on the exceptions to free trade regime and rules of origin of goods to the agreement between the government of the russian federation and the federal government of the federal republic of yugoslavia on free trade between the russian federation and the federal republic of yugoslavia as of august 28, 2000 (belgrade, july 22, 2011) The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Serbia, hereinafter referred to as the Parties, have concluded this Protocol on the following. ARTICLE 1 Exceptions provided by part two of Article 4 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as of August 28, 2000, hereinafter referred to as the Agreement, shall apply to: goods in accordance to Annexes No. 1 and 2 to this Protocol; goods subject to export customs duty, as well as the goods, subject to simultaneous licensing and quoting in accordance to the legislation of the Russian Federation on state regulation of foreign trade activities on the date of its customs declaration. ARTICLE 2 The Parties shall notify each other in writing on introduction of exceptions to free trade regime on goods, listed in Annexes No. 1 and 2 to this Protocol, which are its integral part, no less then two months prior to its introduction. ARTICLE 3 Rules of origin of goods are identified in accordance of the Rules of origin of goods indicated in Annex 3 to this Protocol that is integral to it. ARTICLE 4 On mutual agreement between the Parties changes and amendments to the Rules of origin of goods can be made, which shall be formulated in separate protocols. ARTICLE 5 Article 7 of the Agreement shall be invalid. ARTICLE 6 The present Protocol shall be applied provisionary from the date of its signing and shall enter into force after receiving the last written notification by diplomatic channels on completion by the Parties all intra-state procedures necessary for its entry into force but no earlier than the entry into force the Agreement. From the date of the signing this Protocol shall substitute the relations between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Serbia regulated by the the Protocol on exceptions to free trade regime to Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade as of August 28, 2000, signed on April 3, 2009. Done in the city of Belgrade, July 22, 2011, in two original copies, each in the Russian and Serbian languages, both texts being equally authentic. (Signatures) Annex No.1 to the Protocol between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Serbia on the Exceptions to free trade regime and Rules of origin of goods to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslav as of August 28, 2000 LIST OF GOODS, SUBJECT TO EXCEPTION FROM FREE TRADE REGIME AT ITS IMPORT INTO THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION FROM THE REPUBLIC OF SERBIA Annex No. 2 to the Protocol between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Serbia on the Exceptions to free trade regime and Rules of origin of goods to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslav as of August 28, 2000 LIST OF GOODS, SUBJECT TO EXCEPTION FROM FREE TRADE REGIME AT ITS IMPORT INTO THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF SERBIA FROM THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION Annex No. 3 to the Protocol between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Serbia on the Exceptions to free trade regime and Rules of origin of goods to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on free trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslav as of August 28, 2000 RULES FOR DETERMINING OF THE COUNTRY OF ORIGIN OF GOODS Rules for determining of the country of origin of goods (hereinafter - the Rules) shall apply to products originating in the Russian Federation and the Republic of Serbia (hereinafter - States Parties). ARTICLE 1 Terms and Definitions The terms used in these Rules shall be interpreted to mean the following: "country of origin of goods" - a state, in which the goods were wholly obtained or sufficiently processed (treated), in accordance with these Rules; "criterion of sufficient processing (treatment) of goods" - one of the criteria of origin, according to which the product, which is being subsequently manufactured with the participation of two or more countries, is considered as originating in a state, in the territory of which it had been subjected to significant processing (treatment), sufficient to give the product its characteristic properties, for the last time; "manufacture (production)" – performance of any type of manufacturing or technological operations, including assembly and any special operations, aimed at obtaining the product; "material" - any ingredient, raw material, component or part and so on, used in the product manufacturing; "material of foreign origin" – material, not originating in the territory of the States Parties, or material, the origin of which is not established; "product (products)"- made (manufactured) product, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation; "goods" - any movable property which is a material and a product, including thermal, electrical and other types of energy and vehicles being moved across the customs border (with the exception of vehicles, engaged in international transport of passengers and goods); "consignment" - goods that are delivered simultaneously with one or more shipping documents to the address of a single consignee from a single shipper, as well as goods that are sent with one mail invoice, or transported as baggage by a single person crossing the border; " ex - works price "- the price of goods to be paid to the manufacturer, by the facility of which the final processing (treatment) was executed, on the "ex - works" terms; "resident" - any natural or legal person, company or organization, without the status of legal entity, which under the legislation of one of the States Parties are subject to tax payment therein by virtue of domicile, residence, place of management, registration. However, the above does not include persons, who are subject to tax payment in the State Party only in respect of income derived from transactions not related to manufacturing and (or) sale of goods; "consignor (consignee)" - a person named in shipping documents, which according to the accepted obligations transferred (accepted) or intends to transfer (accept) goods to the carrier (from the carrier); "exporter" - a resident of one of the States Parties that is a party to the foreign trade agreement (contract), that delivers goods to a resident of the other State Party; "importer" - a resident of one of the States Parties that is a party to the foreign trade agreement (contract), that receives goods from a resident of the other State Party; "applicant" - a person, who has addressed the authorized body (organization) of the country of export for obtaining a certificate of origin, confirming and responsible for the accuracy of information about goods, specified in the certificate of origin. The exporters - consignors of goods or persons, representing their interests in accordance with the legislation of the country of export (by power of attorney, contract assignments and other documents), may act as applicants. Importer, consignee of goods or persons, representing their interests in accordance with the legislation of the country of export (by power of attorney, contract assignments and other documents), can also act as applicants; "certificate of origin of goods" - a document, indicating the country of origin and issued by authority (organization), empowered by one of the States Parties in accordance with its legislation; "declaration of origin of goods" - a statement on the country of origin of goods, made by manufacturer, seller or a person, transporting goods, on the commercial invoice or other document, related to the goods; "direct consignment" - consignment of goods, transported from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party without its transportation through the territory of another state. ARTICLE 2 Criteria of Origin of Goods The country of origin of goods is the State Party, in which territory the goods were wholly obtained or sufficiently processed (treated), in accordance with these Rules. ARTICLE 3 Wholly Obtained Goods The goods, wholly obtained in the State Party, are considered to be the following: 1) mineral products extracted from the subsoil, in the territorial sea (waters) or from the seabed of the State Party; 2) vegetable products grown and (or) collected in the State Party; 3) live animals born and breed in the State Party; 4) products obtained in the State Party from animals breed there; 5) products obtained from hunting and fishing in the State Party; 6) products of sea fishing and other products of fishery, caught outside the territorial sea of a Party by vessels, registered or recorded in the State Party and sailing under the flag of that Party; 7) products obtained aboard a factory ship exclusively from products, referred to in subparagraph 6 of this Article, originating from the State Party, provided that such factory ship is registered or recorded in the State Party, and is sailing under its flag ; 8) products obtained from the seabed or subsoil of the sea outside the territorial sea of a State Party, provided that the State Party has exclusive rights to develop such seabed or marine resources; 9) waste and scrap (recycled materials), derived from manufacturing or other processing operations; 10) high-tech products, obtained in the open space on space ships, belonging to the State Party or leased (chartered) by it; 11) goods, manufactured in the State Party from the products, referred to in subparagraphs 1 - 10 of this Article. ARTICLE 4 Criterion of sufficient processing (treatment) 1. Product is considered to be subjected to sufficient processing or treatment in one of the States Parties, if such a product is processed or treated and the value of used in this process materials (raw materials, semi-finished and finished goods), originating from other countries (other than States Parties), or the value of materials of unknown origin does not exceed 50 percent of exported goods’ value. 2. The value of materials (raw materials, semi-finished and finished goods), originating from other countries (other than States Parties), used in the processing (treatment) operations shall be determined on the basis of the customs value of these materials established in the State Party, in which they are processed or treated. The value of materials of unknown origin, provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be determined in the amount of price, paid for these materials in the State Party, in which they are processed or treated. The value of goods, exported from one of the States Parties, shall be determined on the basis of "ex - works" price of the goods’ manufacturer in accordance with the international rules of interpretation of trade terms "Incoterms". ARTICLE 5 Cumulation of origin 1. For the purpose of implementation of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on Free Trade between the Russian Federation and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of 28 August 2000 (hereinafter - the Agreement), goods are considered to be originating from the Russian Federation, when the following conditions are simultaneously met: 1) goods are produced in the territory of the Russian Federation with the usage of materials, originating from the Republic of Serbia, and (or) from the Republic of Belarus, and (or) from the Republic of Kazakhstan, and (or) from the Russian Federation; 2) the value of materials, originating from countries other than those specified in paragraph 1 of this paragraph, and the value of materials of unknown origin used does not exceed 50 percent of the value of exported goods. The value of materials, originating from the Republic of Belarus and the Republic of Kazakhstan, shall be determined on the basis of the price, paid for these materials in the Russian Federation; 3) in the territory of the Russian Federation the materials, specified in subparagraph 1 of this paragraph, were not subjected exclusively to operations, provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 6 of these Rules, provided that such materials should not be sufficiently processed (treated) in the Russian Federation. 2. For the purpose of implementation of the Agreement goods are considered to be originating from the Republic of Serbia, when the following conditions are simultaneously met: 1) goods are manufactured in the territory of the Republic of Serbia from materials, originating from the Russian Federation and (or) from the Republic of Belarus, and (or) from the Republic of Kazakhstan, and (or) from the Republic of Serbia; 2) the value of materials, originating from countries other than those specified in subparagraph 1 of this paragraph, and the value of materials of unknown origin used does not exceed 50 percent of the value of exported goods; 3) in the territory of the Republic of Serbia materials, referred to in subparagraph 1 of this paragraph, were not subjected exclusively to operations, provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 6 of these Rules, provided that such materials should not be sufficiently processed (treated) in the Republic of Serbia. ARTICLE 6 Insufficient Processing (Treatment) 1. The following operations do not meet the criteria of sufficient processing (treatment): 1) operations to ensure the safety of goods during storage or transport; 2) operations to prepare the goods for sale and transportation (division of batches, forming of shipments, sorting, repacking), operations of disassembly and assembly of packages; 3) washing, cleaning, removal of dust, coating with oxid, oil or other substances; 4) ironing or pressing of textiles (any type of fiber and yarn, woven fabrics of all types of fibers and yarn and articles thereof); 5) operations of painting or polishing; 6) peeling, partial or total bleaching, polishing and grinding of crops and rice; 7) operations of coloring of sugar or forming sugar lumps; 8) peeling, extraction of seeds and cutting of fruits, vegetables and nuts; 9) sharpening, grinding or cutting, which do not lead to a significant difference between received components and initial product; 10) sifting through a strainer or sieve, sorting, classifying, screening, selection (including the compilation of products sets); 11) bottling, packaging in cans, bottles, bags, boxes and other simple packaging operations; 12) simple operations of assembly or disassembly of products in parts; 13) product separation into components, which does not lead to significant difference between the received components and the original product; 14) mixing of products (components), that does not result into significant difference between final product and original components; 15) slaughter of animals, butchering (sorting) of meat; 16) combination of two or more of the above mentioned operations. 2. If in respect of goods the criterion of sufficient processing (treatment) is being reached solely by the fulfillment of operations, referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, this product shall not be considered as originating from a State Party, in which these operations take place. ARTICLE 7 Special Cases of Origin of Goods 1. Devices, accessories, spare parts and tools, designed for use with the machinery, equipment, apparatus or vehicles, are considered as originating from the same State Party as the machines, equipment, apparatus or vehicles, on condition that such devices, accessories, spare parts and tools are imported and used in conjunction with these machines, equipment, apparatus or vehicles in configuration and in an amount that usually come with these appliances in accordance with the technical documentation. 2. Package, in which the goods are imported, is considered to be originating from the same State Party as the goods, except where the package with due regard to the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System shall be declared separately from the goods. In this case, the country of origin of packaging is determined separately from the country of origin of the goods. 3. If a package, in which the goods are imported, is considered to be originating from the same State Party as the goods, for the purposes of determination of the country of origin of goods only the packaging in which goods are sold at retail shall be taken into consideration. 4. In determining the country of origin of goods, in unassembled or disassembled state, delivered in several consignments because they can not be shipped in a single consignment due to production or transportation facilities, and goods, which consignment is divided into several parties as a result of errors, shall be considered as a single product where it is so desired by the declarant. This rule applies if the following conditions are simultaneously met: 1) advance notification of the customs authorities of the country of import about the goods in unassembled or disassembled state, delivered in several consignments, or about the separation of the goods into several consignments, with the reasons for such separation, specifications of each consignment with the codes of goods according to the Commodity Nomenclature of the Parties, value and country origin of goods in each consignment, or documentary proof of erroneous separation of goods into several consignments; 2) delivery of all consignments by supplier from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party; 3) declaration of all consignments in one customs authority; 4) delivery of all consignments under a single contract; 5) The delivery of all consignments in a period, not exceeding one year from the date of acceptance of the customs declaration, or until the expiration of approved for its’ filing in respect of the first consignment. Upon a motivated request of the applicant in case where the delivery of all consignments is impossible due to the reasons beyond the control of the consignee, these periods may be extended by the customs authority of the importing country for the time, necessary for the delivery of all consignments, but not more than one year. 5. In determining the country of origin of goods, origin of or processing thermal and electrical energy, machinery, equipment and tools used in its manufacturing is not taken into account. ARTICLE 8 Terms of Granting of the Free Trade Regime 1. The product enjoys the free trade regime in the territories of the states of the Parties if it meets the criteria of origin established by the Rules, and also if: 1. Goods shall benefit from the free trade regime in the territories of the States Parties, on condition that it meets the criteria of origin according to these Rules, and if: 1) goods are exported (imported) on the basis of the agreement (contract) between a resident of one State Party and a resident of the other State Party; 2) to the customs authorities of the importing country certificate of origin form CT-2 (hereinafter - the certificate), which is an integral part of these Rules, filled (executed) in accordance with the requirements for its completion (execution), as defined in Article 12 of these Rules, is provided. Certificate form is presented in Annexes 1 and 2; 3) the condition of direct delivery of goods is met, which is documentary proved; 4) State Parties meet the requirements for administrative cooperation, provided for in Article 11 of these Rules. 2. Direct delivery shall be considered fulfilled also for goods, transported through the territory of one or more states due to geographical, transport, technical or economic reasons, provided that the goods in these transit states, including their temporary storage in their territory, are under customs control. As a documentary evidence of goods being under the customs control transport documents, evidencing the route of transportation of goods from the exporting country through the transit country, or a document, issued by the customs authorities of transit countries, which gives a precise description of goods, indicating the date of transshipment (transfer) of goods, names of vehicles and certifying the conditions under which goods were in transit state, may be used. Direct delivery shall be considered fulfilled also for goods, purchased by importer at exhibitions or fairs, under the following conditions: 1) goods were supplied from the territory of one Party to the territory of a third state, being the organizer of the exhibition or fair, and remained under the customs control during their conduct; 2) goods from the moment they were sent to the fair or exhibition were not used for any purpose other than demonstrative; 3) goods are imported into the territory of the Party in the same condition in which they were sent to the territory of a third state, which is the organizer of the exhibition or fair, excluding changes in their state due to natural deterioration or loss under normal conditions of transport and storage. 3. Goods, the origin of which is not established or the origin of which is established, but for which the free trade regime can not be granted, are imported into the country of import in accordance with the tariff and non-tariff regulations of that Party. 4. In respect to the goods, referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, free trade regime may be granted (restored) in the territories of the Parties, subject to the proper identification of their origin (provision of a certificate and other necessary documents, confirming the country of origin) within 12 months from the date of registration of the customs declaration in the importing country (other than in case where the certificate was counterfeited). ARTICLE 9 Documentary Proof 1. For the purposes of confirmation of the country of origin in the State Party in order for the free trade regime to be granted, it is necessary to provide the customs authorities of the importing country with the original certificate. The certificate validity for granting of the free trade regime is 12 months from the date of its verification by the authority, empowered in accordance with the legislation of the State Party to issue and (or) verify certificates of origin of goods. 2. Certificate is executed and issued for one consignment. 3. Certificate is provided to the customs authorities of the importing country in hard copy in english or russian. 4. The actual number of delivered goods shall not exceed the amount specified in the certificate for more than 5 percent. 5. The certificate may be issued also after the exportation of goods on the basis of a written request of the applicant. In this case, the applicant shall additionally submit to the authority a customs declaration with the appropriate mark of the customs authority, confirming the actual exportation of the goods. The mark of the customs authority must antedate the date of issuance of the certificate. In this case, in section 5 of the certificate states: "Issued retrospectively". 6. In case of loss or damage to the certificate its officially certified duplicate is issued. When issuing a duplicate in section 12 "Certification" is indicated the date of issuance of duplicate, and in section 5 "For official use" ("For official use") the word "Duplicate" ("Duplicate") along with the number and date of the lost or damaged original certificate shall be indicated. A duplicate certificate shall take effect from the date of issuance of the original certificate. The validity of a duplicate certificate for the purposes of granting of the free trade regime can not exceed 12 months from the date of issuance of the original certificate. 7. In return of the canceled for any reason certificate or, if necessary, for the re-execution of a previously issued certificate, a new certificate may be issued on the basis of a written justification of the applicant. In this case, in section 5 a record "Issued instead of certificate form CT-2" is made, indicating the number and date of the canceled (re-executed) certificate. Certificate issued in exchange for another certificate is assigned with a new registration number. ARTICLE 10 Declaration of Origin of Goods 1. For the purposes of confirmation of the origin of small consignments of goods (with customs value, equivalent to 5000 U.S. dollars or less) a certificate is not required. In this case, the exporter can provide a declaration of origin, executed in accordance with Annex 3, which is an integral part of these Rules, on invoice, other commercial or shipping documents. 2. Exporter, that provided the declaration of origin of goods, must at the request of the competent authority of the exporting country submit all the documents and information required for the confirmation of origin in accordance with these Rules. 3. Declaration of origin of goods must be issued in hard copy with the personal signature of the manufacturer, seller, shipper (exporter) of goods or competent person, related to these goods, with his family name and initials. ARTICLE 11 Administrative Cooperation 1. Authorized authorities of the States Parties shall exchange with samples of blank certificates, seal impressions of authorities, empowered in accordance with the national legislation of the Parties to certify (or) to issue certificates of origin of goods, with information on the names and addresses of such competent authorities and authorized, empowered to verify certificates and declarations of origin of goods (in case that such authorities are provided for). Samples of seal impressions must be original and precise to allow for their unambiguous identification for authenticity. Authorized authorities of the States Parties shall promptly notify each other in case of any changes to such information. 2. Without provision of the information, specified in paragraph 1 of this Article, and (or) in the case where such information does not meet the requirements, set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, free trade regime in respect of imported goods shall not be granted. 3. Authorized authorities of the States Parties shall carry out the subsequent verification of certificates and declarations of origin of goods by means of sampling, or if the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of documents or accuracy of information contained therein. 4. In cases, referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, the customs authorities of the importing country shall be entitled to address the competent body, that verified the certificate, or the authorities, empowered to carry out verification of certificates and declarations of origin, with a motivated request to confirm the authenticity of the certificate (declaration of origin of goods) and (or) the accuracy of information, contained therein, or to provide additional or clarifying information, including on fulfillment of the criterion of origin of goods, and (or) copies of the documents, on the basis of which the certificate was issued. To the request for post-verification scanned copy of the certificate (declaration of origin) shall be attached . The request shall state the reasons of its direction and (or) other additional data, indicating what information in the certificate (declaration of origin) may not be valid, except for cases of post verification on the basis of sampling. 5. Post-verification shall be carried out by the competent authorities of the exporting State Party, for which they should be entitled to request the necessary documents and check the documentation and accounts of the manufacturer (exporter). 6. Pending the results of post-verification, the customs authorities shall refuse the grant tariff preferences (free trade regime) in respect of the imported goods. Refusal to grant tariff preferences (free trade regime) shall not give grounds for refusing by customs authorities to issue imported goods, on condition that the prohibitions and restrictions are met, and in no facts of fraud are found, except as provided for by the legislation of the Parties. 7. In case the requirements, specified in paragraph 4 of this Article, are met, the post-verification should be executed as soon as possible and the information about its results should be sent to the customs office, that filed to request, no later than 6 months from the date of the request was send. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether specific goods can be considered as originating in the territory of the State Party, and whether other requirements of these Rules are met. 8. If the results of post-verification are not sufficient to establish the authenticity of the certificates (declarations of origin of goods) or the real origin of goods, and (or) copies of the documents, on the basis of which the certificate was issued, are not presented, tariff preferences (the free trade regime) shall not be granted. 9. Goods are not considered as originating in the States Parties, unless properly executed certificate or requested information are not provided. 10. For the purposes of execution of post-verification copies of the certificates, as well as any export documents relating to them, shall be kept for at least three years by the authorized body of the Party. ARTICLE 12 Requirements and Procedures for the Certificate Completion 1. The certificate is issued in hard copy in english or russian, on paper with a protective netting or protective color field in A4 format (210 x 297 mm) with a density of at least 25 g / sq. m and is produced by printing. 2. A copy of the certificate and any related documents, confirming the origin of goods, are stored in the authorized body, that issued the certificate, not less than 3 years. 3. It is not permitted to use the facsimile signatures of persons in the certificate, the presence of erasures and corrections and (or) additions, not certified by the authorized body, that verified the certificate, are not allowed. 4. Corrections and (or) amendments to the certificate shall be executed by crossing out erroneous information and above-printing or including of hand-adjusted data, which shall be certified by the signature and seal of the authorized body, that verified the certificate. 5. The certificate is executed in accordance with the following requirements: 1) Section 1 - "Consignor/exporter (name and address)". When completing the graphs, the name of the consignor (exporter) either according to the testimony of its state registration, or a document, evidencing the actual location of the consignor (exporter), may be used. If the consignor and exporter are different legal entities, it should be indicated that the consignor (name and address) acts on behalf ("to order") of the exporter (name and address). The same names and addresses of the consignor (exporter) and the consignee (importer) respectively, as contained in other shipping documents, relating to the shipment of goods (the trade agreement /transaction, invoice, customs declaration, etc.) shall be indicated; 2) Section 2 - "The consignee/importer (name and address)". When completing this section, the name of the consignee (importer) may be indicated in accordance with the certificate of its registration or the document, confirming the actual location of the consignee (importer). In case where the consignee and the importer are different legal entities, it should be indicated that the consignee (name and address) acts on behalf ("to order") of the importer (name and address). The same names and addresses of the consignor (exporter) and the consignee (importer) respectively, as contained in other shipping documents, relating to the shipment of goods (the trade agreement /transaction, invoice, customs declaration, etc.) shall be indicated; 3) Section 3 - "Means of transport and route (as far as known)". Means of transport and route, as far as known, are to be indicated; 4) Section 4 - indicates the registration number of the certificate, the country, that issued the certificate, and the country, for which the certificate is intended. The registration number may be indicated by hand-writing or stamping; 5) Column 5 - "For official use" ("For official use"). Official marks of state regulatory authorities of the countries of export, transit, and (or) the receipt of goods and, if necessary, the following records: "Duplicate", "Issued instead of certificate form CT-2", "Issued retrospectively", as well as other records, provided for by these Rules, shall be imprinted, made by hand or stamped in this section. Entries that are made by hand, shall be certified in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article; 6) Section 6 - "N". The serial number of the goods; 7) Section 7 - "Number and kind of packages". Indicates the number and kind of packages; 8) Section 8 - "Description of goods". Indicates the commercial name of goods, and other information to allow unambiguous identification of goods with respect to the claimed for customs declaration. In case of insufficient space in the section 8 it is allowed to use an additional sheet (sheets) of origin of goods (the form of additional sheets is presented in Annex 2, which is an integral part of these Rules), executed in the prescribed manner (authenticated signature, seal and bearing the same registration number, which is indicated in section 4 of the certificate). In the case of movement of the consignment with a considerable list of nomenclature names, provided that all goods are classified in the same heading and have the same criterion of origin, it is allowed to use the shipping document (invoice, proforma invoice, bill of lading or other document, which reflects the quantitative characteristics of the goods), which contains the full listing of products, instead of additional sheet (sheets) of the certificate. This shipping document, on the first sheet of which the registration number and date of issuance of the certificate shall be indicated, is to be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country simultaneously with the certificate. The information about the origin of goods in the shipping documents is certified by the same competent authority, that issued the certificate. In the section 8 of certificate, reference is made to the appropriate shipping document indicating its details and the number of sheets; 9) Column 9 - "Origin criterion". Identifies the following origin criteria: "P" - goods wholly obtained in the exporting country; "Y" - the goods subjected to sufficient processing (treatment) (with indication the percentage of the value of raw materials, semi-finished or finished products, originating in another State, or of unknown origin, used in the manufacture of goods, in the value of exported goods, determined on the basis of "ex-works" price of the manufacturer, for example, "Y 15%"); "Pk" - the origin of goods is obtained by using the cumulative principle. If in the certificate a variety of products is listed, some of which are classified in the same four-digit heading of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, it is allowed to specify a single letter of the criterion of origin for all products of this four-digit heading in section 9. If in the certificate goods classified in different headings of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, and (or) having different criteria of origin, are listed, in column 9 the criteria of origin shall be indicated separately for all the declared goods; 10) Section 10 - "Quantity of goods". Indicates gross weight/net weight (kg), and (or) other quantitative characteristics of the goods under the Commodity Nomenclatures of the Parties. The actual quantity of delivered goods shall not exceed the quantity specified in the certificate, for more than 5 percent. Net weight is indicated including the primary packaging, inseparable from the goods in retail trade; 11) Section 11 - "Number and date of invoice". Contains information on the invoice or pro forma invoice or other document, that reflects the financial and (or) quantitative specification of the goods; 12) Section 12 - "Certification". Shall be completed by an authorized body and contains it’s name, address, stamp and date of issuance of the certificate (duplicate), as well as a signature, name and initials of the person, authorized to verify the certificate (duplicate). The date and the names and initials of the authorized person may be reflected by means of hand-writing or stamping; 13) Section 13 - "Declaration by the applicant". Indicates the country, where the goods were wholly produced or undergone sufficient processing (treatment), the date of declaration of information on the country of origin of the goods, and shall contain stamps of the applicant, signature, name and initials of the applicant. The date and the names and initials of the applicant may be reflected by means of hand-writing or stamping. 6. In the case, where the goods are exported (imported) by a natural person - resident of one of the States Parties, the certificate is executed, taken into account the following features: Section 1 - the surname, initials and address of the consignor; Section 2 – shall indicate, if such data is available, the name, initials of the consignee, his address, and the annotation "For free circulation"; It is acceptable if the consignor and the consignee are the same individuals; Sections 5 and 11 in the absence of data may be left empty; Section 13 shall be signed by the consignor, and indicate the date of declaration of country of origin of goods, as well as the name and initials of the shipper. 7. Completing the certificate on the reverse side of the form is not allowed. ARTICLE 13 Grounds for Denial in Granting of the Free Trade Regime The Customs Authority of the State Party denies in granting of the free trade regime for goods, originating in and imported from the States Parties in case of: 1) breaching of the conditions of granting of the free trade regime, referred to in Article 8 of these Rules; 2) the customs authorities of the importing country within 3 years receive from the competent authorities of the country of export evidence that the certificate has not been issued (counterfeit), was revoked or was issued on the basis of invalid, unreliable or incomplete documents and (or) information; 3) within 6 months from the date of the request, referred to in paragraph 4 of Article 11 of these Rules, a response regarding the requested certificate from the competent authorities of the country of export or country of origin is not received, or if there is a case, provided for by paragraph 8 of Article 11 of these Rules. ARTICLE 14 Transitional and Final Provisions Certificate of origin on the blank form "Certificate of Origin Form A" as used currently in the trade between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Serbia in accordance with the Agreement, may be used for the purposes of confirmation of the origin of the goods in accordance with the provisions of these Rules within 6 months from the date of the applicability of these Rules. Annex 1 To the Rules for Determining the Country of origin of the Goods Annex 2 To the Rules for Determining the Country of origin of the Goods Annex 3 To the Rules for Determining the Country of origin of the Goods
