MainText:
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN ON TRADE AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION (FREE TRADE AGREEMENT) (Dushanbe, October 10, 1992) The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, hereafter – “the Contracting Parties”, striving to develop trade and economic cooperation between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Tajikistan based upon equality and mutual benefits, based upon the sovereign rights of each Contracting Party to conduct its independent foreign economic policy and enforce relevant international obligations and realization of proclaimed aims, striving to endeavor to the creation of common market of goods, services, capital and labour, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 1 1. Contracting Parties shall not apply customs duties, taxes and charges having equivalent impact on import of goods originating from the customs territory of one of Contracting Parties and destined for the customs territory of the other Contracting Party. Exceptions from this trade regime on the agreed nomenclature of goods shall be formulated by annual Protocol, which shall be an integral part of this Agreement. 2. For the purposes of this Agreement, and for its effective term, goods originating from the territories of Contracting Parties shall be deemed to be: (a) Completely produced in the territory of Contracting Parties; or (b) Having been processed on the territory of Contracting Parties by utilizing raw materials, materials and components of third country origin, whose classification under the Harmonized System of Commodity Description and Coding changed in at least one of the first four digits due to this processing; (c) Produced with the use of raw materials, materials and components listed in "b" of the above provided that their total cost does not exceed a fixed proportion of the export price of commodities sold. Detailed rules on establishing origins of goods shall be coordinated by Contracting Parties and included in a document that shall become an integral part of this Agreement. ARTICLE 2 Contracting Parties shall not: - directly or indirectly impose internal taxes or charges on goods, covered by this Agreement, in excess of corresponding taxes and charges imposed on similar goods of domestic production or of third country origin; - apply in respect of import or export of goods, covered by this Agreement, any special limitations or requirements that are applied under similar circumstances to similar goods of domestic production or of third country origin; - apply rules to warehousing, reloading, storage, and transportation of goods that originating from the territory of the other Contracting Party, as well as to payments and payment transfers, other than those applied in similar situations regarding goods of domestic production or of third country origin. ARTICLE 3 1. Contracting Parties shall refrain from introducing quantitative restrictions or its equivalents on export and import of goods within the framework of this Agreement. 2. Quantitative restrictions referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may be introduced unilaterally within reasonable time frames and on strictly defined period only in case of: - sharp deficit in this good on domestic market - until the situation on domestic market will stabilize, or - sharp deficit in the balance of payment - until the balance of payment situation stabilizes, or - for the purposes of exercising the measures provided by the Article 4 of this Agreement. 3. Quantitative restrictions referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may also be introduced by mutual agreement of the Parties and shall be included in the annual protocols as referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 1 of this Agreement. 4. A Contracting Party that applied quantitative restrictions under paragraph 2 of this Article shall upon the request of the other Contracting Party, immediately provide the necessary information on the reasons, forms, and possible time frames for using the above mentioned restrictions. 5. Contracting Parties shall endeavour to solve all issues arising in relation to application of quantitative restrictions under Paragraph 2 of this Article by means of consultations. ARTICLE 4 Each Contracting Party shall not permit re-export of goods in relation to export of which the other Contracting Party, where these goods originate from, applies measures of tariff and non-tariff regulation. Re-export of such goods into third countries may be permitted only upon written consent and on conditions stipulated by an authorized state agency of the country of origin of these goods. In case of non-compliance with this provision, the Contracting Party whose interests have been violated has the right for unilateral introduction of measures to regulate export of goods into the territory of the state that permitted the non-sanctioned re-export. In addition the latter shall repay the full amount of such re-export proceeds to the country of origin of relevant goods. For the purposes of this Article the term "re-export" refers to the export of goods, originating from the customs territory of one Contracting Party, as defined in paragraph 2 of Article 1 of this Agreement, by the other Contracting Party to the outside of the customs territory of the latter, for the purpose of exporting it into a third country. ARTICLE 5 Contracting Parties will on a regular basis exchange information on customs issues, including customs statistics. Relevant authorized bodies of the Contracting Parties shall coordinate the way to exchange such information. ARTICLE 6 1. The Contracting Parties will endeavor to bring together the levels of customs duty rates applied in trade with third countries and for these purposes agreed to conduct regular consultations. 2. The Contracting Parties shall inform each other of all exceptions to the current customs tariffs, applied unilaterally. ARTICLE 7 Contracting Parties shall consider incompatible with the purposes of this Agreement any unfair business practices and shall not allow and eliminate the following methods thereof: agreements between enterprises, decisions made by the associations of enterprises, and general methods of business practices aimed at hindering or limiting competition or disrupting the competitive environment in the territories of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 8 For the purposes of applying measures of tariff and non-tariff regulation in the bilateral economic relationships, statistical information exchange, and for carrying out customs procedures, the Contracting Parties agreed to use the unified, nine-digit Commodity Nomenclature of Foreign Economic Activities (CN FEA), based upon the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and Combined Tariffs and Statistics Nomenclature of the Eurasian economic community. For their own needs Contracting Parties may expend this Commodity Nomenclature beyond the nine digits if necessary. Introduction of the reference original of the Commodity Nomenclature is carried out by the Russian Federation through the existing representations in the relevant international organizations. ARTICLE 9 Contracting Parties shall not use state aid in the form of subsidies to enterprises or in any other form if the result of such state aid would be the distortion of normal economic conditions in the territory of the other Contracting Party. ARTICLE 10 Contracting Parties agree that the adherence to the principle of freedom of transit is the major condition for achieving goals of this Agreement and a substantial element in the process of their integration into the system of international division of labour and cooperation. Thereupon each Contracting Party shall provide unimpeded transit through its territory for goods originating from the customs territory of the other Contracting Party or third countries and destined for the customs territory of the other Contracting Party or any third country, and shall supply exporters, importers, and carriers with all facilities and services available and necessary for ensuring transit on terms not worse than those granted to national exporters, importers, or carriers, or exporters, importers or carriers of any other third state. Contracting Parties agree that transit tariffs for all types of transportation, including tariffs for loading and unloading operations, shall be economically justified and shall not exceed normal operational expenses, including reasonable profit rates. Contracting Parties shall not request payment for warehousing, reloading, storage, and transportation of goods in the currency of any third state. ARTICLE 11 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Contracting Parties from taking measures which they consider necessary for protecting their vital interests or which are undoubtedly necessary for compliance with international agreements to which they are or intend to become parties, if these measures relate to: - information affecting the interests of national defence; - trade in arms, munitions and military equipment; - research or production related to the defence needs; - supply of materials and equipment used in nuclear industry; - protection of public morality and public order; - protection of industrial and intellectual property; - gold, silver, and other precious metals and stones; - protection of human, animal and plant life. ARTICLE 12 With the goal of pursuing coordinated policy of export control in relation to the third countries, Contracting Parties shall establish an Inter-State Coordination Council on Export Control consisting of the heads of national bodies of export control and support staff. Functions of Inter-State Coordination Council shall include the approval of common check lists of goods and services, examination of cases of export control requirements violation, elaboration of proposals to introduce or to call off sanctions, as well as other questions of export control. ARTICLE 13 Provisions of this Agreement shall replace the provisions of agreements concluded earlier by the Contracting Parties insofar as the latter are incompatible or identical with the former. Contracting Parties will instruct their competent authorities to prepare an appropriate protocol on this matter. ARTICLE 14 This Agreement shall not affect other Agreements concluded earlier by the Contracting Parties with third countries. ARTICLE 15 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Contracting Parties from establishing relationships which do not contradict the goals and terms of this Agreement with the states which are not parties to this Agreement and with their associations and international organizations. ARTICLE 16 Disputes between Contracting Parties related to interpretation or application of provisions of this Agreement shall be resolved by means of negotiations. ARTICLE 17 To achieve the goals of this Agreement and to elaborate recommendations for developing trade and economic cooperation between the two countries, Contracting Parties have agreed to establish a joint Russian-Tajik commission. ARTICLE 18 Contracting Parties have agreed that the Russian Federation may establish its trade representation in the Republic of Tajikistan, and the Republic of Tajikistan may establish its trade representation in the Russian Federation. The legal status of these trade representations, their functions and residence will be agreed by the Contracting Parties in a separate agreement. ARTICLE 19 This Agreement becomes effective upon exchange of notices of completion by the Contracting Parties of intra-state procedures necessary for its entry into force. This Agreement will become invalid after twelve months from the date of written notification one of the Contracting Parties of its termination. This Agreement after its termination shall apply to the contracts among the enterprises and organizations of both countries, concluded, but not implemented during the period when the Agreement is in force. Done in the City of Dushanbe, October 10, 1992 in two originals, each in Russian and Tajik, both texts being equally authentic.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN ON TRADE AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION (FREE TRADE AGREEMENT) AS OF OCTOBER 10, 1992 (Moscow, March 1, 1993) Authorized representatives of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Tajikistan, have concluded this Protocol on the following. ARTICLE 1 Exceptions provided by Article 1 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan on Trade and Economic Cooperation (Free Trade Agreement) as of October 10, 1992, shall apply to: 1. Goods subject to the Russian legislation on export tariff, as well as the legislation on licensing and quoting of exportation of goods (works, services) which is in force at the moment of customs clearance of goods during their exportation from the Russian Federation to the Republic of Tajikistan (at the moment of signing this Protocol export tariffs in force, established by the Government of the Russian Federation Regulation No 461 as of June 30, 1992; list of the goods subject to quotas and licensing are established by the Government of the Russian Federation Regulation No 851 as of November 6, 1992); 2. Goods subject to the Tajik legislation on export tariff, as well as the legislation on licensing and quoting of exportation of goods (works, services) which is in force at the moment of customs clearance of goods during their exportation from the Republic of Tajikistan to the Russian Federation (at the moment of signing this Protocol the following legislation is in force: the Law of the Republic of Tajikistan “On customs tariff of the Republic of Tajikistan” as of November 25, 1992, the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Tajikistan Regulation “On requirements to exportation of goods and raw materials outside the Republic of Tajikistan in 1993” No. 72 as of February 15, 1993). The Parties shall immediately inform each other of all changes in the above stated exceptions. The Parties have agreed not to charge in 1993 export duties from the goods within the limits, envisaged in Annex 3 to the Protocol on realization of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan on trade and economic cooperation in 1993 as of January 14, 1993. Additional mutual exceptions of goods from export duties will be formed by separate Protocols. ARTICLE 2 1. In respect of the goods subject to tariff and non tariff export restrictions in accordance with Article 1 of this Protocol, Parties shall provide each other most favoured nation regime in regard to: customs duties, taxes and charges payable upon export, including methods of levying such duties, taxes and fees; provisions relating to customs clearance of transit, transportation, storage, reloading and other similar services; methods of payments and transfer of payments; issuance of export licenses; rules concerning the sale, purchase, transportation, distribution and use of commodities on the domestic market. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to advantages: offered by any of the Parties to third countries with the aim of creating a customs union or free trade area or as a result of the establishment of such a union or area; granted to developing countries, in accordance with the laws of the Parties; provided to the neighbouring countries in order to facilitate cross-border trade; provided by Parties to each other in accordance with special agreements. ARTICLE 3 1. This Protocol shall be integral part of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan on Trade and Economic Cooperation (Free Trade Agreement) as of October 10, 1992, and shall come into force on the same date as this Agreement. 2. This Protocol shall be valid till the new Protocol will be signed as provided by the Article 1 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan on Trade and Economic Cooperation (Free Trade Agreement) as of October 10, 1992. Done in the City of Moscow, March 1, 1993 in two originals in Russian.
