MainText:
TRADE EXPANSION AND ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN INDIA, THE UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC AND YUGOSLAVIA The Republic of India, the United Arab Republic and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (hereinafter referred to as "Participating States"): WISHING to further their common desire for co-operation on the basis of complete equality and friendly relations, observing the Principles of the United Nations Charter; BEARING in mind-the recommendations of. theFirst United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the conclusions embodied in the Charter of Algiers; TAKING note of the evolving international commercial policy regarding closer economic co-operation among developing countries for the efficient . utilisation of their resources and the acceleration of their rate of economic development; HAVING regard to the objectives and the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; and DETERMINED to take practical steps to expand the area of co-operation and undertake joint endeavours to develop mutual beneficial patterns of trade and development; -HAVE agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The objectives of this Agreement are to strengthen mutual economic co-operation, to increase trade exchanges among the Participating States, and to contribute to the development of international trade. ARTICLE II 1. Upon the entry into force of the Agreement, each Participating State shall accord special tariff concessions in customs duties in favour of the goods originating in either of the other two Participating States and listed in the Annex I to this Agreement, hereinafter referred to as the "Common List". 2. The margin of special tariff concession in each case shall be initially equivalent to 40 per cent of the effective most-favoured-nation rate of customs duty, and shall be increased to 50 per cent at the end of a twelve-month period beginning on the date the Agreement comes into force. 3. In respect of goods in the Common List which at present are subject to nil duty, special tariff concession equivalent to 50 per cent of the effective most-favoured-nation rate of customs duty shall be provided if and when duty is levied on such products.ARTICLE III For the purposes of Article II, goods shall be accepted as eligible for special tariff concessions in customs duties if they are of origin of the exporting Participating State and satisfy the conditions of origin set out in Annex II and if they have been consigned to the territory of the importing Participating state from the territory of another Participating state. ARTICLE IV If as a result of the implementation of this Agreement, imports of a particular product into the territory of a Participating State from the territory of another Participating State are increasing and such increase in imports causes or would threaten to cause material injury to production which is carried on in the territory of the importing Participating State, the concerned Participating states shall consult among themselves with a view to remedying the situation. ARTICLE V The Participating states shall accord to any other interested developing country full and prompt opportunity for consultations with respect to -any matter or difficulty which may arise as a result of the implementation of this Agreement. ARTICLE VIThe Participating States shall take appropriate measures for co-operation, particularly in customs administration,, to ensure that the provisions of this Agreement are effectively and harmoniously applied. ARTICLE VII The Annexes attached to this Agreement will constitute an integral part of it and are as follows: Annex I Common List Annex II Rules of Origin of Goods (referred to in Article III of the Agreement) and Schedules A and B thereto. ARTICLE VIII A committee composed of the representatives of the Governments of the Participating States, hereinafter referred to as the "Standing Committee", shall be set up. It shall be responsible for reviewing the working of the Agreement, holding consultations thereunder and making recommendations to the Participating states in-regard to measures having a bearing on the-implementation of this Agreement, inter alia in the field of trade regulations, import regimes and trade and payment procedures. . ARTICLE IX This Agreement shall be open for accession by any developing country, member of the Group of "77f, Upon notification being received by Governments of Participating states from any such country regarding its intention to accede to this agreement, the Participating Governments shall promptly take appropriate steps to bring about such accession on a basis of mutual benefit. ARTICLE X1. The provisions of this Agreement may be modified by mutual agreement between the Participating States. 2. The Participating States shall, at the appropriate time, consider naki ng such adaptations in this Agreement as may be required in the event of a more general scheme bei adopted for multilateral expansion of trade amd economic co-operation among developing countries. ARTICLE XI The Participating States agree to consider extending special tariff concessions in customs duties in favour of products in respect of which industrial co-oneration agreements are reached among themselves. ARTICLE XII This Agreement shall be implemented from1 April 1968 and shall come into force upon the approval of the competent authorities in each country and shall remain in force for a period of five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement. Done in Delhi on the twenty-third day of December, one thousand sine hundred and sixty-seven, in three originals in the English language,all the three texts being equally authentic.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX I Common List Note: Nomenclature of tariff items in this List is given on the basis of the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature as elaborated in the Yugoslav Customs Tariff. As provided in Article II of the Agreement each Participating State shall give effect to the special tariff concessions in customs duties in respect of these items in their respective national tariffs. ANNEX II Rules of Origin of Goods (Referred to in article III of the Agreement) - For determining the origin of goods eligible to special tariff concessions in customs duties, the following Rules shall be applied: Rule 1 1. For purposes of Rule 2, the cost of production ("factory or works cost") to the manufacturer at tihe factory or works shall include also the cost of containers and other forms of interior packing ordinarily sold with the article -*en it is sold in retail or wholesale and the cost of exterior packing but shall not include any other taxes, charges or expenses incurred subsequent to its manufacture. Rule 2An article imported by a Participating State from another Participating State shall be eligible to special tariff concession subject to the following: (a) In the case of articles specified in Schedule A, that they have been wholly produced or gro-w within the area of the exportingParticipating State; (b) In the case of all other articles in the Common List: (i) that they have been wholly manufactured within the territory of the exporting Participating State, or (ii) that they have been partially manufactured and the final process of manufacture has been performed within such territory provided that in both (i) and (ii) above the expenditure on material produced and labour performed within the territory of the exporting Participating State in the manufacture of the article is not less than 50 per cent of the factory or works cost of the article in its finished state. Explanation: "Expenditure on material" means the cost to the manufacturer of the material at the factory or works, including containers. Rule 3 Any one or more of the following operations or processes shall not by themselves constitute the final process of manufacture: (a) Packing(b) Mixing (c) Bottling (d) Labelling (e) Splitting into lots (f) Sorting and grading (g) marking (h) Putting up into sets. Rule 4 In determining the place of production or consignment of marine products taken from the sea or goods produced therefrom at sea, such products shall be regarded as having been consigned from the territory of a Participating tate f they were taken or produced in a vessel chartered by, or belonging to, a Participating State and have been brought direct to the exporting Participating State. Rule 5 When determining the origin of goods, "expenditure on material" incurred in the exporting, Participating State shall include inter alia expenses incurred in respect of energy, fuel, plant,' machinery or tools in the manufacture or production of goods within the exporting Participating State and materials used in the maintenance of such plants and machinery, and tools. Rule 61. Each unit of article in a consignment shall be considered separately. 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this Rule: (a) Tools, parts and accessories which are imported with an article, and the price off which is included in that of the article or for which no separate charge is made, shall be considered as forming a whole with the article, provided that they constitute the standard equipment customarily included in the sale of articles of that kind; (b) in cases not within sub-paragraph (a) goods shall be treated as a single unit if they are so tested for purposes of assessing customs duties by the sporting Participating State. 3. An unassembled or disassembled article which is imported in more than one consignment because it is not feasible for transport or production reasons to import it ina single consignment shall, if the importer so request, be treated as one article if they are so treated for purposes of assessing customs duty in the importing Participating states. Rule 7 1. A claim that goods shall be accepted as eligible to special tariff concession in customs duties shall be supported by an appropriate certificate of origin given by a governmental authority or an authorized body nominated by the exporting Participating State and notified to the other Participating States. 2. The forms of certification shall be as prescribed in Schedule B. Rule8 1. When an importing Participating State wishes an enquiry to be made pertaining to any consignment or certificate of origin, it may make a request to the competent authority of the exporting Participating State. Upon receipt of a request in this behalf the competent authority shall, after verification of -the evidence, furnish information to the importing Participating State.Information obtained in this respect by the Participating States shall be treated as confidential. 2. A Participating State may not accept certificates of an authorized body in case it is shown to have repeatedly issued certificates not in accordance with the provisions of these Rules. Such action shall not, however, be taken without prior notification to the exporting Participating States on the grounds of dissatisfaction. Rale 9 These Rules shall be reviewed annually from the commencement of their operation and be open to such modification as may be agreed upon by the Participating States. SCHEDULE B Form of Certification Of of Goods eligible for special tariffs concessions in customs duty under Article II of the Trade Expansion and Economic Co-operationAgreement (To be given by a governmental authority or an authorised body nominated by the exporting Participating State and to be written, typed or printed in the english language on invoices of goods.) I. In the case of articles including in Schedule A to the Rules, the certification shall be as follows: "Having been authorized in accordance with Rule 7 (1) of the 'Rules of Origin of Goods', the undersigned certifies that the goods described in this invoice have been wholly grown or produced within India/Yugoslavia/ UAR. II. In the case of articles other than those specified in Schedule A, namely wholly or partially manufactured articles: "Having been authorized in accordance with Rule 7 (1) of the 'Rules of Origin of Goods' the undersigned certifies that: (1) The articles described in this invoice have been partially/wholly manufactured in India/Yugoslavia/UAR. (2) The expenditure incurred on all material produced and labour performed within India/Yugoslavia/UAR is not less than 50 per cent of the factory or works' cost of the article in its finished state. (3) The final process of manufacture of each and every article has been performed within India/Yugoslavia/UAR in accordance with the requirements of Rules 2 and 3 of the 'Rules of Origin of Goods'.
