AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF PORTUGAL
REGULATING THE USE OF THE
WATERS OF THE KUNENE RIVER
FOR THE PURPOSES OF
GENERATING HYDRAULIC
POWER AND OF INUNDATION
AND IRRIGATION IN THE
MANDATED TERRITORY OF
SOUTH WEST AFRICA. SIGNED AT
CAPE TOWN, JULY I, 1926.
Whereas by Agreement entered into at Cape 
Town and dated the 22nd day of June, 1926,
between the Plenipotentiaries of the Government
of the Union of South Africa in its capacity as
Mandatory of the Territory of South West Africa
(hereinafter referred to as the Mandated Territory)
and the Plenipotentiaries of the Government
of the Republic of Portugal it has been
finally settled that the boundary between 'the
Mandated Territory and Angola is the middle
line of the Kunene River from its mouth upto
a point on the great Rua Cana Falls above
its lip or crest, and that the parallel of latitude
further forming the boundary starts from that
point and extends due east so as to cause the
Kunene River above the Rua Cana Falls to be
excluded wholly from the Mandated Territory;
And Whereas by this final settlement the
use of the waters of the Kunene River at the
Rua Cana Falls is common to the Government
of the Union of South Africa and the Government
of the Republic of Portugal ;
And Whereas the Government of the Union
of South Africa may be desirous of utilising its
share of the water for the purpose of generating
hydraulic power ;
And Whereas it is not feasible for economic
reasons to construct all the works required for
the aforesaid purpose within the Mandated
Territory ;
And Whereas the Government of the Republic
of Portugal is mindful of the fact that from time
immemorial portions of Ovamboland now forming
part of the Mandated Territory of South
West Africa have periodically been inundated
by the flood waters of the Kunene River overflowing
its banks at various points in Portuguese
Territory ;
And Whereas the Government of the Republic
of Portugal is further mindful of the fact that
by the silting up of the inlets of some of the
natural channels of these waters into Ovamboland
the volume of such overflow has greatly
decreased ;
And Whereas it is vital to the health and
comfort if not to the very existence of the native
tribes of Ovamboland to ensure that these natural
channels shall be and remain open ;
And Whereas the Government of the Union
of South Africa has asked the Government
of the Republic of Portugal for leave to undertake
works for the purpose of restoring to the
Mandated Territory the benefits of inundation
it previously enjoyed ;
And Whereas the Government of the Republic
of Portugal for reasons of humanity agree,
under certain conditions, to allow the diversion
of the waters of the River Kunene for the
benefit of the Mandated Territory ;
And Whereas the GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION
OF SOUTH AFRICA in its aforesaid capacity has
appointed as its Plenipotentiaries :
(i) The Honourable Jacob de VILLIERS,
Judge of Appeal of the Supreme Court
of South Africa, Chairman,
(2) Gysbert Reitz HOFMEYR, Espuire, Companion
of the Most Distinguished Order
of St. Michael and St. George, Ex-Administrator
of South West Africa,
(3) Reenen Jacob VAN REENEN, Esquire,
Bachelor of Arts of the University of
the Cape of Good Hope, Civil Engineer
of the Lehigh University, Associate
Member of the American Society of
Civil Engineers, Associate Member of
the Institute of Civil Engineers;
and THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
PORTUGAL has appointed as its Plenipotentiaries
:
(I) Dr. Augusto DE VASCONCELLOS, President
of the Delegation, Senator, Minister
Plenipotentiary, Ex-Prime Minister, Ex-
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Chief of the
Portuguese Department for the League
of Nations,
(2>Vice Admiral Ernesto DE VASCONCELLos,
Director-General of the Ministry
for the Colonies, Ex-Director of Diplomatic,
Geographical and Marine Services
in the Ministry of the Colonies, Professor
of the Lisbon Colonial School, Permanent
Secretary of the Geographical
Society of Lisbon,
(3) Colonel Carlos Roma MACHADO, Military
Engineer, Director of the Geographical
Society of Lisbon, Ex-Director of Railways
and Public Works in the Colonies,
for the purpose of negotiating an agreement
whereunder, whilst retaining its sovereign rights
intact, the Government of the Republic of Portugal
concedes to the Government of the Union
of South Africa as Mandatory the right to
construct and use works in the Kunene River
within Portuguese Territory for drawing and.
conveying water from the Kunene River for
use in the Mandated Territory for the purposes
aforesaid :
Now There/ore, under and by virtue of the
authority committed to them, the said Plenipotentiaries
on behalf of their respective, Governments,
after due negotiation, agree as follows :
i. A dam, weir or barrage, for the
diversion of water to be utilised for the
generation of hydraulic power in the Mandated
Territory, may be constructed across
the Kunene River on Portuguese Territory
at a distance of not more than three kilometres
upstream from the point on the
Rua Cana Falls at which, in terms of the
Agreement dated 22nd day of June, 1926,
between the two Governments, the parallel
of latitude defining the boundary eastwards
takes its start.
2. Such dam, weir or barrage may be
constructed either by the Government of
the Union of South Africa or by the Government
of the Republic of Portugal. If either
Government wishes to construct such dam,
weir or barrage it shall give two years
written notice to the other Government,
and within that period the other Government
may signify its intention to share in
the construction, in which case plans and
estimates must be approved and the construction
technically and financially supervised
by both Governments. If the dam,
weir or barrage is jointly constructed the
cost of construction shall be equally divided
between the two Governments. If the other
Government does not within the period
specified signify its intention of sharing
in the scheme, the Government which gave
the notice shall in consultation with the
other Government be entitled to construct
such dam, weir or barrage the cost thereof
being borne by the Government constructing
the works. The other Government may,
however, at any time by giving ten years
previous notice, and upon payment of one
half the costs of construction as agreed
upon at the time of completion of the said
dam, weir or barrage, acquire a right to
share in the scheme to the extent of one
half of the water in the river. Notwithstanding
the right which each Government
has to one half share of the water, the
Government which constructs the dam,
weir or barrage shall be entitled to the use
of all the water, until such time as the other
Government shares in the scheme. But the
Government entitled to the use of all the
water, may, under contract, give a share
of the power to the other Government.
3. If the said dam, weir or barrage is
jointly constructed, the cost of maintenance
shall be equally divided between the two
Governments ; if the said works be constructed
by one Government, the maintenance
of the works shall be a charge upon
that Government until the other Government
shares therein, in which case the cost
of maintenance shall from that time onwards
be equally divided between the two Governments.
4. The Government of the Union of
South Africa shall have the right to construct
intake works in the Kunene River
immediately above the said dam, weir or
barrage on the left bank and thus to
impound and to divert into a canal to be
constructed by it on the left bank of the
river in Portuguese territory so much of the
water of the river as it may at that point
be entitled to.
5. The limits within which construction
operations, in so far as the canal is concerned,
may take place within Portuguese Territory
shall, without any owners' rights
accruing to the Government of the Union of
South Africa, be bounded on the right side
of the canal by the left bank of the Kunene
River and on the left side of the canal by a
line starting 300 metres above the intake of
the canal and continuing parallel with and
at a distance of 150 metres from the left
edge of the canal to the said boundary.
6. The Government of the Republic of
Portugal concedes to the Government of the
Union of South Africa the right to use up
to one half of the flood water of the Kunene
River for the purposes of inundation and
irrigation in the Mandated Territory provided
that the report contemplated in Article
nine (a) below shows the scheme to.
be feasible.
7. No diversion of water shall be made
by either Government between the Kazambue
Rapids and Naulila unless a quantity
sufficient for any power works constructed
at any point below the Rapids is allowed
to pass down.
8. The Government of the Union of
South Africa shall have the right :
(a) Subject to the provisions of Article
seven above, to divert by means
of diversion works of any kind the whole
or part of its half share of the flood waters
of the Kunene River at such point or
points as may on investigation by a joint
technical Commission, constituted as provided
in Article nine below, prove to be
the most suitable ;
(b) To construct and maintain the
above works on the Kunene River together
with such embankments and training
works as may be necessary for the
protection of the diversion works and
for the efficient operation of such works ;
(c) From the point or points mentioned
in paragraph (a) hereof, to construct
and maintain a canal, channel or
other aqueduct from the Kunene River
across Portuguese Territory; and
(d) To construct and maintain on
both sides of the river head regulators
at the diversion works and canals.
9. In order to undertake the investigation
mentioned in Article eight (a) above,
the Government of the Union of South
Africa and the Government of the Republic
of Portugal shall at an early date, not being
later than March, 1927, each appoint an
equal number of members on.a joint technical
Commission which shall proceed to
the locality.
Such Commission shall devise a means of
supplying water for the purposes of inundation
and irrigation in the Mandated Territory
and with that object in view, inter alia :
(a) Report on the feasibility of diverting
the water of the Kunene River;
(b) Fix the point or points for such
diversion ;
(c) Design the necessary diversion
works and canals;
(d) Estimate the cost of construction
and maintenance of such works; and
(e) Submit proposals regarding the
operation and maintenance of the works
after construction.
io. The costs of investigation by the
said Commission shall be borne by the
Government of the Union of South Africa
ii. The cost of construction and maintenance
of any works for inunda tion and
irrigation purposes in the Mandated Territory
shall be borne solely by the Government
of the Union of South Africa who
shall reimburse the Government of the Republic
of Portugal to the extent of any
expenditure which the latter may by mutual
arrangement incur in connection with or
in consequence of the construction or maintenance
of these works.
12. No charge shall be made for the
water diverted from the Kunene River for
the purpose of providing means of subsistence
for the Native Tribes in the Mandated
Territory; but should it be desired to
utilise a portion of the water referred to in
Article six above for any other purposes,
being for purposes of gain, the Government
of the Union of South Africa shall give
to the Government of the Republic of
Portugal three months' written notice of
such intention and shall pay, for such
portion of the water so utilised, to that
Government such compensation as may be
mutually agreed upon.
13. The Governmeut of the Union of
South Africa shall, subject to three months'
written notice to the Government of the
Republic of Portugal, have the right
though its engineers, surveyors and other
servants to enter upon Portuguese territory
in Angola for the purpose of surveys and
generally for obtaining information necessary
for the proper design of any works
contemplated in this Agreement. Such
investigation shall be conducted in consultation
with the Government of the
Republic of Portugal. With reference to
the inundation and irrigation works, however,
the Government of the Union of
South Africa shall not be entitled to exercise
this right unless a scheme for the diversion
of the waters has been approved of by
both Governments.
14. The Government of the Union of
South Africa shall have the right :
(a) To appropriate, remove and use
in the construction of any works contemplated
in this agreement, free of charge,
any materials lying convenient to the
works on land the property of the Goververnment
of the Republic of Portugal;
and
(b) Of access through its servants to
the sites of the works contemplated in
this agreement for construction, maintenance
and operation purposes and in
connection therewith, to do all that is
necessary and incidental to such construction,
maintenance and operation,
including the erection of a permanent
dwelling between the River and the
Canal for a caretaker of the diversion
works at the Rua Cana Falls.
15. All temporary dwellings, buildings
and labour camps that it may be necessary
to erect during the construction will be
handed over to the Government of the
Republic of Portugal after the completion
of the works.
In order that no artificial swamps may
be caused, the holes, trenches or excavations
shall, upon the completion of the
works, be filled up.
i6. It is recognised and expressly declared
that, notwithstanding the rights
granted under this Agreement, the Government
of the Republic of Portugal retains
its sovereignty over the areas affected by
the aforesaid works.
17. It is further recognised and expressly
declared that notwithstanding the rights
granted under this Agreement, the design,
construction, maintenance and operation
of the works contemplated in this Agreement
shall be subject to the laws obtaining
in the Province of Angola.
18. No hydraulic works on the Kunene
or Okavango (Cubango) Rivers, except
those at the Rua Cana Falls, may, where
these rivers form the boundary between
the Mandated Territory and Angola, be
constructed by the Government of the
Union of South Africa or by that of the
Republic of Portugal without the previous
consent of the other Government having
been obtained.
19. All disputes between the Parties
arising out of this Agreement shall be
settled by arbitration.
20. This Agreement shall take effect as
from the date of the execution thereof by
the Plenipotentiaries.
Thus done and signed at the City -f Cape
Town on the first day of July, 1926.
Jacob DE VILLIERS, Chairman.
Gys. R. HOFMEYR.
R. J. VAN REENEN.
Augusto DE VASCONCELLOS.
Ernesto DE VASCONCELLOS.
Carlos Roma MACHADO.


