AGREEMENT ON THE CONTINENTAL SHELF BETWEEN ICELAND AND JAN MAYEN* [Done at Oslo, October 22, 1981; entered into force, June 2, 1982]
The Governments of Iceland and of Norway
Desiring to determine the delimitation line on the
continental shelf in the area between Iceland and Jan Mayen,
Having agreed, by entering into the Agreement of
28 May 1980 on fishery and continental shelf questions,
on the extension of the economic zone of Iceland to
200 nautical miles also in those areas between Iceland and
Jan Mayen where the distance between the baselines is less than 400
nautical miles,
Habing agreed in Article 9 of the abovementioned
Agreement that the Parties should jointly appoint a Conciliation
Commission to submit recommendations with regard to the dividing line for the
shelf area between Iceland and Jan Mayen and having jointly appointed such
a Commission,
Having in May 1981 received the Conciliation Commission's
unanimous recommendations to the effect that the delimitation
line between the two Parties' parts of the continental shelf
in the area between Iceland and Jan Mayen shall coincide with
the delimitation line for the economic zones, and that co-operation
between the two Parties be established in connection with
the exploration for and exploitation of hydrocarbon
resources in a specified area between Iceland and Jan Mayen on
both sides of the delimitation line, and
Finding it possible to proceed on the basis of the
Commission's recommendations
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The delimitation line between the Parties' parts of the
continental shelf in the area between Iceland and Jan Mayen shall
coincide with the delimitation line for the Parties' economic zones.
Article 2
The provisions in Articles 3 to 9 apply in an area defined by
the following coordinates:
70&#186;35' N
68&#186;00' N
10&#186;30' W
6&#186;30' W
Article 3
In the first exploration phase, aimed at a systematic
geological mapping of the area defined in Article 2, the Parties
shall jointly carry out seismic and, if necessary, magnetic
surveys. The practical implementation of these surveys shall be
of the task of the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate on the basis
of plans elaborated by the two Parties' experts jointly. The costs
of the surveys shall be borne by the Petroleum Directorate/ the Norwegian State,
unless the Parties otherwise agree.
Norwegian and Icelandic experts shall have the opportunity to participate
in the surveys and in the assessment of the resulting data on an equal footing.
The data and their assessment shall be submitted to the authorities of the
two Parties. They shall be treated as confidential, unless the Parties otherwise
agree.
If there is any net profit from the sale of seismic or
magnetic data to companies or organizations, such net profit
shall be shared by the two Parties on a basis agreed between them.
Article 4
If the surveys mentioned in Article 3 indicate that it is desirable to
carry out more detailed surveys of special fields in the area, including
more detailed seismic work and the commencement of drilling, any exclusive exploration
and production licenses in respect of such special fields shall be based
on joint venture contracts, unless the Parties agree on some other form
of contract. The Parties may agree on some other form of contract. The
Parties may agree to allow governmental or non-governmental petroleum companies
to participate in such contracts.
Article 5
In the part of the area defined in Article 2 north of the delimitation
line between the two Parties' economic zones (approximately 32 750 sq.kms), Iceland
shall be entitled to participate with a share of 25 percent in such petroleum
activities as are referred to in Article 4. In negotiations with outside governmental
or non-governmental petroleum companies, Norway shall seek to arrive at an arrangement 
whereny both the Norwegian and the Icelandic percentage of the costs of such
petroleum activities are carried by the company (or companies) concerned up to the stage
where commercial finds have been declared.
If it is not possible to obtain an arrangement whereby
the two Parties' costs are carried by the company (or companies) concerned,
the Parties shall initiate negotiations on the possibility of conducting
the operations as a joint venture where each of them carries its own costs, or where
they share the costs. If Iceland does not wish to participate on this basis, Norway may
proceed on its own. If commercial finds are declared, Iceland shall be entitled, at this stage,
to enter into participation with its share in rturn for reimbursing
Norway for that share of the costs incurred up to this juncture which
would correspond to Iceland's share if Iceland had participated from the outset.
Norwegian legislation, Norwegian petroleum policy and
Norwegian regulations relating to the control of such activities, safety
measures and environmental protection shall apply to the activities in the
area referred to in the first paragraph. The Norwegian authorities shall also be
responsible for enforcement and administration in the said area.
Article 6
In the part of the area defined in Article 2 south of the delimitation line between
the two Parties' economic zones (approximately 12 720 sq.kms), Norway shall be entitled
to participate with a share of 25 percent in such petroleum activities as are referred to
in Article 4. In negotiations with outside governmental or non-governmental petroleum
companies, Iceland shall not be bound to seek to arrive at an arrangement whereby the Norwegian percentage
of the costs of such petroleum activities are carried by the company (or companies) concerned.
Icelandic legislation, Icelandic petroleum policy and
Icelandic regulations relating to the control of such activities, safety measures
and environmental protection shall apply to the activities in the area referred to in the first
paragraph. The Icelandic authorities shall also be responsible for enforcement
and administration in the said area.
Article 7
After a find has been declared commercial, each of the Parties
shall carry its costs in the further development of
the field in proportion to its share under the contract concerned.
Article 8
If a hydrocarbon deposit lies on both sides of the delimitation line
between the two Parties' economic ones, or lies in its entirety south of the delimitation line,
but extends beyond the coordinates stated in Article 2, the usual unitization principles
for the distribution and exploitation of the deposit shall apply. The more detailed rules
to be applied in such cases shall be agreed between the Parties.
If a hydrocarbon deposit lies in its entirety north of the delimitation
line, but extends beyond the coordinates stated in Article 2, the deposit shall in its entirety
be considered to lie within the coordinates, cf. Articles 5, 6, and 7.
Article 9
If one of the Parties considers that the regulations relating
to safety measures and environmental protection referred to
in Articles 5 and 6 fail to provide adequate protection when
exploration or production operations are carried out in the
area defined in Article 2, the Parties shall consult each other, cf. Article 10
in the Agreement of 28 May 1980 on fishery and continental shelf questions. If,
during such consultation, the Parties fail to agree, the question shall be referred to a Conciliation
Commission consisting of three members. The Parties shall not commence or continue such
operations before the Conciliation Commission's recommendation is available,
unless there are weighty grounds for so doing.
Each of the Parties shall appoint one member of the Commission. The chairman of the Commission
shall be appointed by the Parties jointly.
The Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to
the two Governments at the earliest opportunity. The recommendations
are not binding on the Parties, but during their further discussions the Parties
shall pay reasonable regard to them.
Article 10
This Agreement shall enter into force when the Parties,
by an exchange of notes, have notified each other that the
necessary constitutional procedures have been completed.
In witness whereof the undersigned plenipotentiaries have signed this
Agreement.
Done at Oslo on 22 October 1981 in duplicate in the Icelandic and Norwegian
languages, both texts being equally authoritative.
For the Government of Iceland:
Olafur Johannesson
For the Government of Norway:
Svenn Stray
