AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS AND THE GOVERN
MENT OF THE CO-OPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF GUYANA ON
CO-OPERATION IN THE FIELD OF FISHERIES
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
Government of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana, hereafter referred [to] as
"the Contracting Parties",
Mindful of the friendly relations existing between the two countries,
Being mutually interested in co-operation in the field of fisheries,
Recognizing the necessity of undertaking fishing activities on a scientific
basis with due regard to the conservation of marine resources, and
Conscious of the need to develop and co-ordinate fishery research and the
exchange of scientific and other data in the field of fisheries,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. The Contracting Parties agree to co-operate and render mutual
assistance in the field of fisheries, and for this purpose to make arrangements and
hold discussions on practical matters concerning marine fishery research,
commercial utilization of the living resources in the waters adjacent to the
Co-operative Republic of Guyana, training of national personnel, and rendering
technical assistance in the development of the fishery industry of the
Co-operative Republic of Guyana.
Article 2. The Soviet side shall render to the Government of the
Co-operative Republic of Guyana assistance in:
(a) Conducting research for the determination of the living resources in the
waters adjacent to the Co-operative Republic of Guyana, in accordance with
the Programme agreed upon by the Contracting Parties;
(b) Developing its national fishery industry, particularly in the harvesting and
processing of fish and other marine life;
(c) Training fishery specialists of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana in
educational institutions of the U.S.S.R. and the Co-operative Republic of
Guyana, as well as on board Soviet vessels.
Article 3. With a view to realizing the co-operation envisaged by the
provisions of the present Agreement, the Soviet side:
(a) Shall provide a research vessel equipped with appropriate fishing implements
and gear and manned by a crew and scientists, and shall bear the expenses
(except the wages and salaries) of five specialists of the Co-operative
Republic of Guyana who will participate in research activities to be carried
out on board the vessel.
The results of the research will be used by the Contracting Parties for
conducting fishery activities on a scientific basis.
(b) Shall assist the Co-operative Republic of Guyana in formulating a long-term
fishery development plan and shall send their specialists to the Co-operative
Republic of Guyana to undertake, together with Guyanese specialists,
surveys, and to collect data to elaborate the said plan.
Article 4. The Contracting Parties agree to organize a joint venture for
harvesting fish and other marine resources in the waters adjacent to the
Co-operative Republic of Guyana.
The terms, conditions and measures, in connection with the operations of the
Soviet fishing vessels and the organization of the joint fisheries, including the
most acceptable form of a Joint Soviet-Guyanese Enterprise for harvesting and
processing fish and other commercial species and for marketing fish products,
will be specified in appropriate supplementary documents to be signed by the
competent authorities of the Contracting Parties as addenda to this Agreement.
Article 5. The Government of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana
through its competent authorities shall enter into supplementary agreements with
the competent authorities of the USSR to set out the terms and conditions in
respect of the following matters:
(a) The number of Soviet fishery vessels entering the ports of the Co-operative
Republic of Guyana and operating within the 200-mile fishing zone.
(b) The scope of their operations and the facilities for servicing them.
(c) The points specified by the Guyana side at which such vessels shall anchor
and berth in the Co-operative Republic of Guyana.
(d) The facilities for preventive and between-voyage repairs which shall be
done by Soviet replacements teams.
(e) "Aeroflot" flights to the Co-operative Republic of Guyana to transport
replacement crews and spare parts for the fishing vessels.
(f) The loading, unloading and reloading of fish and other marine life as well as
technical materials and supplies at points specified by the Guyana Side.
(g) The facilities to obtain supplies of fresh water, fuel and food.
(h) The entry and exit of crews of the Soviet fishing vessels in the ports of the
Co-operative Republic of Guyana.
Article 6. For the purpose of implementing the provisions of the present
Agreement the Government of the USSR shall establish a Mission of the Ministry
of Fisheries of the USSR in the Co-operative Republic of Guyana on terms and
conditions agreed upon by the Contracting Parties.
Article 7. A Mixed Soviet-Guyanese Commission shall be established to
work out and put into effect measures to implement the provisions of this
Agreement.
Within three months after this Agreement comes into force, each Contracting
Party shall designate its Representative and Deputy Representative and submit
their names to the other Contracting Party.
The Mixed Commission shall be convened once a year alternately in the
territory of the two Contracting Parties. If one of the Contracting Parties requests
a meeting the Mixed Commission shall meet not later than three months after the
request of the Contracting Party is received.
The deliberations of the Joint Commission shall be governed by the Statute
elaborated at its first session and approved by the Contracting Parties.
Article 8. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of its signature.
The Agreement shall remain in force for a period of five years and shall be
extended for successive two-year periods, unless either Party declares its desire
to terminate it by giving notice to the other Party at least six months prior to the
expiration of the period.
DONE in duplicate in the city of Georgetown this 17th day of May 1977, each
in the Russian and English languages, both texts being equally authoritative.
For the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics
I. Shinkarev
For the Government of the Co-operative
Republic of Guyana
H. D. Hoyte

