Agreement between the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark and the
Government of the Kingdom of Norway concerning the Delimitation of the
Continental Shelf in the Area between the Faroe Islands and Norway and
concerning the Boundary between the Fishery Zone near the Faroe Islands and the
Norwegian Economic Zone
(15 June 1979)
The Government of the Kingdom of Denmark and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway,
Having decided to delimit the continental shelf in the area between the Faroe Islands and Norway,
Having decided that, for the time being, they will not establish the boundary farther north than to the point which lies
200 nautical miles from the nearest points of the baselines from which the width of the Contracting Parties' territorial sea is
measured, and,
Desiring at the same time to establish the boundary between the fishery zone near the Faroe Islands and the Norwegian
economic zone,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The boundary between that part of the continental shelf in the area between the Faroe Islands and Norway over which
the Kingdom of Denmark and the Kingdom of Norway respectively exercise sovereignty shall, in so far as the exploration and
exploitation of natural resources is concerned, be the mid-line, which is defined as the line equidistant at each of its points from
the nearest points on the baselines from which the width of the Contracting Parties' territorial sea is measured.
Article 2
1. In the application of the mid-line principle referred to in article 1, the south end-point of the boundary line
shall be defined as the point (Point No. 1) which is equidistant from the nearest points on the baselines from which the territorial
sea of the Kingdom of Denmark near the Faroe Islands, of the Kingdom of Norway and of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland is measured.
From Point No. 1, the boundary line is traced as the geodesic to the point of intersection (Point No. 2) of the lines
which lie 200 nautical miles (1 nautical mile equals 1,852 metres) from the nearest points of the baselines from which the width
of the Contracting Parties' territorial sea is measured.
The positions of the aforementioned points are:
Point No. 1: 63&#186; 53' 14.93" N., 0&#186; 29' 19.55" W.
Point No. 2: 64&#186; 25' 59.52" N., 0&#186; 29' 12.22" W.
2. The positions referred to above are defined in geographical latitude and longitude with respect to the European
Datum (first revision, 1950).
3. As an illustration, the boundary line is drawn on the map annexed to this Agreement.
Article 3
If it is found that natural resources on the sea-bed or in the subsoil thereof extend on both sides of the boundary between
the shelf areas of the Contracting Parties in such a way that the resources situated in one Party's continental shelf area can be
extracted in whole or in part from the other Party's area, an agreement concerning the exploitation of the natural resources in
question shall be concluded at the request of either Contracting Party.
Article 4
The boundary between the fishery zone near the Faroe Islands and the Norwegian economic zone shall follow the
boundary line referred to in article 2.
Article 5
The Agreement shall be ratified. The exchange of the instruments of ratification shall take place at Oslo.
The Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the exchange of the instruments of ratification.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed
this Agreement.
DONE at Copenhagen on 15 June 1979, in duplicate in the Danish and Norwegian languages, both texts being equally
authentic.

