amendments to the agreement for the establishment of the indo-pacific fisheries councilsource: agreement for the establishment of the indo-pacific fisheries council, as amendedwords added are in brackets; words deleted are in square brackets.preamblethe governments of burma, china, france, india, the netherlands, the republic of the philippines, the united kingdom and the united states of america, members of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations, having a mutual interest in the development and proper utilization of the living aquatic resources of the indo-pacific areas, and desiring to further the attainment of these ends through international co-operation by the establishment of an indo-pacific fisheries council agree as follows: ARTICLE ithe council1. the contracting governments agree to establish, a council, to be known as the indo-pacific fisheries council, for the purpose of carrying out the functions and duties hereinafter set forth in article iv.2. the members of the council shall be [the governments] ARTICLE iiorganization1. each member [government] shall be represented at sessions of the council by a single delegate, who may be accompanied by an alternate and by experts and advisers. participation in sessions of the council by alternates, experts and advisers shall not entail the right to vote, except in the case of an alternate who is acting in the place of a delegate during his absence.2. each member [government] shall have one vote. decisions of the council shall be taken by a majority of the votes cast, except when a greater majority is required by t his agreement or by the rules governing the procedure of the council. a majority of the total membership of the council shall constitute a quorum.[3. the council shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman who with the immediately retiring chairman shall constitute the executive committee. in the unavoidable absence of one or two members of the executive committee from a committee session, the chairman shall have the power to co-opt the chairman of one or two of the technical committees which may from time to time be established in accordance with the rules governing the procedure of the council, at his discretion, to substitute the absent committee member or members for that committee session only, provided that one permanent member of the executive committee shall always be present and that the number of voting members attending the committee session shall in no case exceed three.][4. the council shall determine the frequency, dates and places of its sessions and establish rules governing its procedure.][5. the chairman shall call a session of the council at least once in every two years, unless directed otherwise by a majority of the member governments. the initial session shall be called by the food and agriculture organization of the united nations within six months after the entry into force of this agreement and at such place as it may designate.][6.]. pending the establishment of such a regional office, the council shall select a temporary seat within that area.[7.] ARTICLE iiicommittees and working parties ARTICLE [iii] ivfunctionsthe council shall have the following functions and duties:a. to formulate the oceanographical, biological and other technical aspects of the problems of development and proper utilization of living aquatic resources;b. to encourage and co-ordinate research and application of improved methods in every day practice;c. to assemble, publish or otherwise disseminate oceanographical, biological and other technical information relating to living aquatic resources;d. to recommend to members [governments] such national or co-operative research and development projects as may appear necessary or desirable to fill gaps in such knowledge;e. to undertake, where appropriate, co-operative research and development projects directed to this end;f. to propose, and where necessary to adopt, measures to bring about the standardization of scientific equipment, techniques and nomenclature;g. to extend its good offices in assisting members [governments] to secure essential material and equipment;h. to report upon such questions relating to oceanographical, biological and other technical problems as may be recommended to it by members [governments] or by the [food and agriculture] organization [of the united nation s] and other international, national or private organizations with related interests;i. [to report biennially to the conference of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations upon its activities for the information of the conference; and to make such other reports to the food and agriculture organization of the united nations on matters falling within the competence of the council as may seem to it necessary and desirable.] ARTICLE [iv] vareathe council shall carry out the functions and duties set forth in article iv i n the indo-pacific area ARTICLE [v] vicooperation with inter national bodiesthe council shall co-operate closely with other international bodies in matters of mutual interest ARTICLE [vi] viiexpenses1. the expenses of delegates and their alternates, experts and advisers occasioned by attendance at sessions of the council shall be determined and paid by their respective governments.2. the expenses of the secretariat, including publications and communications, and of the chairman, the vice-chairman and the immediately retired chairman of the council, when performing duties connected with its work during intervals between its sessions, shall be determined and paid by the [food and agriculture] organization [of the united nations] within the limits of a biennial budget prepared and approved in accordance with the [current regulations of that organization] 3. the expenses of research or development projects undertaken by individual members of the council, whether independently or upon the recommendation of the council, shall be determined and paid by their respective governments.4. the expenses incurred in connection with co-operative research or development projects undertaken in accordance with the provisions of article [iii] 5. ARTICLE [vii] viiiamendments[any proposal for amending this agreement shall require the approval of a two-thirds majority of all the members of the council. an exception to this rule is made in the following cases:(1) amendments to the agreement extending the functions of the council require the approval of the conference of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations in addition to approval by a two-thirds majority of all the members of the council;(2) amendments of the agreement extending the powers of the council to incur expenses to be borne by the food and agriculture organization of the united nations, shall require the approval of a two-thirds majority of all the members of the council and of the director-general of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations.] ARTICLE [viii] ixacceptance1. this agreement shall be open to acceptance by [governments which are members of the food and agriculture] organization [of the united nations].2. [this agreement shall also be open to acceptance by governments which are not members of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations, with the approval of the conference of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations and of two-thirds of the members of the council.] participation by such [governments] nations in the activities of the council shall be contingent upon the assumption of a proportionate share in the expenses of the secretariat, as determined [by the council and approved] by the [food and agriculture] organization [conference].3. [the notifications of acceptance of this agreement shall be deposited with the director-general of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations, who shall immediately inform all the governments concerned of their receipt.] ARTICLE [ix] xentry into force[1.] this agreement shall enter into force upon the date of receipt of the fifth [notification] of acceptance.[2. notifications of acceptance received after the entry into force of this agreement shall take effect on the date of their receipt by the director-general of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations who shall immediately inform all the governments concerned and the council of their receipt.] ARTICLE xiterritorial application ARTICLE [x] xiiwithdrawal notice of withdrawal shall become effective three months from the date of its receipt by the director-general. ARTICLE xiiiinterpretation and settlement of disputes ARTICLE xivtermination ARTICLE xvcertification and registration[formulated at baguio this 26th day of february, one thousand nine hundred and forty-eight, in the english language, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations which shall furnish certified copies thereof to the governments members of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations.]adopted at karachi on 20 january 1961 by the indo-pacific fisheries council at its ninth session and approved at rome on 23 november 1961 by the eleventh session of the conference of the food and agriculture organization.
