AGREEMENT CONCERNING THE ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CONDI
TIONS OF APPROVAL AND RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF APPROVAL FOR
MOTOR VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND PARTS. DONE AT GENEVA ON
20 MARCH 1958
ENTRY INTO FORCE of Regulation No. 59 (Uniformprovisions concerning the approval of
replacement silencing systems) as an annex to the above-mentioned Agreement of
20 March 1958'
The said Regulation came into force on 1 October 1983 in respect of Belgium and France,
in accordance with article 1 (5) of the Agreement:
Regulation No. 59
UNIFORM PROVISIONS CONCERNING THE APPROVAL OF REPLACEMENT
SILENCING SYSTEMS
1. SCOPE
This Regulation contains provisions relating to the approval of silencing systems or
components thereof to be fitted to one or more given types of motor vehicles in
categories MI and NI* as replacement parts.
2. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Regulation,
2.1. "Silencing system" means a complete set of components necessary for limiting the
noise produced by the engine of a motor vehicle and its exhaust;
2.2. "Silencing system component" means one of the separate components which to
gether form the exhaust system (e.g. silencer proper, expansion chamber,
resonator);
2.3. "Silencing system of different types" means silencing systems which differ significantly
in such respects as:
2.3.1. That their components bear different trade names or marks,
2.3.2. That the characteristics of the materials constituting a component are different or
that the components differ in shape or size, a modification regarding the coating
(zinc coating, aluminium coating, etc.) is not considered changing the type,
* Category M: Power-driven vehicle having at least four wheels or having three wheels when the maximum weight
exceeds 1 metric ton, and used for the carriage of passengers. (Articulated vehicles comprising two non-separable but ar
ticulated units shall be considered as single vehicles.)
Category Mj: Vehicles used for the carriage of passengers and comprising not more than eight seats in addition to
the driver's seat.
Category N: Power-driven vehicles having at least four wheels or having three wheels when the maximum weight
exceeds 1 metric ton, and used for the carriage of goods.
Category Nj: Vehicles used for the carriage of goods and having a maximum weight not exceeding 3.5 metric tons.
In conformity with "Classification of vehicles" in Regulation No. 13 (E/ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505/Rev.l/
Add.l2/Rev.2, paragraph 5.2).
2.3.3. That the operating principles of at least one component are different,
2.3.4. That their components are combined differently;
2.4. "Replacement silencing system or components of said system" means any part of the
exhaust system defined in paragraph 2.1 above intended for use on a vehicle, other
than a part of the type fitted to this vehicle when submitted for type approval pursu
ant to this Regulation;
2.5. "Approval of a replacement silencing system or components of said system" means
the approval of the whole or part of a silencing system adaptable to one or several
specified types of motor vehicles, as regards the limitation of their noise level;
2.6. "Vehicle type" means a category of motor vehicles which do not differ significantly in
such respects as:
2.6.1. The lines and constituent materials of the body (more particularly the engine com
partment and its soundproofing),
2.6.2. The length and width of the vehicle,
2.6.3. The type of engine (positive ignition, compression ignition, two stroke or four
stroke, reciprocating or rotary), number and capacity of cylinders, number of carbu
rettors, arrangement of valves, maximum horse-power and corresponding engine
speed (r.p.m.), etc.
2.6.4. Number and ratios of gears, total ratio of the transmission,
2.6.5. The number, type and arrangement of the exhaust systems, and
2.6.6. The number, type and arrangement of the intake systems.
3. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL
3.1. The application for approval of a replacement silencing system or components of
said system shall be submitted by its manufacturer or by his duly accredited represen
tative.
3.2. It shall be accompanied by the undermentioned documents in triplicate and the fol
lowing particulars:
3.2.1. A description of the vehicle type(s) on which the system or components is intended to
be mounted, with regard to the items mentioned in paragraph 2.6 above. The num
bers and/or symbols identifying the engine type and the vehicle type shall be
specified and the vehicle type approval number, if necessary;
3.2.2. A description of the assembled silencing system showing the relative position of each
of its components, as well as mounting instructions;
3.2.3. Detailed drawings of each component to enable it to be easily located and identified,
and a specification of the material used.
3.3. On request of the technical service conducting the tests for approval, the manufac
turer of the silencing system shall submit:
3.3.1. Two samples of the system or components submitted for approval;
3.3.2. A sample of the original silencing system with which the vehicle was equipped when
submitted for type approval;
3.3.3. A vehicle representative of the type to which the system is to be fitted: this vehicle,
when measured for noise emission according to the methods described in paragraphsS.
l and3.2of annex 3 to Regulation No. 51 must satisfy the following condi
tions:
3.3.3.1. The noise level when the vehicle is in motion must not exceed the limit applicable to
the category of vehicle concerned at the time when the type to which the vehicle
belongs was approved; furthermore, it must not exceed by more than 3 dB(A) the
noise level indicated in the approval of the type to which the vehicle belongs;
3.3.3.2. The noise level when the vehicle is stationary does not exceed the reference value in
dicated in the approval of the type to which the vehicle belongs;
3.3.4. A separate engine, of at least the same cylinder capacity and power as that of the
above-mentioned vehicle.
4. MARKINGS
4.1. Each component of the replacement silencing system, excluding tubes and mounting
accessories, shall bear:
4.1.1. The trade name or mark of the manufacturer of the system or its components,
4.1.2. The commercial description given by the manufacturer.
4.2. Such markings shall be clearly legible and indelible.
5. APPROVAL
5.1. If the type of replacement silencing system submitted for approval pursuant to this
Regulation meets the requirements of paragraph 6 below, approval for that type
shall be granted.
5.2. An approval number shall be assigned to each type approved. Its first two digits (at
present 00 for the Regulation in its original form) shall indicate the series of amend
ments incorporating the most recent major technical amendments made to the
Regulation at the time of issue of the approval. The same Contracting Party may not
assign the same number to another type of replacement silencing system or compo
nent designed for the same type(s) of vehicle.
5.3. Notice of approval or of refusal of approval of a replacement silencing system or
components of said system pursuant to this Regulation shall be communicated to the
Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation, by means of a form conform
ing to the model in annex 1 to the Regulation, and of drawings of the silencing sys
tem or components supplied by the applicant for approval, in a format not exceeding
A4 (210 x 297 mm) or folded to that format and on an appropriate scale.
5.4. There shall be affixed to every component of silencing system conforming to a type
approved under this Regulation an international approval mark consisting of:
5.4.1. A circle surrounding the letter "E" followed by the distinguishing number of the
country which has granted approval;*
5.4.2. The number of this Regulation, followed by the letter "R", a dash and the approval
number to the right of the circle prescribed in paragraph 5.4.1;
5.4.3. The approval number shall be mentioned in the approval form, as well as the method
used for approval tests.
5.5. The approval mark shall be easily legible and indelible, when the silencing system is
mounted on the vehicle.
5.6. A component may be marked with more than one approval number if it has been ap
proved as a part of more than one replacement silencing system; in this case the circle
need not be repeated. Annex 2 to this Regulation gives an example of the arrange
ment of the approval mark.
* 1 for the Federal Republic of Germany, 2 for France, 3 for Italy, 4 for the Netherlands, 5 for Sweden, 6 for
Belgium, 7 for Hungary, 8 for Czechoslovakia, 9 for Spain, 10 for Yugoslavia, 11 for the United Kingdom, 12 for Austria,
13 for Luxembourg, 14 for Switzerland, 15 for the German Democratic Republic, 16 for Norway, 17 for Finland, 18 for
Denmark, 19 for Romania, 20 for Poland and 21 for Portugal. Subsequent numbers shall be assigned to other countries in
the chronological order in which they ratify or accede to the Agreement concerning the Adoption of Uniform Conditions
of Approval and Reciprocal Recognition of Approval for Motor Vehicle Equipment and Parts, and the numbers thus
assigned shall be communicated by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the Contracting Parties to the Agree
ment.
6. SPECIFICATIONS
6.1. General specifications
6.1.1. The replacement exhaust system or components thereof must be designed, con
structed and capable of being mounted so as to ensure that the vehicle complies with
the provisions of this Regulation under normal conditions of use, notwithstanding
any vibrations to which it may be subject.
6.1.2. The silencing system or components thereof must be designed, constructed and
capable of being mounted so that reasonable resistance to the corrosion
phenomenon to which it is exposed is obtained having regard to the conditions of use
of the vehicle.
6.2. Specifications regarding noise levels
6.2.1. The acoustic efficiency of the replacement silencing system or components of said
system shall be verified by means of the methods described in paragraphs 3.1 and 3.2
of annex 3 to Regulation No. 51.
When the replacement silencing system or components thereof is mounted on the
vehicle described in paragraph 3.3.3 above, the noise levels obtained using the two
methods (stationary and running vehicle) shall satisfy one of the following condi
tions:
6.2.1.1. They shall not exceed the values obtained with the type of vehicle concerned when
submitted for type approval,
6.2.1.2. They shall not exceed the noise values measured on the vehicle referred to in
paragraph 6.2.1 above, when this is fitted with an exhaust silencing system cor
responding to the type fitted to the vehicle when submitted for type approval.
6.3. Measurement of the vehicle performances
6.3.1. The replacement exhaust system or components thereof must be such as to ensure
that vehicle performance is comparable with that achieved with the original equip
ment exhaust system or component thereof.
6.3.2. The replacement silencing system or, depending on the manufacturer's choice, the
components of said system shall be compared with an original silencing system or
components, which are also in new condition, successively mounted on the vehicle
mentioned in paragraph 3.3.3 above.
6.3.3. The verification shall be carried out by measuring the back pressure pursuant to
paragraph 6.3.4 below.
The value measured with the replacement silencing system shall not exceed the value
measured with the original standard silencing system by more than 25 per cent under
the conditions mentioned below.
6.3.4. Test method
6.3.4.1. Test method with engine
The measurements shall be conducted on the engine referred to in paragraph 3.3.4
above coupled to a dynamometer. With the throttle completely open, the bench shall
be adjusted so as to obtain the engine speed(s) corresponding to the rated maximum
power of the engine.
For the measurement of back pressure, the distance at which the pressure tap shall be
placed from the exhaust manifold is indicated in annex 4 to this Regulation.
6.3.4.2. Test method with vehicle
The measurements shall be carried out on the vehicle referred to in paragraph 3.3.3
above.
The test shall be conducted: either on the road, or on a roller dynamometer.
With the throttle completely open, the engine must be loaded so as to obtain the
engine speed corresponding to the rated maximum power of the engine (engine
speed S).
For the measurement of back pressure, the distance at which the pressure tap shall be
placed from the exhaust manifold is indicated in annex 4 to this Regulation.
6.4. Additional specifications regarding silencing systems or components filled with
fibrous materials
Absorbing fibrous materials may be used in silencing systems or components only
when it is established by appropriate means of design and manufacturing, that the
efficiency of the system in traffic conditions is sufficient to comply with the existing
regulations. Such a silencing system is deemed to be effective in traffic conditions if
the exhaust gas is not in contact with the fibrous materials or if, the silencing system
being emptied of its absorbing materials and tested on vehicle in conformity with the
procedures described in Regulation No. 51, annex 3, paragraphs 3.1 and 3.2, the
acoustic pressure levels comply with the provisions laid down in paragraph 6.2
above.
If that condition is not fulfilled, the complete silencing system shall be submitted to a
conventional conditioning using the installation and procedure described below or
one of the two tests described in Regulation No. 51, annex 3, paragraphs 3.1.1 and
3.1.2. When the procedure described in paragraph 6.2.1.2 above is employed, the
applicant for approval may ask for the emptying or the conditioning of the original
silencing system.
6.4.1. Test method and apparatus
The exhaust system or components of said system is/are fitted to the vehicle referred
to in paragraph 3.3.3 above or the engine referred to in paragraph 3.3.4. In the
former case, the vehicle must be mounted on a roller dynamometer, and, in the
second case, the engine must be mounted on a dynamometer.
The test apparatus described below is fitted at the outlet of the silencing system.
6.4.1.1. Test apparatus
The test apparatus, a detailed diagram of which is shown in annex 3 to this Regula
tion must be fitted at the outlet of the exhaust system. Any other apparatus providing
equivalent results is acceptable.
6.4.2. Test procedure
6.4.2.1. The test apparatus shall be adjusted in such a way that the exhaust gas flow is alter
nately interrupted and re-established by the quick action valve for 2,500 cycles.
6.4.2.2. The valve is opened when the exhaust gas pressure, measured at 100 mm at least
downstream from the intake flange, reaches a value between 0.35 and 0.40 bar. It is
closed when this pressure does not differ by more than 10 per cent from its stabilized
value, measured with the valve open.
6.4.2.3. The time delay switch shall be set for the duration of gas exhaust resulting from the
provisions laid down in paragraph 6.4.2.2 above.
6.4.2.4. Engine speed shall be 75 per cent of the speed S at which, according to the manufac
turer, the engine develops maximum power.
6.4.2.5. The power indicated by the dynamometer shall be 50 per cent of the full-throttle
power measured at 75 per cent of engine speed (S).
6.4.2.6. Any drain holes shall be closed off during the test.
6.4.2.7. The entire test must be completed within 48 hours. If necessary, one cooling period
will be observed after each hour.
6.4.2.8. After conditioning, the noise level is checked pursuant to paragraph 6.2 above.
7. EXTENSION OF APPROVAL
The silencing system manufacturer or his duly accredited representative may ask the
administrative department which has granted the approval of the silencing system
for one or several types of vehicles, for an extension of the approval to other types of
vehicles.
The procedure is that described in paragraph 3 above.
Notice of the extension of approval (or refusal of extension) shall be communicated
to the Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation in accordance with the
procedure specified in paragraph 5.3 above.
8. MODIFICATION OF THE TYPE OF SILENCING SYSTEM
8.1. Every modification of the type of replacement silencing system shall be notified to
the administrative department which approved the type of silencing system. The said
department may then either:
8.1.1. Consider that the modifications made are unlikely to have an appreciable adverse
effect, or
8.1.2. Require a further test report from the technical service responsible for conducting
the tests.
8.2. Confirmation or refusal of approval, specifying the alterations, shall be com
municated by the procedure specified in paragraph 5.3 above to the Parties to the
Agreement applying this Regulation.
9. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION
9.1. Every replacement silencing system bearing an approval mark as prescribed under
this Regulation shall conform to the type of silencing system approved and satisfy
the requirements of paragraph 6 above.
9.2. In order to verify conformity as prescribed in paragraph 9.1 above, a silencing
system bearing the approval mark required by this Regulation shall be taken from
the series. Production shall be deemed to conform to the requirements of this
Regulation if the levels measured do not exceed by more than 1 dB(A) the limits
prescribed in paragraph 6.2.1 above.
10. PENALTIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION
10.1. The approval granted in respect of a type of silencing system pursuant to this Regula
tion may be withdrawn if the requirements laid down in paragraph 9 above are not
complied with, or if the silencing system or components fail to pass the tests provided
for in paragraph 9.2 above.
10.2. If a Party to the Agreement which applies this Regulation withdraws an approval it
has previously granted, it shall forthwith so notify the other Contracting Parties ap
plying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the approval form bearing at the end,
in large letters, the signed and dated annotation "APPROVAL WITHDRAWN".
11. PRODUCTION DEFINITELY DISCONTINUED
If the holder of the approval completely ceases to manufacture a type of replacement
silencing system or components of the said system in accordance with this Regula
tion, he shall so inform the authority which granted the approval. Upon receiving the
relevant communication, that authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the
Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the approval form bear
ing at the end, in large letters, the signed and dated annotation: "PRODUCTION
  DISCONTINUED".
12. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING AP
PROVAL TESTS, AND OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
The Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation shall communicate to the
United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the technical services respon
sible for conducting approval tests and of the administrative departments which
grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or refusal or withdrawal of
approval, issued in other countries, are to be sent.



ANNEX 1
Communication concerning the approval (or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval or
production definitely discontinued) of a type of replacement silencing system or com
ponents of the said system pursuant to Regulation No. 59
ANNEX 2
ARRANGEMENT OF THE APPROVAL MARK
(See paragraph 5.4 of this Regulation)
The above approval mark affixed to a component of silencing system shows that the re
placement silencing system type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E 4) pursu
ant to Regulation No. 59 under approval number 002439. The first two digits of the approval
number indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of Regula
tion No. 59 in its original form.
ANNEX 3
TEST APPARATUS
ANNEX 4
MEASURING POINTS BACK PRESSURE
Examples of possible measuring points for loss-of-pressure tests. The exact measuring
point shall be specified in the test report. It shall be in an area where gas flow is regular.

