agreement (with annex) on measures for regulating the catch and conserving stocks of seals in the north-eastern part of the atlantic ocean.source: signed at oslo, on 22 november 1957 (norway and union of soviet socialist republics) unts (no. 4476) [1958 unts 280] [came into force on 27 june 1958 by the exchange of the instruments of ratification at moscow, in accordance with article xii]the government of norway and the government of the union of soviet socialist republics,desiring to establish international co-operation with a view to achieving the optimum productivity of stocks of seals in the waters of the north-eastern part of the atlantic ocean, so that the size of these stocks may be increased and maintained at a level ensuring the maximum sustained catch, anddesiring to extend and co-ordinate scientific research with a view to studying the condition of the seal stocks in that area, anddesiring to take effective measures to achieve these ends,have resolved to conclude this agreement and have appointed as their plenipotentiaries: the government of norway: nils lyso, minister,the government of the soviet union: aleksandr akimovich ishkov, minister,who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE i1. the area to which this agreement applies shall include the waters of the north-eastern part of the atlantic ocean east of cape farewell in which the nationals of the two countries hunt seals, namely, the greenland and norwegian seas, the denmark strait and the area of jan mayen island, and also the barents sea.2. this agreement applies to the greenland seal (phoca groenlandica), the hooded seal (cystophora cristata) and the walrus (odobaenus rosmarus).3. at the proposal of the commission referred to in article iii below, this agreement may be extended to apply to the bearded seal (erignathus barbatus), the ringed seal (phoca hispida) and the white polar bear (ursus arctos), in accordance with the provisions of article vii.4. none of the provisions of this agreement shall be deemed to limit in any way the sovereign rights of the contracting parties in their territorial and internal waters ARTICLE ii1. in order to achieve the purpose of this agreement, the contracting parties have agreed upon the measures set forth in the annex1to the agreement, regulating the taking of greenland seals, hooded seals and walruses.2. the annex is an integral and inalienable part of this agreement. all references to this agreement shall be deemed to include the annex in its present form or as amended in accordance with articles iv and vii ARTICLE iiii. the contracting parties shall set up a commission, consisting of not more than three representatives from each country. furthermore, the delegations of both countries shall be entitled to invite to meetings of the commission any advisers or observers they may deem necessary.2. unless the commission decides otherwise, it shall hold a regular annual meeting alternately in each of the two countries.3. meetings shall be presided over by a representative of the country in which the meeting is being held.4. each country shall have one vote in the commission. unanimity shall be a prerequisite for all valid decisions ARTICLE ivthe commission's functions shall be as follows:(a) on the basis of scientific and practical research, to submit proposals to the two governments concerning the regulation of the hunting operations and amendments or additions to the annex referred to in article ii above;(b)) to submit proposals to the two governments concerning scientific research conducted independently or jointly by the contracting parties and concerning the co-ordination of such research;(c) lf it is deemed necessary, to submit proposals to the two governments concerning control over the implementation of the regulations governing hunting operations set forth in the annex to this agreement ARTICLE vthe contracting parties undertake, so far as is feasible, to supply the commission with any statistical, practical and scientific information that the commission considers necessary for its work ARTICLE vi1. each contracting party shall bear the costs of its own scientific research and of its participation in the commission.2. expenditure on any research carried out in common and other joint expenditure shall be shared between the contracting parties in accordance with the commission's proposals ARTICLE vii1. the commission's proposals concerning scientific research, regulations governing hunting operations and control over their implementation, the sharing of expenditure on any research carried out in common and other joint expendi• ture, and the extension of the agreement to other species of animals in accordance with article i, paragraph 3 above, shall be submitted to the two governments for approval and shall become binding if such approval is granted.2. regulations governing the hunting operations and measures for the control of their implementation proposed by the commission shall, once they have been approved, be put into effect by the contracting parties not later than two months after they become binding, unless the contracting parties agree otherwise ARTICLE viiieach contracting party undertakes to carry out such measures as may be necessary to ensure the observance of this agreement ARTICLE ix1. each contracting party shall be entitled, notwithstanding this agree• ment, to issue to its nationals licences for the taking of the marine mammals to which this agreement applies, for the following purposes:(a) for scientific research;(b) for the local indigenous inhabitants and for expeditions, provided that the raw materials are used for food, animal feed and other local domestic purposes.2. the contracting parties shall inform the commission of the issuance of all such licences ARTICLE x1. states interested in co-operating in the regulation of hunting operations and the conservation of stocks of the species of animals to which this agreement applies may, with the consent of the contracting parties, become parties to the agreement.2. applications for accession to this agreement shall be sent through diplomatic channels to the government of norway and the government of the soviet union ARTICLE xieither contracting party may notify the other in writing that it does not wish in the future to be bound by one or more provisions of the annex to this agreement. unless the contracting parties agree on another time-limit, the provision or provisions concerned shall cease to be binding on the expiry of twelve months from the receipt of the notification by the other contracting party ARTICLE x ii1. this agreement is subject to ratification and shall enter into force on the date of the exchange of the instruments of ratification, which shall take place at moscow as soon as possible.2. three years after the entry into force of this agreement, either contract• ing party may denounce it by notifying the other contracting party in writing. the agreement shall expire eighteen months after receipt of such notification by the other contracting party.done at oslo on 22 november 1957 in duplicate, in the norwegian and · russian languages, both texts being equally authentic.nils lysoa. ichkov annexin accordance with article ii of the agreement, 1 the following regulations, which shall be binding upon nationals of the two countries from the date of the entry into force of the agreement, have been established to govern the catch.l. the hunting areas set forth in this annex comprise the following:jan mayen hunting area (vesterisen): the area of the shelf ice off the eastern coast of greenland, between 77° north. latitude and a line drawn from cape nord (horn) in iceland westward to a point 66° 28' north latitude and 300 west longitude, thence in a straight line to the middle of storfjord in greenland.northern hunting area (nordisen): the area of the shelf ice off the northern part of the greenland sea, north of 77° north latitude, bounded on the east by the 20th meridian east.eastern hunting area (0stisen): the area of the shelf ice of the barents sea, east of the 20th meridian east.denmark strait hunting area: the ice pack east of greenland, south of the above• mentioned line drawn from cape nord (horn) in iceland to storfjord in greenland.2. in the hunting areas defined in paragraph 1 above, the taking of greenland seals and hooded seals is prohibited at all times of the year except the following:jan mayen hunting area (vesterisen): 7 a.m. on 20 march to midnight on 5 may.northern hunting area (nordisen): 7 a.m. on 20 march to midnight on 5 may.eastern hunting area (ostisen): 7 a.m. on 1 march to midnight on 10 may.greenwich mean time.3. in the denmark strait, norwegian vessels which have been engaged in sealing in this area for one or more years between 1952 and 1956 are temporarily authorized to hunt from 7 a.m. on 15 june to midnight on 15 july (greenwich mean time).4. the taking of walruses is prohibited in all areas throughout the year. the competent authorities of the contracting parties may issue special licences for the taking of a limited number of adult male walruses, exclusively for the needs of the local population and for expeditions, with the express proviso that the raw materials thus obtained shall be used for food, animal feed and other local domestic purposes.5. the taking of marine animals by the use of poisonous substances is prohibited. means and methods of taking or hunting marine mammals which involve substantial losses of wounded animals are also prohibited.6. animals found in the waters between ice floes or in the open seas may be hunted from vessels only by means of harpoon guns.7. in taking marine mammals on coastal rookeries, the pollution of the rookeries with the carcasses and the remains of slaughtered animals and the lighting of bonfires in the rookeries are prohibited.8. each contracting party shall lay down more detailed provisions concerning coastal hunting operations by the local population.
