AGREEMENT in the form of an exchange of letters concerning the amendment to the Agreement on fisheries between the European Economic Community, on the one hand, and the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland, on the other

A. Letter from the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland

Brussels, . . . . . .

Sir,

With reference to the agreed record of conclusions on fisheries negotiations between the European Community, one the one hand, and the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland, in the other, Copenhagen 29 June to 1 July 1994 and in particular to the amendment to the Agreement on fisheries between the European Economic Community, on the one hand, and the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland, on the other, to include joint ventures and joint enterprises, I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland are prepared to amend the said Agreement by adding the following Article:

'Article 8 a

The Contracting Parties shall promote the establishment of temporary joint ventures and joint enterprises in the fisheries sector between vessel owners in the Community and enterprises in Greenland.

Greenland shall grant the necessary authorization for such temporary joint ventures and joint enterprises established for the purpose of harvesting sea fisheries resources for operating in its fishing zone.`

I should be obliged if you could confirm that the European Community is in agreement with this amendment.

Please accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest consideration.

For the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland

B. Letter from the European Community

Brussels, . . . . . .

Sir,

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of today's date, which reads as follows:

'Sir,

With reference to the agreed record of conclusions on fisheries negotiations between the European Community, on the one hand, and the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland, on the other, Copenhagen 29 June to 1 July 1994 and in particular to the amendment to the Agreement on Fisheries between the European Economic Community, on the one hand, and the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland, on the other, to include joint ventures and joint enterprises, I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Denmark and the local Government of Greenland are prepared to amend the said Agreement by adding the following Article:

"Article 8 a

The Contracting Parties shall promote the establishment of temporary joint ventures and joint enterprises in the fisheries sector between vessel owners in the Community and enterprises in Greenland.

Greenland shall grant the necessary authorization for such temporary joint ventures and joint enterprises established for the purpose of harvesting sea fisheries resources for operating in its fishing zone."

I should be obliged if you could confirm that the European Community is in agreement with this amendment.`

I have the honour to confirm the agreement of the European Community to the amendment to the Agreement on fisheries.

Please accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest consideration.

On behalf of the Council of the European Union
