amendment to the annex to the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean convention of may 9, 1952.source: united states treaties and other international agreements, vol. 13, part i, pp. 372 (tias 4992).secretariat:roy i. jacksonexecutive directorhiroshi kasaharaassistant directoroffices:6640 n.w. marine drivevancouver s, b.c.phone castle 4-0722cable address:"northcom"international north pacific fisheries commissionestablished by convention between canada, japan and the united states for the conservation of the fisheries resources of the north pacific oceandecember 1, 1961.the honourable dean rusk,secretary of state,washington 25, d.c.dear sir,on behalf of the international north pacific fisheries commission, i have the honour to transmit to your government the following recommendation with respect to the removal of herring off the coast of the united states of america south of the entrance to the strait of juan de fuca from the annex to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean [1]"whereas the international north pacific fisheries commission, in performing the functions described in article iii(1) (a) of the convention, has determined that the herring stocks off the coast of the united states of america south of the entrance to the strait of juan de fuca no longer meet the conditions of article iv of the convention, it is recommended:1. that the stocks of herring described above be removed from the annex to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean.2. that, in order to accomplish the above, and in accordance with the provisions of article vii of the convention, that paragraph 1, section (b) of the annex to the convention (as amended on may 24, 1960) [1] be amended to read as follows:(b) herring (clupea pallasii)the convention area off the coast of canada in which commercial fishing for herring of canadian origin is being or can be prosecuted."the above recommendation was adopted by the commission during the course of its eighth annual meeting, at a plenary session held on november 11, 1961.kindly note that the paragraph beginning "(b)" above contains the commission's proposal for language to amend the annex to the convention. since the convention is written in two equally authentic languages, japanese and english, i have attached to this letter a copy of the proposed amendment to the annex in japanese. this proposed amendment is identified by my signature and the date of this letter.the commission would appreciate being advised of the views of your government on the acceptance of its recommendations. with assurances of our highest esteem,yours very truly,international north pacific fisheries commissionroy i jacksonroy i. jackson,executive director.secretariat:roy i. jacksonexecutive directorhiroshi kasaharaassistant directoroffices:6640 n.w. marine drivevancouver 8, b.c.phone castle 4-0722cable address:"northcom"international north pacific fisheries commissionestablished by convention between canada, japan and the united states for the conservation of the fisheries resources of the north pacific oceanapril 2, 1962.the honourable dean ruse,secretary of state,washington 25, d.c.dear ser,in letters dated december 1, 1961, i transmitted, for the consideration of the governments of the united states, canada and japan, the recommendation of the international north pacific fisheries commission for amendment of the annex of the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean. the recommended amendment reads as follows:"(b) herring (clupea pallasii)"the convention area off the coast of canada in which commercial fishing for herring of canadian origin is being or can be prosecuted."your government accepted the commission's recommendation in a letter [1] which was received by the commission on april 2, 1962. since the approval of the government of canada was received on march 14, 1962, and the approval of the government of japan was received on march 26, 1962, the annex to the convention is considered amended from april 2, 1962, in accordance with the provisions of article vii, paragraph 1, of the convention.with assurances of our highest esteem,yours sincerely,international north pacific fisheries commissionroy i jacksonroy i. jackson,executive director.
