CONVENTION PLACING THE INTERNATIONAL
POPLAR COMMISSION WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF
FAO. APPROVED BY THE CONFERENCE OF THE
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS AT ITS TENTH SESSION, ROME,
19 NOVEMBER 1959
The Contracting Nations,
Considering
The statutes of the International Poplar Commission established in 1947 in
pursuance of a proposal by the French Government following an International
Poplar Week held in Paris,
The intention of the founders of the International Poplar Commission to estab
lish it under the aegis of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations,
The views expressed by the Ninth Session of the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Resolution 47/57 regarding the
desirability of avoiding any ambiguity with respect to the legal status of bodies
promoted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and of
clarifying their legal relationship with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, and
Reaffirming
The desirability of promoting international cooperation in the study of all
scientific, technical, social and economic aspects of Poplar cultivation,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
STATUS
The International Poplar Commission (hereinafter referred to as "the Commis
sion") shall be placed within the framework of the Food and Agriculture Organi
zation of the United Nations (hereinafter referred to as << the Organization >>) and the
present Convention whose object is to achieve that purpose shall be governed by the
provisions of Article XIV of the Constitution of the Organization.
Article II
MEMBERSHIP
1. Member Nations of the Commission shall be such Member Nations or Associate
Members of the Organization as accept this Convention in accordance with the
provisions of Article XIII of this Convention.
2. The Commission may, by a two-thirds majority of its membership, admit to
membership such other Nations that are Members of the United Nations as have
submitted an application for membership and a declaration made in a formal instru
ment that they accept this Convention as in force at the time of admission.
Article III
FUNCTIONS
The functions of the Commission shall be :
(a) to study the scientific, technical, social and economic aspects of poplar and
willow cultivation,
(b) to promote the exchange of ideas and material between research workers, pro
ducers and users,
(c) to arrange joint research programs,
(d) to stimulate the organization of congresses combined with study tours,
(e) to report and make recommendations to the Conference of the Organization,
through the Director-General of the Organization, and
(/) to make recommendations to National Poplar Commissions, through the Director-
General of the Organization and the governments concerned.
Article IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL POPLAR COMMISSIONS
Each contracting Nation shall make provision as soon as possible and to the
best of its ability, for the establishment of a National Poplar Commission and shall
transmit a description of the competence and scope of the National Commission and
of any changes thereto to the Director-General of the Organization, who shall circulate
this information to the other Member Nations of the Commission. Each contracting
Nation shall communicate to the Director-General the publications of its National
Commission.
Article V
SEAT OF THE COMMISSION
The seat of the Commission shall be in Rome at the Headquarters of the Organi
zation.
Article VI
SESSIONS
1. Each Member Nation of the Commission shall be represented at sessions of the
Commission by a single delegate who may be accompanied by an alternate and by
experts and advisors. Alternates, experts and advisors may take part in the pro
ceedings of the Commission but not vote, except in the case of an alternate who is
duly authorized to substitute for the delegate. Each Member Nation of the Commis
sion shall have one vote. Decisions of the Commission shall be taken by a majority
of the votes cast except as otherwise provided in this Convention. A majority of
the Member Nations of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
2. The Director-General of the Organization in consultation with the Chairman
of the Executive Committee of the Commission shall convene a regular session of
the Commission once every two years. Special sessions of the Commission may be
convened by the Director-General in consultation with the Chairman of the Execu
tive Committee, or if requested by the Commission, or by at least one-third of the
Member Nations of the Commission.
3. The sessions of the Commission shall be held at the place determined by the
Commission within the territories of its Member Nations or at the seat of the Com
mission.
4. The Commission shall elect, at the beginning of each session, from amongst the
delegates, a Chairman and two Vice-Chairmen.
5. There shall be a General Committee of the session consisting of the Chairman
and the two Vice-Chairmen of the session and the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman
of the Executive Committee.
Article VII
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
1. There shall be an Executive Committee of the Commission consisting of 12 mem
bers and up to five co-opted members.
2. Twelve members of the Executive Committee shall be elected by the Com
mission from among individuals nominated by Member Nations of the Commission
upon the suggestion of their respective National Poplar Commissions. Members
of the Executive Committee shall be appointed in their personal capacity because
of thek special competence, and shall serve for a period of six years. Members of
the Executive Committee shall be eligible for re-election.
3. The Executive Committee may, in order to ensure the cooperation of the neces
sary specialists, coopt one to five additional members under the same conditions as
are provided for in paragraph 2 above. The term of office of the additional members
shall expire with the term of the elected members.
4. The Executive Committee shall, between sessions of the Commission, act on
behalf of the Commission as its executive organ. The Executive Committee shall
in particular make proposals to the Commission regarding the general orientation
and the program of work of the Commission, study technical questions and implement
the program as approved by the Commission.
5. The Executive Committee shall elect from amongst its Members a Chairman
and a Vice-Chairman.
6. Sessions of the Executive Committee may be convened as often as necessary by
the Director-General of the Organization in consultation with its Chairman. The
Committee shall meet in connection with each regular session of the Commission.
It shall also meet at least once between two regular sessions of the Commission.
7. The Executive Committee shall report to the Commission.
Article VIII
SECRETARY
A Secretary of the Commission shall be appointed by the Director-General of
the Organization from amongst the senior staff of the Organization and shall be re
sponsible to the Director-General. The Secretary shall perform such duties as the
work of the Commission may require.
Article IX
SUBSIDIARY BODIES
1. The Commission may, if necessary, establish sub-commissions, committees or
working parties, subject to the availability of the necessary funds in the relevant
chapter of the approved budget of the Organization. Sessions of such sub-commis
sions, committees or working parties shall be convened by the Director-General of
the Organization in consultation with the Chairman of such body.
2. Membership in subsidiary bodies shall be open to all Member Nations of the Com
mission, or shall consist of selected Member Nations of the Commission, or of indi
viduals appointed in their personal capacity, as determined by the Commission.
Article X
EXPENSES
1. Expenses incurred by delegates of Member Nations of the Commission and of
their alternates and advisors, when attending sessions of the Commission, or subsi
diary bodies, as well as the expenses incurred by observers, shall be borne by the
respective governments or organizations.
2. Expenses of all the Members of the Executive Committee when attending ses
sions of the Executive Committee shall be borne by the countries of which they are
nationals.
3. Expenses incurred by individuals invited in their personal capacity to attend
sessions or participate in the work of the Commission or its subsidiary bodies shall
be borne by such individuals except when they have been requested to perform a
specific task on behalf of the Commission or its subsidiary bodies.
4. The expenses of the Secretariat shall be borne by the Organization.
5. When the Commission or Executive Committee hold sessions elsewhere than at
the seat of the Commission, all additional expenses related to such sessions shall be
borne by the host government. The expenses for publications relating to sessions
of the Commission other than the reports of such sessions, of the Executive Committee
and subsidiary bodies shall be borne by the host government.
Article XI
RULES OF PROCEDURE
The Commission may, by a majority of two-thirds of its membership, adopt
and amend its own Rules of Procedure, which shall be consistent with the General
Rules of the Organization. The Rules of the Commission and any amendments
thereto shall come into force upon approval by the Director-General of the Organi
zation, and as from the date of such approval, subject to confirmation by the Council.
Article XII
AMENDMENTS
1. This Convention may be amended by the Commission by a two-thirds majority
of the membership of the Commission.
2. Proposals for amendments may be made by any Member Nation of the Commis
sion in a communication addressed to the Director-General of the Organization not
later than 120 days before the session at which the proposal is to be considered. The
Director-General shall immediately inform all Member Nations of the Commission
of all proposals for amendment.
3. Amendments shall become effective only with the concurrence of the Conference
of the Organization and as from the date of such concurrence. The Director-General
of the Organization shall inform all Member Nations of the Commission, all Member
Nations and Associate Members of the Organization and the Secretary-General of
the United Nations of such amendments.
4. Amendments involving new obligations for Member Nations of the Commission
shall come into force in respect of each Member Nation only upon acceptance by it.
The instruments of acceptance of amendments involving new obligations shall be
deposited with the Director-General of the Organization. The Director-General of
the Organization shall inform all Member Nations of the Commission, all Member
Nations and Associate Members of the Organization and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations of such acceptance. The rights and obligations of any Member
Nation of the Commission that has not accepted an amendment involving additional
obligations shall continue to be governed by the provisions of the Convention in
force prior to the amendment.
Article XIII
ACCEPTANCE
1. Acceptance of this Convention by any Member Nation or Associate Member of
the Organization shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of acceptance
with the Director-General of the Organization and shall take effect on receipt of
such notification by the Director-General.
2. Acceptance of this Convention by non-member nations of the Organization
shall become effective on the date on which the Commission approves the applica
tion for membership in conformity with the provisions of Article II of this Conven
tion.
3. The Director-General of the Organization shall inform all Member Nations of
the Commission, all Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organization
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations of all acceptances that have become
effective.
4. Acceptance of this Convention may be made subject to reservations which shall
become operative only upon unanimous concurrence by the Member Nations of the
Commission. The Director-General of the Organization shall notify forthwith all
Member Nations of the Commission of any reservation. Members of the Commission
not having replied within three months from the date of the notification shall be
deemed to have accepted the reservation.
Article XIV
TERRITORIAL APPLICATION
Member Nations of the Commission shall, when accepting this Convention,
state explicitly to which territories their participation shall extend. In the absence
of such a declaration, participation shall be deemed to apply to all the territories for
the international relations of which the Member Nation of the Commission is respon
sible. Subject to the provisions of Article XVI, paragraph 2 below, the scope of the
territorial application may be modified by a subsequent declaration.
Article XV
INTERPRETATION AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Any dispute regarding the interpretation or application of this Convention, if
not settled by the Commission, shall be referred to a committee composed of one
member appointed by each of the parties to the dispute, and in addition an independ
ent chairman chosen by the members of the Committee. The recommendations of
such a committee, while not binding in character, shall become the basis for renewed
consideration by the parties concerned of the matter out of which the disagreement
arose. If as the result of this procedure the dispute is not settled, it shall be referred
to the International Court of Justice in accordance with the Statute of the Court,
unless the parties to the dispute agree to another method of settlement.
Article XVI
WITHDRAWAL
1. Any Member Nation of the Commission may give notice of withdrawal from the
Commission at any time after the expiry of one year from the date of its acceptance
of this Convention. Such notice of withdrawal shall take effect six months after
the date of its receipt by the Director-General of the Organization who shall inform
all Member Nations of the Commission, all Member Nations and Associate Members
of the Organization and the Secretary-General of the United Nations of such receipt.
2. A Member Nation of the Commission that is responsible for the international
relations of more than one territory shall, when giving notice of its own withdrawal
from the Commission, state to which territory or territories the withdrawal is to
apply. In the absence of such a declaration, the withdrawal shall be deemed to
apply to all the territories for the international relations of which the Member Na
tion of the Commission is responsible. A Member Nation of the Commission may
give notice of withdrawal with respect to one or more of the territories for the inter
national relations of which it is responsible. Any Member Nation of the Commission
that gives notice of withdrawal from the Organization shall be deemed to have simul-
taneously withdrawn from the Commission, and this withdrawal shall be deemed to
apply to all the territories for the international relations of which the nation concerned
is responsible, with the exception of Associate Members.
Article XVII
TERMINATION
This Convention shall be considered terminated if and when the number of
Member Nations of the Commission falls below 6 unless the remaining Member
Nations of the Commission unanimously decide otherwise subject to the approval
of the Conference of the Organization. The Director-General of the Organization
shall inform all Member Nations of the Commission, all Member Nations and Associate
Members of the Organization and the Secretary-General of the United Nations of
such termination.
Article XVIII
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. This Convention shall enter into force as soon as twelve Member Nations or
Associate Members of the Organization have become parties to it by the deposit of
an instrument of acceptance in accordance with the provisions of Article XIII. 1 of
this Convention.
2. With respect to such nations as are already Members of the Commission and
who become parties to the present Convention, the provisions of this Convention
shall replace the provisions of the statutes of the International Poplar Commission
adopted at the second session of the Commission held on 20 to 28 April 1948 in Italy.
Article XIX
AUTHENTIC LANGUAGES
The English, French and Spanish texts of this Convention shall be equally
authentic.
***
The present Convention regarding the establishment of the International
Poplar Commission within the framework of the Organization having been approved
by the Conference of the Organization on 19 November 1959 by Resolution No. 61/59,
the undersigned, the Chairman of the Tenth Session of the Conference of the Organi
zation and the Director-General of the Organization, hereby certify that this docu
ment constitutes a true copy of the text of the Convention as approved by the Con-
ference of the Organization. A document identical to the present one and likewise
certified by the Chairman of the Tenth Session of the Conference and the Director-
General of the Organization, shall be transmitted to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for registration once this Convention has come into force. The
Director-General of the Organization shall in addition certify copies of this Conven
tion and transmit one such copy to each Member or Associate Member of the Organi
zation.
Rome, 20 November 1959.
(Signed) Richelieu MORRIS (Signed) B. R. SEN
Chairman of the Conference Director-General of the Organization
