AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS ON CERTAIN
FISHERY PROBLEMS ON THE HIGH SEAS IN THE WESTERN
AREAS OF THE MIDDLE ATLANTIC OCEAN
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Considering it desirable that the fisheries in the western areas of the high seas in
the Middle Atlantic Ocean be conducted on a rational basis with due attention to
their mutual interests, proceeding from generally recognized principles of interna
tional law,
Considering it necessary to conduct the fisheries in the said areas with due con
sideration of the state of fish stocks, based on the results of scientific investigations,
for the purpose of ensuring the maintenance of maximum sustainable yields and the
maintenance of the said fisheries,
Taking into account the need for expanding and coordinating scientific research
in the field of fisheries and the exchange of scientific data,
Have agreed on the following:
1. a. The Government of the United States of America and the Government
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics consider it desirable to expand research
pertaining to the species of fish of interest to both Parties, on a national basis as well
as in the form of coordinated research according to agreed programs. The compe
tent authorities of both Governments shall ensure the following, at least on an an
nual basis:
(i) An exchange of scientific and statistical data, published works, and the results
of fishery research; and
(ii) Meetings of scientists.
b. The competent authorities of the two Governments shall also ensure the
mutual exchange of regular visits of scientists to fisheries research vessels for varying
periods of time in order to enhance scientific collaboration. Each exchange shall
generally include two visiting scientists. Such collaboration may continue through
the analyses of data, samples, and other results of the research.
c. Each Government will take the necessary steps to ensure that its competent
authorities conduct the corresponding fishery research and develop the most ra
tional fishing technology, in accordance with a coordinated program which has been
developed by the scientists of both countries. The exchange of scientific and
statistical data shall include, inter alia, information on methods of analysis and data
on by-catches.
2. The Government of the United States of America and the Government of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the purpose of reproduction and
maintenance of fish stocks, will take appropriate measures to ensure that their
citizens and vessels will:
a. Refrain from fishing during the period from January 1 through April 15, to en
sure access of red hake and silver hake to the spawning grounds and to protect
certain winter concentrations of scup and flounders; said abstention will apply to
an area of the Mid-Atlantic bounded by straight lines connecting the following
coordinates in the order listed:
North Latitude West Longitude
40 05' 71 40'
39 50' 71 40'
37 50' 74 00'
37 50' 74 25'
38 24' 73 44'
39 40' 72 32'
b. Refrain from increasing the catch of scup, flounders, and black sea bass above
the 1967 levels in the waters situated west and south of Sub-area 5 of the Con
vention area of the 1949 International Convention for the Northwest Atlantic
Fisheries' and north of 34 North Latitude;
c. Refrain, in the waters specified in sub-paragraph b of this paragraph, from con
ducting specialized fisheries for scup, flounders, bluefish, and river herring in
all instances, and from increasing their incidental catch of these species, that is,
the catch taken unintentionally when conducting specialized fisheries for other
species;
d. Refrain,in waters situated west and south of Sub-area 5 of the Convention area
of the 1949 International Convention for the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries and
north of 30 North Latitude, from fishing menhaden during the period from
January 1 through April 30, and from increasing the incidental catch of this
species;
e. Limit their catches of silver hake, red hake, and flounders (other than
yellowtail) from the southern New England stocks so that the aggregate catches
of silver hake, red hake, and flounders (other than yellowtail) from these stocks
shall not exceed the national allocations agreed upon in the International Com
mission for the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries (ICNAF);
/. Limit their catches of sea herring and mackerel from the Mid-Atlantic stocks so
that the aggregate catches of sea herring and mackerel from these stocks shall
not exceed the agreed upon ICNAF national allocations and shall comply with
applicable ICNAF size limitations;
g. The provisions of sub-paragraphs a, b, and c of this paragraph shall not apply
to vessels under 110 feet in length, nor to vessels fishing for Crustacea or
molluscs.
3. Fishing vessels of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics shall refrain
from engaging in the intentional catching of lobster off the coast of the United
States north of Cape Hatteras, shall take appropriate measures to minimize inciden
tal catches of lobster in specialized fisheries for other species, and shall return to the
sea in a viable condition all lobster taken incidentally insofar as possible.
4. Considering the necessity to conserve the stocks of yellowtail flounder in
habiting the shallow waters in the southern New England and northern Mid-Atlantic
areas, taking into account that these stocks migrate in these areas, and realizing that
conservation measures may be effective ones only if applied to a stock as a whole,
the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics agrees to limit the fishing
operations of the vessels of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics more than 145
feet in length to mid-water trawling, using mid-water trawl doors, during the period
from July 1 through December 31 in the area adjacent to the United States coast
north of 40 &#186;20'N and south of 43 &#186;17'N, and west of the line drawn between the
points 68 &#186;15'W, 40 &#186;20'N and 7q &#186;00'W, 43 &#186;17'N. Representatives of both Govern
ments will meet prior to the expiration of the period of validity of this Agreement,
with a view to considering further conservation measures for yellowtail flounder
stocks. The implementation of this paragraph of the Agreement shall not result in an
increase in fishing vessel units in the shallow water areas on Georges Bank.
5. Both Governments shall take appropriate measures to ensure that their
citizens and vessels will, in the waters covered by this Agreement, conduct their
fishing with due regard for the conservation of the stocks of fish.
6. Fishing vessels and fishery support vessels under the flag of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics may conduct loading operations in the waters of the ninemile
fishery zone contiguous to the territorial sea of the United States of America in
the following areas bounded by straight lines connecting the coordinates in the order
listed:
a. During the period from November 15 through May 15:
North Latitude West Longitude
40 &#186; 44' 00" 72 &#186; 27' 00"
40 &#186; 38' 00" 72 &#186; 27' 00"
40 &#186; 34' 31" 72 &#186; 40' 00"
40 &#186; 32' 41" 72 &#186; 46' 26"
40 &#186; 32' 32" 72 &#186; 53' 26"
40 &#186; 36' 54" 72 &#186; 53' 26"
40 &#186; 40' 55" 72 &#186; 40' 00"
b. During the period from September 15 through May 15:
North Latitude West Longitude
39 &#186; 40' 00" 74 &#186; 00' 00"
39 &#186; 37' 00" 73 &#186; 54' 00"
39 &#186; 32' 30" 73 &#186; 57' 18"
39 &#186; 35' 30" 74 &#186; 04' 00"
7. Fishing vessels of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics may fish during
the period from January 1 through March 31, within the nine-mile fishery zone con
tiguous to the territorial sea of the United States of America, in the waters bounded
by straight lines connecting the following coordinates in the order listed:
North Latitude West Longitude
40 &#186; 40' 55" 72 &#186; 40' 00"
40 &#186; 34' 31" 72 &#186; 40' 00"
40 &#186; 32' 41" 72 &#186; 46' 26"
40 &#186; 32' 32" 72 &#186; 53' 26"
40 &#186; 36' 54" 72 &#186; 53' 26"
Each Government shall, within the scope of its domestic laws and regulations,
facilitate entry into appropriate ports for fishing vessels, fishery research vessels,
and fishery support vessels. The Government of the United States of America will
take appropriate measures to ensure the following:
a. The entry of not more than four Soviet fishing, fishery reseach, and fishery sup
port vessels each month into each of the Ports of Baltimore, Philadelphia, New
York, and Boston. In addition, special provisions shall be made as necessary
regarding the entry of Soviet research vessels which are engaged in a mutually
agreed research program in accordance with the terms of paragraph 1 of this
Agreement.
b. Entry into the Ports of Baltimore, Philadelphia, and New York, as indicated in
sub-paragraph a above, shall be permitted subject to four days' advance notice
of the planned entry to the appropriate authority.
c. The Government of the United States of America will accept applications for
entry into the Port of Boston either at the American Embassy in Moscow or at
the Department of State in Washington at least seven days prior to entry. Such
applications may be made in Washington either by the Soviet Embassy or by a
commercial shipping agent designated by the appropriate Soviet authorities.
d. The Government of the United States of America at its Embassy in Moscow will
accept crew lists in application for visas valid for a period of six months for
multiple entries into United States ports pursuant to sub-paragraph a above.
Such a crew list shall be submitted at least 14 days prior to the first entry of a
vessel into a port of the United States. Submission of an amended (supplemen
tal) crew list subsequent to departure of a vessel from Soviet ports will also be
subject to the provisions of this sub-paragraph, provided that visas thereunder
shall only be valid for six months from the date of issuance of the original crew
list visa. Notification of entry or an aplication for entry under sub-paragraph b
or c above shall specify if shore leave is requested under such a multiple entry
visa.
e. Entry of all vessels into the ports referred to in subparagraph a above may be to
replenish ships stores or fresh water, obtain bunkers, provide rest for or make
changes in personnel of such vessels, and obtain minor repairs and other ser
vices normally provided in such ports, all in accordance with applicable rules
and regulations.
/. Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, it is understood that the entry of
Soviet vessels into any United States port is subject to the applicable laws and
regulations of the United States.
g. Each of the above provisions in this paragraph may be modified by mutual con
sent at any time.
9. Under conditions oiforce majeure, each Government will, within the scope
of its domestic laws and regulations, facilitate entry of fishing, fishery research, and
fishery support vessels into its respective open ports after appropriate notification
has been given.
10. Both Governments consider it useful to arrange:
a. Regular visits of representatives of the fisheries authorities of the two countries
to exchange information and discuss actual or potential problems concerning
the fishing grounds, questions relating to the operations of the fishing fleets,
and questions arising out of the application of the provisions of this Agreement;
such visits shall take place at least every three months, on appropriate vessels of
each side; and
b. Mutual visits of representatives of fishermen's organizations of the two coun
tries on vessels operating in the Western areas of the Middle Atlantic.
Those participating in each visit shall prepare a brief report of their visit in each
case and submit it to the appropriate authorities of the two Governments. Visits
shall be arranged between the Regional Director of the National Marine Fisheries
Service in Gloucester, Massachusetts, and the chiefs of the joint fleet expeditions of
the Main Administrations "ZAPRYBA" or "SEVRYBA" as appropriate. Each side will
inform the other side, at least two weeks before the visit, of subjects it wishes dis
cussed.
11. The Scheme of Joint Enforcement in effect under the 1949 International
Convention for the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries shall apply on a voluntary basis to
enforcement of the provisions of this Agreement. The Scheme of Joint Enforcement
will also be applied on a voluntary basis to enforcement of regulations in effect
under the Convention in Statistical Area 6 until the Scheme becomes effective in that
area for both Governments. Each Government will inform the other of the date on
which it is able to apply the Scheme on a mandatory basis to enforcement of regula
tions in effect under the Convention in Statistical Area 6. Nothing in this paragraph
is intended to modify the mandatory application of the Scheme of Joint Enforce
ment under the 1949 International Convention for the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries
to conservation regulations under that convention, or the system of enforcement ap
plicable to the nine-mile fishing zone contiguous to the territorial sea of the United
States.
12. Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted as prejudicing the views of
either Government with regard to freedom of fishing on the high seas or to tradi
tional fisheries.
13. This Agreement constitutes an extension and modification of the provi
sions of the Agreement between the Government of the United States of America
and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics signed in
Washington on December 11, 1970. 1
The present Agreement shall enter into force on July 1, 1973 and shall remain in
force through December 31, 1974. At the request of either Government, represen
tatives of the two Governments will meet at a mutually convenient time with a view
to modifying the present Agreement. In any event, representatives of the two
Governments will meet at a mutually convenient time prior to the expiration of the
period of validity of this Agreement to review the operation of this Agreement and
to decide on future arrangements. Notwithstanding the above, at any time after
March 31, 1974, either Government may communicate to the other Government its
intention to denounce the present Agreement, in which case the Agreement shall ter
minate one month from the date on the communication. As soon as possible after
receipt of such communication, representatives of the two Governments will meet to
discuss possible future arrangements.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized for this purpose,
have signed this Agreement.
DONE in Copenhagen, June 21, 1973, in duplicate, in English and Russian, both
texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of the United States of America:
Donald L. McKernan
For the Government of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics:
Vladimir M. Kamentsev
