
CONVENTION BETWEEN FINLAND AND NORWAY
REGARDING NEW REGULATIONS FOR FISHING IN THE PASVIK
RIVER (PASVIKELVA). SIGNED AT OSLO, APRIL 2IST, 1938.

His MAJESTY THE KING OF NORWAY and THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND
have decided to conclude an Agreement regarding new fishery regulations for the fishing area
of the Pasvik river, and for that purpose have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
His MAJESTY THE KING OF NORWAY:
M. Halvdan KOHT, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND:
M. Wdin6 WUOLIJOKI, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to His Majesty
the King of Norway;
Who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon
the following Articles:

Article 1.
In Norway and Finland fishery regulations shall be issued - as far as possible simultaneously
- for the fishing area of the Pasvik river, in Norway in accordance with the annexed Norwegian
text and in Finland in accordance with the annexed Finnish text.
The fishery regulations shall come into force in both countries on May 1st, 1938.
Article 2.
The fishery regulations shall remain in force until further notice. Should one of the two
countries desire to terminate the regulations in force or to amend them, notice to this effect shall
be given to the other country at least one year before such termination or amendment takes effect.
Article 3.
The chief of police (politimester) at Sor-Varanger or a person authorised by him, and the
district bailiff (kronofogden) in the district of Petsamo or a person authorised by him, shall meet
at the respective places in order to demarcate the closed areas above and below the salmon stairs.
Should the chief of police or the district bailiff so desire, the boundary in the lakes below the mouths
of the streams within which it is forbidden to use standing tackle shall be determined and demarcated
in the same manner.
Article 4.
The chief of police at Sor-Varanger and the district bailiff in the district of Petsamo are
authorised to enter into direct communication with each other if either of them has obtained
information from a reliable source that fishing is taking or has taken place in the territory of the
other country below the Grense waterfall in violation of the fishery regulations, and under such
conditions that the inspection authorities of the country concerned cannot be assumed to be aware
of the fact.
Similarly, the chief of police or the district bailiff shall communicate with each other if they
are informed by their own authorities that the fishery regulations have been waived in accordance
with the provisions in section 9 of the regulations.

Article 5.
As soon as the question of the right to fish in the fishing area of the Pasvik river has been
settled by legal provisions in both countries, an attempt shall be made to obtain uniform provisions
for the part of the fishing area which forms the frontier in respect of the conditions under which
persons not entitled to fish may, on obtaining a fishing card, use fishing rods and hand lines.
Article 6.
An attempt shall be made to improve the effectiveness of the salmon stairs in the Hare
waterfall. The Finnish authorities shall prepare a proposal with an estimate of costs for such
arrangements as are considered necessary in this connection.
Done at Oslo, in duplicate, this 2Ist day of April, 1938.
(L. S.) (Signed) Halvdan KOHT.
(L. S.) (Signed) Wdin6 WUOLIJOKI.

FISHERY REGULATIONS FOR THE FISHING AREA OF THE PASVIK RIVER.

 1.
Text of Norwegian Regulations.
The fishing area of the Pasvik river comprises
the part of the river and of the lakes which
it forms belonging to Norway.

 1.
Text of Finnish Regulations.
The fishing area of the Pasvik river comprises
the part of the river and of the lakes which
it forms belonging to Finland.

 2.
Within the fishing area it is permitted in fishing for burbot to use bar-nets, seine nets, fyke
nets, fish traps, hooks and barriers. The use of other tackle, including fish gigs, and also the use
of lime, explosives, poisonous substances or electric current as means of catching fish are prohibited.

Text of Norwegian Regulations.
In the part of the river lying below the frontier
north of Boris Gleb as far as the outlet
of the river near the group of islands at Elvenes,
it is forbidden to fish with the use of other
tackle than bar-nets and hooks. For a distance
of 200 metres outside this group of islands
it is permissible only to fish with hooks.
In the waters from the Hare waterfall down
to the national frontier south of Boris Gleb the
use of seine nets is forbidden.

Text of Finnish Regulations.
In the part of the river lying below the Kolttakongds
waterfall, it is forbidden to fish with
the use of other tackle than bar-nets and hooks.

In the waters from the Jiiniskoski waterfall
to the Kolttakongds waterfall, the use of seine
nets is forbidden.

 3.
It is forbidden to use knotted tackle of a smaller mesh than 35 mm. between the knots counting
from the middle of each knot when the tackle is wet. In the waters from the Hare waterfall down
to the frontier south of Boris Gleb it is also forbidden to use nets with larger mesh than 45 mm.
between the knots.

In the case of fishing tackle consisting of netting, the distance between the knots or the corners
of the meshes shall not be less than 40 mm.
In the case of fyke nets or other tackle made of wooden sticks, branches, roots, bark or other
similar material, the distance between the sticks may not be less than 30 mm. and the distance
between the straps may not be less than 150 mm.
Fish traps, including the connecting nets, may not be higher at any part than 1.5 metres.
 4.
It is at all times forbidden to catch or kill salmon, trout (both sea trout and fresh-water trout),
gwyniad or grayling less than 25 cm. in length, measured from the tip of the snout to the end of
the central part of the tail fin.
Should such fish have been caught, they must be immediately returned to the water.

 5.
Text of Norwegian Regulations.
All fishing is forbidden:
1. At the Hare waterfall, within an
area bounded above the fall by a straight
line drawn from a mark cut on the Norwegian
side of the river about ioo metres
above the fall to the end point of the
trolley line on the Finnish side, and a
line below the fall drawn from a mark
cut on the Finnish side about 150 metres
from the lowest outlet of the salmon stairs
across the stream to a mark cut on the
Norwegian side. In the part of this area
situated below a mark fixed about 50 metres
from the foot of the fall on the Norwegian
side, rod fishing shall be permitted in the
month of July, but only with flies or
worms.

2. At the Skolte waterfall, within an area
bounded on the south by a line from the
place at which the road from Boris Gleb
now ends across the stream to a mark
cut on the opposite bank of the river, and
in the north by the frontier south of Boris
Gleb.

With the exception mentioned in the provision
under (1), in the case of fishing with rod or hand
line, no part of the tackle may enter the closed
area.

 5.
Text of Finnish Regulations.
All fishing is forbidden:
1. At the Hare waterfall, within an
area bounded above the fall by a straight
line drawn from a mark cut on the Norwegian
side of the river about 100 metres
above the fall to the end point of the
trolley line on the Finnish side, and a line
below the fall drawn from a mark cut
on the Finnish side about 150 metres from
the lowest outlet of the salmon stairs across
the stream to a mark cut on the Norwegian
side.

2. At the Skolte waterfall within an
area bounded upstream by a line across
the stream from the place at which the
road from Boris Gleb now ends, and
downstream by a straight line from a notch
made in a stone situated about 90 metres
from the lower end of the salmon stairs
across the stream to a notch made in a
stone on the opposite bank.

In the case of fishing with rod or hand line,
no part of the tackle may enter the closed area.

 6.
In the other parts of the fishing area, it is forbidden to catch salmon, trout (both sea trout
and fresh-water trout) and gwyniad in the period from September 15th inclusive to October 3st
inclusive; but these kinds of fish may be caught at all times of the year in the following lakes
formed by the Pasvik river, i. e., Grensevatn, Fjoervatn, Vaggetemvatn, Hassetjonna, Langvatn,
Svanvatn, Bjornvatn, and Klistervatn.
 7.
Besides the lakes mentioned in  6 and the Fossevatn, in the streams which constitute the
frontier one-sixth of the width lying nearest the frontier at the midsummer level of water shall
be kept open as a fishing stream. In other waterways, the fishing stream shall be one-third of the
width of the waterway at the place where it is deepest.
In the fishing stream it is forbidden to use other fishing tackle than seine nets and hooks.
In the lakes mentioned in  6 and also in the Fossevatn, it is forbidden to use standing tackle
within a distance of 2oo metres from the mouth of the fishing stream.

Text of Norwegian Regulations.
 8.
Fishing inspectors shall be considered on the
same footing as police officials in respect of any
insulting language or action used against them.

 9.
The provisions laid down in the present
fishery regulations shall not prevent the inspector
of fresh-water fisheries, while applying
the provisions which he considers necessary
in order to avoid abuse, from permitting
fishing for scientific purposes or in order to
catch fish for breeding in incubators.

 10.
Breaches of the above provisions shall be
punishable by a fine. Fishing tackle which
is put to an unlawful use and fish which is caught
unlawfully, or the value of such tackle or fish,
may be confiscated.

Text of Finnish Regulations.
 8.
The person duly instructed to supervise the
observance of the present regulations shall
enjoy the same rights and the same legal
protection as inspectors and police officials;
certificates issued by him shall have the same
value as evidence as that conferred on certificates
issued by inspectors in general, in virtue
of Chapter 17, Article 11, of the Code of Legal
Procedure.

 9.
The provisions laid down in the present
fishery regulations shall not prevent the Department
of Agriculture, while applying the
provisions which it considers necessary in
order to avoid abuse, from permitting fishing
for scientific purposes or in order to catch
fish for breeding in incubators.

 10.
Breaches of the provisions of the present
fishery regulations shall be punishable in
accordance with the general law.

 11.
With the exception of nets with a smaller mesh than 30 mm. between the knots, fishing tackle
which is lawful according to the rules applied hitherto, and which is proved to have been procured
before the issue of the present rules, may be used until the end of the year 1942 notwithstanding
the general provisions of the present regulations regarding fishing tackle the use of which is
permissible within the fishing area.
