AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION IN THE FIELD OF FISHERIES
The Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of the Russian Federation, Reaffirming their mutual desire to conserve the living resources of the sea, in particular the living resources in the waters to which the Convention on fishing and conservation of the living resources in the Baltic Sea and the Belts, signed at Gdansk on 13 September 1973, applies, and to ensure the rational management and exploitation of those stocks,
Taking into account the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, particularly those parts regulating the utilization and conservation of living resources
Taking into account the traditional fishing operations of each Contracting Party in the area under the fisheries jurisdiction of the other Contracting Party, Guided by a constant desire to promote and strengthen friendship and cooperation between them, Have agreed as follows:
Article 1 Each Contracting Party shall allow the fishing vessels of the other Contracting Party to engage in fishing operations within the area under its fisheries jurisdiction in the Baltic Sea extending beyond the limit of 12 nautical miles from the baselines from which territorial sea is measured, in accordance with the regulations and conditions set forth in this Agreement.
Article 2 Each Contracting Party shall annually determine, for the area under its fisheries jurisdiction, the total allowable catch for particular stocks or groups of stocks, with due regard to their interdependence, the best available scientific data, the recommendations of the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission and other relevant factors.
Article 3 1. Each Contracting Party shall annually determine, after consultation with the other Contracting Party, the catch quotas for fishing vessels of that Contracting Party and the areas in which catches may be taken. Such catch quotas shall be subject to amendment in the event of unforeseen circumstances, particularly the
need to carry out urgent conservation measures based on the best available scientific data. 2. In determining catch quotas for fishing vessels of the other Contracting Party, the traditional fishing operations of the other Contracting Party in the area in question and other relevant factors shall be taken into account. 3. Each Contracting Party shall determine, for fishing vessels of the other Contracting Party, catch quotas that: (a) Ensure balanced consideration of its fishing rights in the area under its fisheries jurisdiction; and (b) May be granted in accordance with article 4 of this Agreement. Article 4 If a Contracting Party's determination of the total allowable catch in accordance with article 2 of this Agreement indicates that the catch exceeds the fishing capacity of that Contracting Party, the other Contracting Party's fishing vessels may be given a catch quota for such excess quantities or fish in accordance with the regulations and conditions established by the Contracting Party having such excess quantities at its disposal, after consultation, taking into account the needs of the other Contracting Party and other relevant factors. Article 5 1. The fishing vessels of one Contracting Party, when operating within the area under the fisheries jurisdiction of the other Contracting Party, in accordance with this Agreement, shall observe the stock-conservation measures and other conditions established for such activity, and shall be subject to the fishery laws and regulations of that other Contracting Party. 2. The fishing vessels of each Contracting Party shall enter daily into logbooks the relevant information pertaining to the fishing area, intensity of fishing operations and the catches. Such logbooks shall be available for inspection at all times when such vessels are present in the area under the fisheries jurisdiction of the other Contracting Party. Each fishing vessel shall provide information by radio regarding the commencement and completion of fishing operations in the area under the fisheries jurisdiction of the other Contracting Party, as well as other relevant activities, in such manner and at such time as may be prescribed by that Contracting Party. The competent authorities of each Contracting Party shall submit to the competent authorities of the other Contracting Party detailed reports concerning the catch, the time at which the fishing operations were carried out and other relevant information in such manner and at such time as may be prescribed by that Contracting Party. The provisions of this paragraph shall be without prejudice to paragraph 1. 3. In the event of the adoption of new laws, rules or regulations of particular significance for the fishing operations of the other Contracting Party, appropriate notification shall be given in good time. Article 6 1. The competent authorities of each Contracting Party shall notify the competent authorities of the other Contracting Party of the name and registration num
ber of the vessels, the fishing gear to be used and any other relevant particulars of each fishing vessel of the Contracting Party that intends to engage in fishing operations within the area under the fisheries jurisdiction of the other Contracting Party in accordance with article 1. Similar notification shall also be given in respect of any support vessel or supply vessel escorting the said fishing vessels. 2. The competent authorities of each Contracting Party shall, on a mutual basis and free of charge, issue to each fishing vessel of the other Contracting Party the appropriate licences that allow it to engage in fishing operations. Article 7 1. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that its vessels comply with the provisions of this Agreement and with other relevant regulations. 2. Each Contracting Party may take, within the area under this fisheries jurisdiction and in accordance with international law, such measures as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the vessels of the other Contracting Party comply with the provisions of this Agreement. Article 8 The Contracting Parties undertake to cooperate, both directly and through the approriate international organizations, with a view to ensuring the proper management and conservation of the living resources of the sea, in particular with respect to the stocks within the area covered by the Convention on fishing and conservation of the living resources in the Baltic Sea and the Belts, signed at Gdansk on 13 September 1973. Article 9 1. With the entry into force of this Agreement, the Agreement of 22 December 1977 between the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on mutual relations in the field of fisheries and the Agreement of 18 April 1988 between the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on mutual fishery relations in the formerly disputed area of the Baltic Sea shall cease to have effect for the Contracting Parties. 2. This Agreement shall be without prejudice to other existing agreements between the two Contracting Parties or to existing multilateral conventions to which they are parties. Likewise, it shall be without prejudice to the views of each Contracting Party concerning the law of the sea. Article 10 1. This Agreement is subject to ratification or approval and shall enter into force on the date of the exchange of the instruments of ratification or approval. The Agreement shall be applied provisionally from the date of its signature. 2. This Agreement shall remain in force for a period of 10 years. Unless either Contracting Party terminates this Agreement by giving notice to that effect at least 12 months before the expiry of that period, it shall remain in force for further six
year periods unless notice of termination is given 12 months before the expiry of any such six-year period. DONE at Stockholm on 11 December 1992 in duplicate in the Swedish and Russian languages, both texts being equally authentic. For the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden: S. DE MARE For the Government of the Russian Federation: V. M. SOSNO

