AGREEMENT REGARDING FISHERIES ON THE BREITGRUND.
Article 1.
German fishermen who reside on the East coast of Slesvig-Holstein between Flensburg and the
village of Stein at the entrance of the Kiel Fjord - both places included - and who have hitherto taken
part in the fisheries on the Breitgrund situated in front of the outlet of the Flensburg Fjord shall, during
a period of three years after the coming into force of this Agreement, be entitled to fish also in that part
of the Breitgrund lying within three nautical miles of the Danish coast which is bounded :
On the West by the line Kegnas Beacon-Breitgrund Barrel Buoy West (distinctive mark on top,
one ball), and its southern extension.
On the East by the line Gammel Pol Beacon-Breitgrund Buoy East (distinctive mark on top two
perpendicular spars).
On the North by the ten metre sounding on the coast of Alsen.
The total number of such fishermen may, however, not exceed 450.
Article 2.
The German fishing authorities shall issue the necessary passes for fishermen who are permitted,
in accordance with Article 1, to fish in that portion of the Breitgrund specified in the same article and
shall transmit to the Danish fishing authorities a specimen of this pass together with a list of the fishermen
who have been granted such passes and of the marks by which their boats may be recognised. Any
changes made in the method of issuing the passes shall be communicated to the Danish authorities
as and when they occur.
Article 3.
In the part of the Breitgrund referred to in Article 1 only fixed nets and rods may be employed
in the fisheries by German fishermen who are entitled to fish there. They are forbidden to make use
of drag-nets.
Fishing shall be carried on in conformity with the regulations generally applicable in Danish waters.
Article 4.
The Danish Government reserves to itself the right temporarily to suspend the application of the
whole or part of this Agreement if considerations connected with international complications should
necessitate such a step.
FINAL PROTOCOL.
The German Government undertakes, as long as the right granted in Article 1 to German fishermen
to fish on the part of the Breitgrund mentioned in the same Article shall subsist and remain in
force, to permit, during the period in which the above Agreement is valid, the import of smoked fish
from Denmark to a total amount of 8oo tons, of which, however, not more than 300 tons may be imported
within one year as from the coming into force of the Agreement.
