AGREEMENT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INTERGOV
ERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION FOR MARKETING INFORMA
TION AND COOPERATION SERVICES FOR FISHERY PROD
UCTS IN AFRICA (INFOPECHE)
The Contracting Parties,
Conscious of the importance of the fisheries sector in their
economic development;
Convinced that African countries would benefit greatly from the
development of their fisheries which may depend on the
establishment of international market information and cooperation
organization for fishery products;
Realizing that the promotion and success of such organization can
be facilitated through regional cooperation;
Considering that the said cooperation can best be achieved
through the establishment of an intergovernmental organization
carrying out its activities in collaboration with countries,
organizations and institutions that may be able to provide
financial and technical support;
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
Establishment
The Contracting Parties hereby establish the Intergovernmental
Organization for Marketing Information and Cooperation Services
for Fishery Products in Africa, hereinafter referred to as
"INFOPECHE".
ARTICLE 2
Definitions
For the purpose of this Agreement:
"Fishery products" means all aquatic animals and plants and
products derived therefrom. Endangered species falling under
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Fauna and Flora adopted in Washington in 1973, as
amended, 1 are excluded. Marine mammals, especially dolphins
which are not covered by the said Convention shall not be
included within the services provided by INFOPECHE.
"Host State" means the State in which the seat of INFOPECHE
is situated.
"Marketing information" means data and other information on
distribution, transport and sale of fishery products on local
and international markets and on the overall process of the
said product development and promotion including advertising,
public relations and other services.
ARTICLE 3
Objectives
The objectives of INFOPECHE shall be:
(a) to contribute to the development and modernization of
the fisheries sector of the Contracting Parties;
(b) to contribute to more balanced supplies of fishery
products to the Contracting Parties;
(c) to make the best use of export opportunities within and
outside Africa; and
(d) to promote technical and economic cooperation among
Contracting Parties.
ARTICLE 4
Functions
For the achievement of its objectives, INFOPECHE shall provide:
(a) marketing information on fishery products, including
sales opportunities and supply prospects within and
outside Africa;
(b) advice on technological developments, product
specifications, processing methods and quality standards
in accordance with market requirements;
(c) assistance in identifying new products and promoting
under-utilized species;
(d) training of staff in governments, institutions and the
fishing industry in marketing development.
ARTICLE 5
Headquarters
1. The seat of INFOPECHE is in Abidjan (Cote d'Ivoire).
However, if on the date on which this Agreement enters into
force, the Cote d'Ivoire has not deposited an instrument of
ratification or accession in respect of this Agreement, the seat
of INFOPECHE shall be determined by the Governing Council by a
two-thirds majority of its members.
2. The Host State shall make available to INFOPECHE, without
charge, the premises required for its operation as described in
Annex II to this Agreement.
3. The Host State shall undertake to grant to INFOPECHE, to its
premises, property, funds and assets, to the members of the
Governing Council, to the Director and the staff of INFOPECHE and
to the consultants, the privileges, immunities and facilities
provided for in Article 12 and in Annex II to this Agreement.
ARTICLE 6
Membership
1. The Member States of INFOPECHE shall be the Contracting
Parties to the present Agreement.
2. The original founding Member States of INFOPECHE shall be
those States in Africa specified in Annex I to this Agreement
which ratify or accede to this Agreement in accordance with
Article 14, paragraphs 1 and 2.
3. The Governing Council of INFOPECHE may, by a two-thirds
majority of all its Member States, authorize any State not
referred to in Annex I to this Agreement, which has submitted an
application for membership, to accede to the Agreement as in
force at the time of accession, in accordance with Article 14,
paragraph 3.
ARTICLE 7
The Governing Council
1. INFOPECHE shall have a Governing Council consisting of all
Member States. Each Member State shall designate one
representative to act on its behalf.
2. The Governing Council shall hold a regular session annually
at such time and place as it shall determine.
3. The Governing Council may hold special sessions if it so
decides or at the request of one-third of its members.
4. The Governing Council shall elect its Chairman and other
officers who will hold office for two years.
5. The Governing Council shall adopt its own Rules of Procedure,
by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast. The Rules of
Procedure may provide the possibility for the Governing Council,
in special circumstances, to modify the conditions of adoption
of a decision.
6. Each Member State of the Governing Council shall have one
vote. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement,
all decisions of the Governing Council shall be taken by a simple
majority of the votes cast. A simple majority of the members
shall constitute a quorum.
ARTICLE 8
Functions of the Governing Council
The Functions of the Governing Council shall be:
(a) to determine the policy of INFOPECHE and approve its
programme of work and its budget;
(b) to determine the contributions of Member States as
provided in Article 11;
(c) to establish special funds for the development of new
programmes and projects;
(d) to lay down general standards and guidelines for the
management of INFOPECHE including the fees to be charged
for its services;
(e) to review the work and activities of INFOPECHE and the
audited accounts, and give guidance to the Director of
INFOPECHE on the implementation of its decisions;
(f) to adopt the Financial Regulations;
(g) to elect its Chairman and other officers, appoint the
Director of INFOPECHE and, if necessary, a Deputy
Director and to terminate their appointment;
(h) to adopt rules governing the settlement of disputes,
referred to in Article 17;
(i) to approve formal arrangements with other organizations
or institutions and with governments;
(j) to adopt the Staff Regulations which fix the general
conditions of service of the staff;
(k) to establish if it deems appropriate, sub-regional
offices;
(1) to establish technical committees whenever necessary to
advise it on specific issues; and
(m) to perform all other functions that have been entrusted
to it by this Agreement or that are ancillary to the
accomplishment of the approved activities of INFOPECHE.
ARTICLE 9
Observers
Non-member States, organizations and institutions that are able
to make a significant contribution to the activities of INFOPECHE
may be invited to be represented at sessions of the Governing
Council as observers, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure
adopted under Article 7, paragraph 5.
ARTICLE 10
The Director and Staff
1. INFOPECHE shall have a Director appointed by the Governing
Council on such conditions as it may determine. The tenure of
the Director is three years. His term may be renewed by
decision of the Governing Council.
2. The Director shall be the legal representative of INFOPECHE.
He shall direct the work of INFOPECHE under the guidance of the
Governing Council, in accordance with its policy and decisions.
3. The Director shall submit to the Governing Council at each
regular session:
(a) a report on the work of INFOPECHE, as well as the
audited accounts; and
(b) a draft programme of work of INFOPECHE and a draft
budget.
4. The Director shall prepare and organize the sessions of the
Governing Council and all other meetings of INFOPECHE. He shall
provide the secretariat for such meetings and attend them.
5. The Governing Council may decide to appoint a Deputy
Director. The Deputy Director would have the powers and duties
entrusted to the Director under this Agreement, if and for so
long as the Director were unable to perform his duties.
6. Should it deem it necessary, the Governing Council may accept
that the Director and the Deputy Director of INFOPECHE be persons
seconded by States or international organizations.
7. Staff members shall be appointed by the Director in
accordance with the policy, general standards and guidelines laid
down by the Governing Council and in accordance with the Staff
Regulations.
ARTICLE 11
Finances
1. The financial resources of INFOPECHE shall be:
(a) the contributions of the Member States to the budget of
INFOPECHE;
(b) the revenue obtained from the provision of services
against payment, for example: subscriptions to
INFOPECHE publications, sales of information, paid
advertisements in INFOPECHE publications and consultant
fees for its technical services;
(c) subventions from States and international organizations;
(d) donations and legacies provided that acceptance of such
donations and legacies is compatible with the objectives
of INFOPECHE; and
(e) such other resources as are approved by the Governing
Council and compatible with the objectives of INFOPECHE.
2. Member States undertake to pay annual contributions in freely
convertible currencies to the regular budget of INFOPECHE. There
shall be for each Member State a minimum contribution determined
by the Governing Council. The Governing Council shall establish
a scale of contributions, approved by unanimous vote, and taking
account of GNP per capita of each Member State. The Host State
is exempted from payment of any contribution for as long as it
provides the services and covers the costs described in Section
1, Part B of Annex II. At each regular session, the Governing
Council shall, by a majority of three-quarters of the Member
States participating in the session, determine the regular budget
for the following year.
3. INFOPECHE shall be operated having regard to generally
accepted commercial principles. To this end, INFOPECHE shall
charge for its services at rates set by the Governing Council
with a view to the revenue thus derived covering the operating
costs and administrative expenses of INFOPECHE, and replacement
of operating assets.
4. If the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of
the contribution due from it for the two preceding calendar
years, a Member State, on the decision of the Governing Council,
may lose its voting right in the Governing Council.
ARTICLE 12
Legal Status, Privileges and Immunities
1. INFOPECHE shall possess juridical personality and such legal
capacity, as well as privileges and immunities, as may be
necessary for the fulfilment of the Organization's objectives and
for the exercise of its functions.
2. The representatives of Member States and the Director and
staff of INFOPECHE shall be accorded the privileges and
immunities necessary for the independent exercise of their
functions with INFOPECHE.
3. Each Member State shall accord the status, privileges and
immunities referred to above in the following manner:
(a) In the territory of each Member State which has acceded
to the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the Specialized Agencies, those which are stipulated
therein, mutatis mutandis;
(b) In the territory of each Member State which has not
acceded to the above Convention but which has acceded
to the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations, those which are stipulated therein,
mutatis mutandis ; and
(c) If a Member State has not acceded to either of the above
Conventions it shall, within six months of the deposit
of its instrument of ratification or accession, conclude
an agreement with INFOPECHE granting a status and
privileges and immunities comparable to those provided
for in the said Conventions.
4. Privileges and immunities are accorded to the representatives
of Member States and the Director and staff of INFOPECHE not for
the personal benefit of the individuals themselves, but in order
to safeguard the independent exercise of their functions in
connection with the Organization. Consequently, a Member State
or the Director, as the case may be, not only has the right but
is under a duty to waive the immunity of its representatives or
of a staff member in any case where, in the opinion of the Member
State or of the Director, the immunity would impede the course
of justice, and where it can be waived without prejudice to the
purpose for which the immunity is accorded. If the Member State
sending the representative or the Director, as the case may be,
does not waive the immunity of the representative or the staff
member, the Member State or the Director shall make the strongest
efforts to achieve an equitable solution of the matter.
5. INFOPECHE may conclude agreements with States in which
offices of the Organization may be located, specifying the
privileges and immunities and facilities to be enjoyed by the
Organization to enable it to fulfil its objectives and to perform
its functions.
ARTICLE 13
Cooperation with other Organizations and Institutions
The Contracting Parties agree that there should be cooperation
between INFOPECHE and other international fisheries institutions
and other organizations which may contribute to the work and
further the objectives of INFOPECHE. INFOPECHE may enter into
agreements with such institutions and organizations. Such
agreements may include, if appropriate, provision for
participation by such organizations in activities of INFOPECHE.
ARTICLE 14
Signature, Ratification, Accession, Entry into force and
Admission
1. This Agreement shall be open for signature by the States in
Africa listed in Annex I, in Abidjan, on 13 December 1991, and
thereafter, at the Headquarters of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in Rome until 31
December 1992. Such States that have signed the Agreement may
become a party thereto by depositing an instrument of
ratification. Such States that have not signed the Agreement may
become a party thereto by depositing an instrument of accession.
2. Instruments of ratification or accession shall be deposited
with the Director-General of FAO, who shall be the Depositary of
the present Agreement.
3. Subject to Article 6, paragraph 3 of the present Agreement,
and at any time after the entry into force of this Agreement, any
State not referred to in paragraph 1 above may apply to the
Director-General of FAO to become a member of INFOPECHE. The
Director-General of FAO shall inform Member States of such
application. The Governing Council shall then decide on the
application in accordance with Article 6, paragraph 3, and if a
favourable decision is made, invite the State concerned to accede
to the Agreement establishing INFOPECHE. The State shall lodge
its instrument of accession, whereby it consents to be bound by
the provisions of this Agreement as from the date of its
admission, with the Director-General within ninety days of the
date of the invitation by the Governing Council.
4. This Agreement shall enter into force, with respect to all
States that have ratified it or acceded thereto, on the date when
instruments of ratification or accession have been deposited by
the Governments of at least five States listed in Annex I.
ARTICLE 15
Amendment
1. Proposals for the amendment of this Agreement must be made
by a Member State in a communication to the Depositary, who shall
promptly notify the proposal to all Member States and to the
Director of INFOPECHE.
2. The Governing Council may amend this Agreement by a twothirds
majority of the Member States. Amendments shall take
effect, with respect to all Contracting Parties, on the thirtieth
day after their adoption by the Governing Council, except for any
Contracting Party which gives notice of withdrawal within thirty
days of the adoption of such amendment, subject to Article 16,
paragraph 1.
3. No proposal for amendment shall be considered by the
Governing Council unless it was received by the Depositary at
least one hundred and twenty days before the opening day of the
session at which it is to be considered.
ARTICLE 16
Withdrawal and Dissolution
1. At any time after the expiration of three years from the date
when it became a party to this Agreement, any Member State may
give notice of its withdrawal from INFOPECHE to the Depositary.
Such withdrawal shall take effect twelve months after the notice
thereof was received by the Depositary or at any later date
specified in the notice, provided, however, that any obligation
incurred by the Member State vis- -vis INFOPECHE shall remain
valid and enforceable.
2. INFOPECHE shall cease to exist at any time decided by the
Governing Council by a three-quarters majority of all its
Members. Any assets remaining after the land, buildings and
fixtures have been disposed of, after the balance of any donated
funds that have not been used has been returned to the respective
donors, and after all obligations have been met, shall be
distributed among the States which were Members of INFOPECHE at
the time of the dissolution, in proportion to the contributions
that they made, in accordance with Article 11, paragraph 2, for
the year preceding the year of the dissolution.
ARTICLE 17
Interpretation and Settlement of Disputes
1. Any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of
this Agreement which cannot be settled by negotiation,
conciliation or similar means may be referred by any party to the
dispute to the Governing Council for its recommendation. Failing
settlement of the dispute, the matter shall be submitted to an
arbitral tribunal consisting of three arbitrators. The parties
to the dispute shall appoint one arbitrator each; the two
arbitrators so appointed shall designate by mutual agreement the
third arbitrator, who shall be the President of the tribunal.
If one of the Parties does not appoint an arbitrator within two
months of the appointment of the first arbitrator, or if the
President of the arbitral tribunal has not been designated within
two months of the appointment of the second arbitrator, the
Chairman of the Governing Council shall designate him within a
further two-month period.
2. Any Member State that fails to abide by an arbitral award
rendered in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article may be
suspended from the exercise of the rights and privileges of
membership by a simple majority of the Governing Council.
ARTICLE 18
Depositary
The Director-General of FAO shall be the Depositary of this
Agreement. The Depositary shall:
(a) send certified copies of this Agreement to the
Governments of the States listed in Annex I, and to any
other government which so requests;
(b) arrange for the registration of this Agreement, upon its
entry into force, with the Secretariat of the United
Nations, in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations;
(c) inform the States listed in Annex I and any State that
has been admitted to membership of INFOPECHE of:
(i) the signature of this Agreement and the deposit of
instruments of ratification or accession in
accordance with Article 14;
(ii) the date of entry into force of this Agreement in
accordance with Article 14, paragraph 4;
(iii) notification of the desire of a State to be
admitted to membership of INFOPECHE, and
admissions, in accordance with Article 6;
(iv) proposals for the amendment of this Agreement, and
the adoption of amendments, in accordance with
Article 15; and
(v) notices of withdrawal from INFOPECHE in accordance
with Article 16;
(d) convene the first session of the Governing Council of
INFOPECHE within six months after the entry into force
of this Agreement, in accordance with Article 14,
paragraph 4.
ARTICLE 19
Annexes
Annexes I and II shall constitute an integral part of this
Agreement.

ANNEX I TO THE AGREEMENT
LIST OF STATES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 6, PARAGRAPH 2
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Congo
Cote d'Ivoire
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Mauritania
Morocco
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Zaire
ANNEX II TO THE AGREEMENT
UNDERTAKINGS BY THE HOST STATE
INTRODUCTION
Pursuant to Article 5, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Agreement,
and without prejudice to paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Article 12, the
present Annex relates to the additional rights and obligations
of the Host State. It shall apply to the State referred to in
Part B for as long as that State is the Host State.
PART A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section l: Privileges, immunities ana facilities accorded to the
Organization
1. Without prejudice to Article 5, paragraph 3 and Article 12,
paragraph 3 of this Agreement, the Host State undertakes to
accord the following privileges, immunities and facilities to the
Organization and to its property, funds and assets, wherever
located in that State:
(a) immunity from every form of legal process, except
insofar as in any particular case the Organization has
expressly waived immunity;
(b) immunity from search, requisition, confiscation,
expropriation and any other form of interference;
(c) freedom to hold funds or currency of any kind, to
operate accounts in any currency, to transfer funds or
foreign currency within the Host State or abroad, and
to convert any foreign currency into any other currency;
(d) freedom, without prejudice to any appropriate security
precautions determined by agreement between the Host
State and the Organization, from censorship of official
correspondence and other official communications;
(e) exemption from all direct and indirect taxes on th
property, income and official transactions of the
Organization, except taxes that are no more than charges
for services rendered;
(f) exemption from customs duties and prohibitions and
restrictions on imports and exports in respect of
articles imported or exported by the Organization, or
on publications issued by the Organization, for official
purposes.
2. The Host State shall exercise due diligence to ensure that
the security and tranquillity of the premises of the Organization
are not in any way impaired and shall, at the request of the
Director of the Organization, provide adequate police protection
where necessary.
3. The Organization shall enjoy for its official communications
treatment not less favourable than that accorded to any other
organization or government, including the diplomatic mission of
such other government, in the Host State, in the matter of
priorities and rates for mail, cables, telephone and other
communications.
Section 2: Privileges, immunities and facilities accorded to
official representatives, the Director and staff of the
Organization, experts and consultants
1. Without prejudice to Article 5, paragraph 3 and Article 12,
paragraph 2 of this Agreement, the Host State undertakes to
accord the following privileges, immunities and facilities:
(a) to the representatives of any State, any international
organization or institution with respect to the
performance of their official duties in connection with
the work of the Organization:
(i) immunity from personal arrest or detention except
in the case of flagrancy, and from seizure of
their personal baggage and, in respect of words
spoken or written and all acts done by them in
their official capacity, immunity from legal
process of any kind;
(ii) inviolability for all papers and documents;
(iii) exemption in respect of themselves and their
spouses from immigration restrictions, alien
registration or national service obligations;
(iv) the same facilities in respect of currency or
exchange restrictions as are accorded to
representatives of foreign governments on
temporary official missions;
(b) to the Director, staff, experts and consultants of the
Organization:
(i) immunity from legal process in respect of words
spoken or written and all acts done by them in
their official capacity;
(ii) exemption from taxation on the salaries and
emoluments paid to them by the Organization;
(iii) immunity, together with their spouses and
dependants, from immigration restrictions and
alien registration;
(iv) together with their spouses and dependants, the
same repatriation facilities in time of crisis as
officials of comparable rank of diplomatic
missions;
(v) provided that they are not nationals of the Host
State, the right to import free of duty their
furniture and effects, including one car, at the
time of first taking up their post in the
Organization, as well as replacements of such
furniture and effects, including a car, at such
intervals as may be agreed upon by the
Organization and the Government of the Host State.
2. In addition to the privileges and immunities referred to in
paragraph 1, the Director, staff, experts and consultants of the
Organization, provided that they are not nationals of the Host
State, shall be granted the same privileges in respect of
exchange facilities as are accorded to officials of comparable
rank of diplomatic missions.
3. Subject to the application of measures for the maintenance
of public health and security, agreed upon between the Host State
and the Organization, the Host State shall impose no impediment
on the entry into, sojourn in and departure from its territory
of the representatives of States, international organizations or
institutions referred to in paragraph l(a), and their spouses,
or of the Director, staff, experts and consultants of the
Organization, and their spouses and dependants, or of any person
visiting the Organization in connection with its work.
4. Any visa reguired for any person referred to in paragraph 3
shall be granted or extended promptly and without charge.
Section 3: Enforcement of the law of the Host State
The Organization shall cooperate with the appropriate
authorities of the Host State to facilitate the proper
administration of justice, secure the observance of police
regulations, and prevent the occurrence of any abuses in
connection with the privileges, immunities and facilities
conferred pursuant to Article 5, paragraph 3 and Article 12 of
this Agreement or to the present Annex. In any case where an
immunity conferred upon a person would impede the course of
justice and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of
the Organization, such immunity shall be waived by the
Organization.
Section 4 : Amendment of this Part
1. Subject to paragraph 2, the present Part A of this Annex may
be amended in the manner set out in Article 15 of this Agreement.
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement,
including the present Annex, no amendment to this Part may be
adopted unless the Host State has expressly consented thereto.
PART B
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS CONCERNING Cote D'IVOIRE
Section 1: Premises of the Organization ana related facilities
1. The seat of the Organization shall be located in Immeuble
SOGEFIHA, Boulevard Carde, Abidjan.
2. In fulfilment of its obligations in accordance with Article
5, paragraph 2 of the Agreement, Cote d'Ivoire undertakes to
arrange for:
(a) provision to the Organization for its
exclusive use premises with an area of 300 sq.
metres adapted to the needs of the
Organization;
(b) responsibility for maintenance costs and
provision of electricity and water needed for
the use of the premises;
(c) provision to the Organization of at least four
full-time support and technical staff.
3. At the request of the Organization, Cote d'Ivoire shall
undertake at its own expense all necessary repairs to the
premises referred to in paragraph 2 (a) with the exception of
those which can be considered as day-to-day maintenance of the
said premises.
section 2: Privileges, immunities and facilities
1. The taxes referred to in Section 1, paragraph l(e), of Part
A shall include customs duties and dues on motor vehicles,
furniture and equipment. Likewise, legacies and donations,
including anything considered necessary by the Organization for
its establishment or for attaining its objectives, shall also be
exempt from such taxes and dues.
2. Any funds or property transferred by the Organization, for
educational or scientific purposes, to any natural person or to
any non-profit organization shall be exempt from the payment of
taxes by such person or organization.
3. Staff members of the Organization, including the Director,
shall, provided that they are not nationals of Cote d'Ivoire be
permitted to maintain assets outside Cote d'Ivoire and be exempt
from any form of taxation on income derived from sources outside
Cote d'Ivoire or on property outside Cote d'Ivoire. They shall
furthermore be exempt from national service obligations.
4. Cote d'Ivoire shall adopt the legislation necessary to give
effect to the privileges, immunities and facilities referred to
in this Agreement, including the present Annex.
Section 3 : Amendment of this Fart
1. Subject to paragraph 2, the present Part B of this Annex may
be amended in the manner set out in Article 15 of this Agreement.
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement,
including the present Annex, no amendment to this Part may be
adopted unless Cote d'Ivoire has expressly consented thereto.
DONE in Abidjan in Cote d'Ivoire on 13 December 1991 in a single copy in the English
and French languages, each version being equally authoritative.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the duly authorized representatives of the Contracting Parties
whose names appear hereunder have signed the present Agreement.
For Cameroon:
For Cape Verde:
For Congo:
For Cote d'Ivoire:
For Gabon:
For Gambia:
For Ghana:
For Guinea:
For Guinea-Bissau:
For Liberia:
For Mauritania:
For Morocco:
KOFFI JEAN KOUAKOU
SARJO K. TOURAY
NAMUANO FRANCISCO DIAS GOMES
NAH-DOE P. BROPLEH
ALY OULD HAIBA
ZINE EL ABIDINE SEBTI
For Nigeria:
JIMOH GAFFAR
For Senegal:
For Sierra Leone:
For Zaire:

