AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
REPUBLIC OF CHINA CONCERNING FISHERIES OFF THE
COASTS OF THE UNITED STATES
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of
the Republic of China,
Considering their common concern for the rational management, conser
vation and optimum utilization offish stocks off the coasts of the United States;
Recognizing that the United States has established a fishery conservation
zone within 200 nautical miles of its coasts within which the United States
exercises fishery management authority over all fish and that the United States
also exercises such authority over the living resources of the continental shelf
appertaining to the United States and to anadromous species of fish of United
States origin throughout their migratory range;
Desirous of establishing reasonable terms and conditions pertaining to
fisheries of mutual concern over which the United States exercises fishery
management authority;
Have agreed as follows:
Article I.
The purpose of this Agreement is to ensure effective conser
vation, optimum utilization and rational management of the fisheries of mutual
interest off the coasts of the United States and to establish a common under
standing of the principles and procedures under which fishing may be conducted
by nationals and vessels of the Republic of China for the living resources over
which the United States exercises fishery management authority as provided by
United States law.
Article II. 
As used in this Agreement, the term
1. "living resources over which the United States exercises fishery
  management authority" means all fish within the fishery conservation zone of the
United States except highly migratory species, all anadromous species of fish
that spawn in the fresh or estuarine waters of the United States and migrate
to ocean waters, throughout their migratory range, and all living resources of the
continental shelf appertaining to the United States;
2. "fish" means all finfish, molluscs, crustaceans, and other forms of
marine animal and plant life, other than marine mammals, birds and highly
migratory species;
3. "fishery" means
a. one or more stocks of fish that can be treated as a unit for purposes of
conservation and management and that are identified on the basis of geo
graphical, scientific, technical, recreational and economic characteristics; and
b. any fishing for such stocks;
4. "fishery conservation zone" means a zone contiguous to the territorial
sea of the United States, the seaward boundary of which is a line drawn in
such a manner that each point on it is 200 nautical miles from the baseline from
which the breadth of the territorial sea of the United States is measured;
5. "fishing" means
a. the catching, taking or harvesting of fish;
b, the attempted catching, taking or harvesting offish;
c. any other activity that can reasonably be expected to result in the catching,
taking or harvesting of fish; or
d. any operations at sea directly in support of, or in preparation for, any
activity described in sub-paragraphs a through c above, provided that such
term does not include other legitimate uses of the high seas, including any
scientific research activity conducted by a scientific research vessel;
6. "fishing vessel" means any vessel, boat, ship or other craft that is used
for, equipped to be used for, or of a type that is normally used for
a. fishing; or
b. aiding or assisting one or more vessels at sea in the performance of any
activity relating to fishing, including preparation, supply, storage, refrigeration,
transportation or processing;
7. "highly migratory species" means species of tuna which, in the course of
their life cycle, spawn and migrate over great distances in waters of the ocean;
and
8. "marine mammals" means any mammal that is morphologically adapted
to the marine environment,, including sea otters and members of the orders
Sirenia, Pinnipedia and Cetacea, or primarily inhabits the marine environment
such as the polar bears.
Article III. 
1. The Government of the United States is willing to allow
access for fishing vessels of the Republic of China to harvest, in accordance
with terms and conditions to be established in permits issued under Article VI,
an allocation of that portion of the allowable catch for a specific fishery that
will not be harvested by United States fishing vessels.
2. The Government of the United States shall determine each year, subject
to such adjustments as may be necessitated by unforeseen circumstances
affecting the stocks:
a. the total allowable catch for each fishery on the basis of the best available
scientific evidence, taking into account the interdependence of stocks, interna
tionally accepted criteria, and all other relevant factors;
b. the harvesting capacity of United States fishing vessels in respect of each
fishery;
c. the portion of the total allowable catch for a specific fishery that, on an
annual basis, will not be harvested by United States fishing vessels; and
d. the allocation of such portion that can be made available to qualifying fishing
vessels of the Republic of China.
3. In implementation of paragraph 2, d, of this Article, the United States
shall determine each year the measures necessary to prevent overfishing while
achieving, on a continuing basis, the optimum yield from each fishery. Such
measures may include, inter alia:
a. designated areas where, and periods when, fishing shall be permitted, limited
or conducted only by specified types of fishing vessels or with specified types
and quantities of fishing gear;
b. limitations on the catch offish based on area, species, size, number, weight,
sex, incidental catch, total biomass or other factors;
c. limitations on the number and types of fishing vessels that may engage in
fishing and on the number of days each vessel or the total fleet may engage
in fishing in a designated area within the fishery conservation zone or for a
specified fishery;
d. requirements as to the types of gear that may, or may not, be employed; and
e. requirements designed to facilitate enforcement of such conditions and
restrictions, including the maintenance of appropriate position-fixing and
identification equipment.
4. The Government of the United States shall notify the Government of the
Republic of China of the determinations provided for by this Article on a timely
basis.
Article IV. 
In determining the portion of the surplus that may be made
available to vessels of the Republic of China, and vessels of other countries,
the Government of the United States will promote the objective of optimum
utilization, taking into account, inter alia, traditional fishing, if any, contributions
to fishery research and the identification of stocks, previous cooperation in
enforcement, previous cooperation with respect to conservation and management
of fishery resources of mutual concern, and the need to minimize economic
dislocation in cases where vessels have habitually fished for living resources over
which the United States now exercises fishery management authority.
Article V. 
The Government of the Republic of China shall take all necessary
measures to ensure:
a. that nationals and vessels of the Republic of China refrain from fishing for
living resources over which the United States exercises fishery management
authority except as authorized pursuant to this Agreement;
b. that all such vessels so authorized comply with the provisions of permits
issued pursuant to this Agreement and applicable laws of the United States;
and
c. that the total allocation referred to in Article III, paragraph 2, d, of this
Agreement is not exceeded for any fishery.
Article VI. 
1. The Government of the Republic of China may submit
application to the Government of the United States for a permit for each fishing
vessel of the Republic of China that wishes to engage in fishing in the fishery
conservation zone pursuant to this Agreement. Such application shall be prepared
and processed in accordance with Annex I, which shall constitute an integral
part of this Agreement. The Government of the United States may require the
payment of reasonable fees for such permits.
Article VII. 
The Government of the Republic of China shall ensure that
nationals and vessels of the Republic of China refrain from harassing, hunting,
capturing, or killing, or attempting to harass, hunt, capture or kill, any marine
mammal within the United States fishery conservation zone, except as may be
otherwise provided by an international agreement respecting marine mammals to
which the United States is a party, or in accordance with specific authorization
for and controls on incidental taking of marine mammals established by the Govern
ment of the United States.
Article VIII. 
The Government of the Republic of China shall ensure that in
the conduct of the fisheries under this Agreement:
1. the authorizing permit for each vessel of the Republic of China is prominently
displayed in the wheelhouse of such vessel;
2. appropriate position-fixing and identification equipment, as determined by the
Government of the United States, is installed and maintained in working
order on each vessel;
3. designated United States observers are permitted to board, upon request,
any such fishing vessel, and shall be accorded the equivalent rank of ship's
officer while aboard such vessel, and, further, the Government of the United
States shall be reimbursed for the costs incurred in the utilization of
observers;
4. agents are appointed and maintained within the United States possessing the
authority to receive and respond to any legal process issued in the United
States with respect to a vessel owner or operator for any cause arising out of
the conduct of fishing activities under this Agreement; and
5. all necessary measures are taken to ensure the prompt and adequate
compensation of United States citizens for any loss of, or damage to, their
fishing vessels, fishing gear or catch that is caused by any fishing vessel of
the Republic of China.
Article IX. 
1. The Government of the Republic of China shall take such
measures as may be necessary to ensure that each vessel of the Republic of
China authorized to fish pursuant to this Agreement, and any other fishing vessel
of the Republic of China that engages in fishing for living resources subject to
the fishery management authority of the United States, shall allow and assist
the boarding and inspection of such vessel by any duly authorized enforcement
official of the United States, and shall cooperate in such enforcement action
as may be undertaken pursuant to the laws of the United States.
2. In cases of seizure and arrest of a vessel of the Republic of China by
the authorities of the Government of the United States, notification shall be given
promptly through diplomatic channels informing the Government of the Republic
of China of the action taken and of any penalties subsequently imposed.
Article X. 
1. The Government of the United States will impose appropriate
penalties, in accordance with the laws of the United States, on vessels of the
Republic of China, or their owners or operators, that violate the requirements
of this Agreement or of any permit issued hereunder.
2. Arrested vessels and their crews shall be promptly released, subject to
such reasonable bond or other security as may be determined by the court.
Article XI. 
The Government of the Republic of China undertakes to
cooperate with the Government of the United States in the conduct of scientific
research required for the purpose of managing and conserving living resources
subject to the fishery management authority of the United States, including the
compilation of best available scientific information for the management and
conservation of stocks of mutual concern. The competent agencies of the two
Governments shall enter into such arrangements as may be necessary to facilitate
such cooperation, including the exchange of information and scientists, regularly
scheduled meetings between scientists to prepare research plans and review
progress, and the implementation and maintenance of a standardized system
for the collection and archiving of relevant statistical and biological information
in accordance with Annex II, which shall constitute an integral part of this
Agreement.
Article XII. 
The Government of the United States and the Government
of the Republic of China shall cooperate in the exchange of scientific and technical
information relating to species of tuna of mutual interest with a view to the
establishment of regional arrangements, including appropriate international
organizations, to ensure conservation of the species. Such scientific exchanges
shall include the reporting of tuna and associated catches.
Article XIII. 
The Government of the United States and the Government
of the Republic of China shall carry out periodic bilateral consultations regarding
the implementation of this Agreement and the development of further cooperation
in the field of fisheries of mutual concern, including the establishment of appro
priate multilateral organizations for the collection and analysis of scientific
data respecting such fisheries.
Article XIV. 
Should the Government of the United States indicate to the
Government of the Republic of China that nationals and vessels of the United
States wish to engage in fishing for living resources off the coasts of the Republic
of China, the Government of the Republic of China will allow such fishing on
the basis of reciprocity and on terms not more restrictive than those established
in accordance with this Agreement.
Article XV. 
Nothing contained in the present Agreement shall affect or
prejudice in any manner the positions of either Government with respect to the
extent of internal waters, of the territorial sea, of the high seas, or of coastal
state jurisdiction or authority for any purpose other than the conservation and
management of fisheries.
Article XVI. 
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on a date to be
mutually agreed by exchange of notes, upon the completion of the internal
procedures of both Parties, and shall remain in force until July 1, 1982, unless
terminated sooner by either Party after giving written notification of such
termination six months in advance.
2. This Agreement shall be subject to review by the two Governments
two years after its entry into force.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized for this
purpose, have signed this Agreement.
DONE in Washington, September 15, 1976, corresponding to the 15th day
of the 9th month of the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of China, in duplicate, in
the English and Chinese languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government
of the United States of America:
Rozanne L. Ridgway.
For the Government of the
Republic of China:
James C. H. Shen


ANNEX I
APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCEDURES
The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of annual
permits authorizing vessels of the Republic of China to engage in fishing for living
resources over which the United States exercises fishery management authority:
1. The Government of the Republic of China may submit an application to the
Government of the United States for each fishing vessel of the Republic of China that
wishes to engage in fishing pursuant to this Agreement. Such application shall be made
on forms provided by the Government of the United States for that purpose.
2. Any such application shall specify:
a. the name and official number or other identification of each fishing vessel for which
a permit is sought, together with the name and address of the owner and operator
thereof;
b. the tonnage, capacity, speed, processing equipment, type and quantity of fishing
gear, and such other information relating to the fishing characteristics of the vessel
as may be requested;
c. a specification of each fishery in which each vessel wishes to fish;
d. the amount of fish or tonnage of catch by species contemplated for each vessel
during the time such permit is in force;
e. the ocean area in which, and the season or period during which, such fishing would
be conducted; and
/. such other relevant information as may be requested.
3. The Government of the United States shall review each application, shall
determine what conditions and restrictions related to fishery management and conservation
may be needed, and what fee will be required. The Government of the United States
shall inform the Government of the Republic of China of such determinations.
4. The Government of the Republic of China shall thereupon notify the Government
of the United States of its acceptance or rejection of such conditions and restrictions
and, in the case of a rejection, of its objections thereto.
5. Upon acceptance of the conditions and restrictions by the Government of the
Republic of China and the payment of any fees, the Government of the United States
shall approve the application and issue a permit for each fishing vessel of the Republic
of China, which fishing vessel shall thereupon be authorized to fish in accordance with
this Agreement and the terms and conditions set forth in the permit. Such permits shall
be issued for a specific vessel and shall not be transferred.
6. In the event the Government of the Republic of China notifies the Government
of the United States of its objections to specific conditions and restrictions, the two
Governments may consult with respect thereto and the Government of the Republic of
China may thereupon submit a revised application.
7. The procedures in this Annex may be amended by agreement through an exchange
of notes between the two Governments.
ANNEX II
DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR VESSELS
OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA
The procedures described below are designed to contribute to continuing needs for
assessment of the status of stocks and management of the fisheries. However, specific
needs may develop from time to time which require a change in standard procedures, or
additional data for special studies. Also, the pattern of fisheries will change. These
aspects require that the procedures must be flexible enough to accommodate necessary
changes.
All data described below for the Pacific area shall be provided to the designated
representative of the National Marine Fisheries Service.
1. Catch and Effort Statistics
a. by May 30 of the following year, annual catch and effort statistics shall be
provided as follows: catch in metric tons and effort in hours trawling, effort in
number of longline units, effort in number of traps (pots), effort in number of
hours of longline or trap soaking time, and effort in number of days fishing by
vessel class, by gear type, by month, by half degree latitude by one degree
longitude statistical area, by the following species groupings:
Yellowfin sole Pacific cod
Rock sole Sablefish
Arrowtooth flounder Alaska pollock
Flathead sole Atka mackerel
Dover sole Herring
Other flounders Other species taken in excess of 1,000 metric
Pacific ocean perch tons
Other rockfishes All other species combined
b. in addition to the annual statistical report above, provisional monthly fishery
information shall be provided by the end of the following month as follows:
catch in metric tons and effort in vessel-days on the grounds by gear type, by
vessel class, by the following species groups:
: Pollock Sablefish
Cod Herring
Rockfishes Others
Flatfishes
for each of the following International North Pacific Fisheries Commission
(INPFC) statistical areas:
Bering Sea; sub-areas 1, 2, 3, and 4 Charlotte
Aleutian Region Vancouver
Shumagin Columbia
Chirikof Eureka
Kodiak Monterey
Yakutat Conception
Southeast Other designated areas
2. Biological Statistics
Biological sampling by the Republic of China shall be conducted and measurements
from sampling recorded as required according to procedures developed and coordinated
through consultations between scientists of the United States and the Republic of China
so as to determine the representative size, age, and weight of individual fish in the catch.
When such samples are collected, the Republic of China shall provide by May 30 of
the following year the annual biological statistics which shall include:
a. length frequency samples by vessel class, by gear type, by month, by half degree
latitude by one degree longitude statistical area, by sex, and by species previously
identified in 1, a ; and
b. length-weight samples of each principal species (e.g., expected yearly catch in area
of agreement of 500 or more metric tons) by INPFC statistical area (previously
identified in 1, b). As scientific need arises, samples of scales or otoliths shall also
be collected for age determination.
3. Other Statistical Requirements
As further statistics are required for analyses and should fisheries for other species
and areas be conducted (other than those identified in 1 and 2), the procedures for such
data collection and reporting shall be developed and coordinated through consultations
between scientists of the United States and the Republic of China.
4. United States Observers
United States observers shall be assisted to perform the following duties while aboard
vessels of the Republic of China:
a. sampling the catch to estimate species composition; size, weight, and age composition;
and collecting other biological data as appropriate for scientific evaluation offish stocks;
b. measuring daily catch rates, determining location and duration of fishing, obtaining
gear dimensions, and observing performance of fishing operations; and
c. transmitting messages to the Government of the United States whenever requested.
i 5. Amendment Procedure
The procedures in this Annex may be amended by agreement through an exchange
of notes between the two Governments.
AGREED MINUTES
The representatives of the Government of the United States and the
Government of the Republic of China have agreed to record the following in
connection with the Agreement between the Government of the United States
of America and the Government of the Republic of China Concerning Fisheries
off the Coasts of the United States signed today:
1. With respect to Article IV of the Agreement, the Representative of the
Government of the Republic of China requested that the Government of the
United States, in making its determinations pursuant to that Article, consider the
dependence of the people of the Republic of China upon fish as a major source
of protein; past cooperation of the Republic of China with the United States in
enforcement; contributions of the Republic of China to the international scientific
community in the field of fishery research; and the economic dislocation of the
fishing industry of the Republic of China arising from the loss of traditional
fishing grounds elsewhere.
2. With respect to the provisions of Article X of the Agreement, the Repre
sentative of the Government of the United States stated that, should there be
cases involving fishermen from the Republic of China arising out of fishing
activities under this Agreement, the appropriate representatives of the Government
of the United States will recommend to the court that the penalty for violation
of fishery regulations not include imprisonment or any other form of corporal
punishment. The Representative of the Government of the Republic of China
noted this statement by the Representative of the Government of the United
States, and expressed his sincere appreciation to the Government of the United
States for its readiness to make such recommendations.
3. With respect to Article XII of the Agreement, the two Governments
agreed that at the outset of the Agreement and until such time as appropriate
regional arrangements are in place, the Government of the Republic of China
will, in order to establish a base of scientific information to further such arrange
ments, provide to the Government of the United States statistics on tuna and
related catches off the coasts of the United States.
4. The Representative of the Government of the United States stated that,
subject to the applicable laws and regulations of the United States, fishing
vessels of the Republic of China could enter United States ports for the purpose
of obtaining supplies and services normally available in those ports.
