Annex IV of MARPOL 73/78
Regulations for the Prevention
of Pollution by Sewage
from Ships
Regulation 1
Definitions
For the purposes of the present Annex:
(1) New ship means a ship:
(a) for which the building contract is placed, or in the absence of a
building contract, the keel of which is laid, or which is at a
similar stage of construction, on or after the date of entry into
force of this Annex; or
(b) the delivery of which is three years or more after the date of
entry into force of this Annex.
(2) Existing ship means a ship which is not a new ship.
(3) Sewage means:
(a) drainage and other wastes from any form of toilets, urinals, and
WC scuppers;
(b) drainage from medical premises (dispensary, sick bay, etc.) via
wash basins, wash tubs and scuppers located in such premises;
(c) drainage from spaces containing living animals; or
(d) other waste waters when mixed with the drainages defined
above.
(4) Holding tank means a tank used for the collection and storage of
sewage.
(5) Nearest land. The term "from the nearest land" means from the
baseline from which the territorial sea of the territory in question is
established in accordance with international law except that, for the
purposes of the present Convention, ``from the nearest land'' off the
north-eastern coast of Australia shall mean from a line drawn from a
point on the coast of Australia in
latitude 11800' S, longitude 142808' E
to a point in latitude 10835' S, longitude 141855' E
thence to a point latitude 10800' S, longitude 142800' E
thence to a point latitude 9810' S, longitude 143852' E
thence to a point latitude 9800' S, longitude 144830' E
thence to a point latitude 13800' S, longitude 144800' E
thence to a point latitude 15800' S, longitude 146800' E
thence to a point latitude 18800' S, longitude 147800' E
thence to a point latitude 21800' S, longitude 153800' E
thence to a point on the coast of Australia in
latitude 24842' S, longitude 153815' E.
Regulation 2
Application
The provisions of this Annex shall apply to:
(a) (i) new ships of 200 tons gross tonnage and above;
(ii) new ships of less than 200 tons gross tonnage which are
certified to carry more than 10 persons;
(iii) new ships which do not have a measured gross tonnage
and are certified to carry more than 10 persons; and
(b) (i) existing ships of 200 tons gross tonnage and above, 10
years after the date of entry into force of this Annex;
(ii) existing ships of less than 200 tons gross tonnage which are
certified to carry more than 10 persons, 10 years after the
date of entry into force of this Annex; and
(iii) existing ships which do not have a measured gross tonnage
and are certified to carry more than 10 persons, 10 years
after the date of entry into force of this Annex.
Regulation 3
Surveys
(1) Every ship which is required to comply with the provisions of this
Annex and which is engaged in voyages to ports or offshore terminals
under the jurisdiction of other Parties to the Convention shall be
subject to the surveys specified below:
(a) An initial survey before the ship is put in service or before the
certificate required under regulation 4 of this Annex is issued for
the first time, which shall include a survey of the ship which
shall be such as to ensure:
(i) when the ship is fitted with a sewage treatment plant the
plant shall meet operational requirements based on
standards and the test methods developed by the
Organization;
(ii) when the ship is fitted with a system to comminute and
disinfect the sewage, such a system shall be of a type
approved by the Administration;
(iii) when the ship is equipped with a holding tank the capacity
of such tank shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration
for the retention of all sewage having regard to the
operation of the ship, the number of persons on board and
other relevant factors. The holding tank shall have a means
to indicate visually the amount of its contents; and
(iv) that the ship is equipped with a pipeline leading to the
exterior convenient for the discharge of sewage to a
reception facility and that such a pipeline is fitted with a
standard shore connection in compliance with regulation
11 of this Annex.
This survey shall be such as to ensure that the equipment,
fittings, arrangements and material fully comply with the
applicable requirements of this Annex.
(b) Periodical surveys at intervals specified by the Administration
but not exceeding five years which shall be such as to ensure that
the equipment, fittings, arrangements and material fully comply
with the applicable requirements of this Annex. However,
where the duration of the International Sewage Pollution
Prevention Certificate (1973) is extended as specified in
regulation 7(2) or (4) of this Annex, the interval of the
periodical survey may be extended correspondingly.
(2) The Administration shall establish appropriate measures for ships
which are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (1) of this
regulation in order to ensure that the provisions of this Annex are
complied with.
(3) Surveys of the ship as regards enforcement of the provisions of this
Annex shall be carried out by officers of the Administration. The
Administration may, however, entrust the surveys either to surveyors
nominated for the purpose or to organizations recognized by it. In
every case the Administration concerned fully guarantees the
completeness and efficiency of the surveys.
(4) After any survey of the ship under this regulation has been completed,
no significant change shall be made in the equipment, fittings,
arrangements, or material covered by the survey without the approval
of the Administration, except the direct replacement of such
equipment or fittings.
Regulation 4
Issue of certificate
(1) An International Sewage Pollution Prevention Certificate (1973) shall
be issued, after survey in accordance with the provisions of regulation
3 of this Annex, to any ship which is engaged in voyages to ports or
offshore terminals under the jurisdiction of other Parties to the
Convention.
(2) Such certificate shall be issued either by the Administration or by any
persons or organization duly authorized by it. In every case the
Administration assumes full responsibility for the certificate.
Regulation 5
Issue of a certificate by another Government
(1) The Government of a Party to the Convention may, at the request of
the Administration, cause a ship to be surveyed and, if satisfied that the
provisions of this Annex are complied with, shall issue or authorize
the issue of an International Sewage Pollution Prevention Certificate
(1973) to the ship in accordance with this Annex.
(2) A copy of the certificate and a copy of the survey report shall be
transmitted as early as possible to the Administration requesting the
survey.
(3) A certificate so issued shall contain a statement to the effect that it has
been issued at the request of the Administration and it shall have the
same force and receive the same recognition as the certificate issued
under regulation 4 of this Annex.
(4) No International Sewage Pollution Prevention Certificate (1973) shall
be issued to a ship which is entitled to fly the flag of a State which is
not a Party.
Regulation 6
Form of certificate
The International Sewage Pollution Prevention Certificate (1973) shall be
drawn up in an official language of the issuing country in the form
corresponding to the model given in the appendix to this Annex. If the
language used is neither English nor French, the text shall include a
translation into one of these languages.
Regulation 7
Duration of certificate
(1) The International Sewage Pollution Prevention Certificate (1973)
shall be issued for a period specified by the Administration, which
shall not exceed five years from the date of issue, except as provided in
paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) of this regulation.
(2) If a ship at the time when the certificate expires is not in a port or
offshore terminal under the jurisdiction of the Party to the
Convention whose flag the ship is entitled to fly, the certificate may
be extended by the Administration, but such extension shall be
granted only for the purpose of allowing the ship to complete its
voyage to the State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly or in which it
is to be surveyed and then only in cases where it appears proper and
reasonable to do so.
(3) No certificate shall be thus extended for a period longer than five
months and a ship to which such extension is granted shall not on its
arrival in the State whose flag it is entitled to fly or the port in which it
is to be surveyed, be entitled by virtue of such extension to leave that
port or State without having obtained a new certificate.
(4) A certificate which has not been extended under the provisions of
paragraph (2) of this regulation may be extended by the Administration
for a period of grace of up to one month from the date of expiry
stated on it.
(5) A certificate shall cease to be valid if significant alterations have taken
place in the equipment, fittings, arrangement or material required
without the approval of the Administration, except the direct
replacement of such equipment or fittings.
(6) A certificate issued to a ship shall cease to be valid upon transfer of such
a ship to the flag of another State, except as provided in paragraph (7)
of this regulation.
(7) Upon transfer of a ship to the flag of another Party, the certificate shall
remain in force for a period not exceeding five months provided that it
would not have expired before the end of that period, or until the
Administration issues a replacement certificate, whichever is earlier.
As soon as possible after the transfer has taken place the Government
of the Party whose flag the ship was formerly entitled to fly shall
transmit to the Administration a copy of the certificate carried by the
ship before the transfer and, if available, a copy of the relevant survey
report.
Regulation 8
Discharge of sewage
(1) Subject to the provisions of regulation 9 of this Annex, the discharge
of sewage into the sea is prohibited, except when:
(a) the ship is discharging comminuted and disinfected sewage
using a system approved by the Administration in accordance
with regulation 3(1)(a) at a distance of more than 4 nautical
miles from the nearest land, or sewage which is not comminuted
or disinfected at a distance of more than 12 nautical miles from
the nearest land, provided that in any case, the sewage that has
been stored in holding tanks shall not be discharged instantaneously
but at a moderate rate when the ship is en route and
proceeding at not less than 4 knots; the rate of discharge shall be
approved by the Administration based upon standards developed
by the Organization; or
(b) the ship has in operation an approved sewage treatment plant
which has been certified by the Administration to meet the
operational requirements referred to in regulation 3(1)(a)(i) of
this Annex, and
(i) the test results of the plant are laid down in the ship's
International Sewage Pollution Prevention Certificate
(1973);
(ii) additionally, the effluent shall not produce visible floating
solids in, nor cause discoloration of, the surrounding
water; or
(c) the ship is situated in the waters under the jurisdiction of a State
and is discharging sewage in accordance with such less stringent
requirements as may be imposed by such State.
(2) When the sewage is mixed with wastes or waste water having different
discharge requirements, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
Regulation 9
Exceptions
Regulation 8 of this Annex shall not apply to:
(a) the discharge of sewage from a ship necessary for the purpose of
securing the safety of a ship and those on board or saving life at
sea; or
(b) the discharge of sewage resulting from damage to a ship or its
equipment if all reasonable precautions have been taken before
and after the occurrence of the damage, for the purpose of
preventing or minimizing the discharge.
Regulation 10
Reception facilities
(1) The Government of each Party to the Convention undertakes to
ensure the provision of facilities at ports and terminals for the
reception of sewage, without causing undue delay to ships, adequate
to meet the needs of the ships using them.
(2) The Government of each Party shall notify the Organization for
transmission to the Contracting Governments concerned of all cases
where the facilities provided under this regulation are alleged to be
inadequate.
Regulation 11
Standard discharge connections
To enable pipes of reception facilities to be connected with the ship's
discharge pipeline, both lines shall be fitted with a standard discharge
connection in accordance with the following table:
Standard dimensions of flanges for discharge connections
Description Dimension
Outside diameter 210 mm
Inner diameter According to pipe outside diameter
Bolt circle diameter 170 mm
Slots in flange 4 holes 18 mm in diameter equidistantly
placed on a bolt circle of the above
diameter, slotted to the flange periphery.
The slot width to be 18 mm
Flange thickness 16 mm
Bolts and nuts:
quantity and diameter
4, each of 16 mm in diameter and of
suitable length
The flange is designed to accept pipes up to a maximum internal
diameter of 100 mm and shall be of steel or other equivalent
material having a flat face. This flange, together with a suitable
gasket, shall be suitable for a service pressure of 6 kg/cm2
For ships having a moulded depth of 5 m and less, the inner diameter
of the discharge connection may be 38 mm.


Appendix to Annex IV
Form of Sewage Certificate
