PROTOCOL
TO THE 1979 CONVENTION
ON LONG-RANGE TRANSBOUNDARY
AIR POLLUTION ON
PERSISTENT ORGANIC POLLUTANTS
The Parties.
Determined to implement the Convention on Long-range Transboundary
Air Pollution,
Recognizing that emissions of many persistent organic pollutants
are transported across international boundaries and are deposited in
Europe, North America and the Arctic, far from their site of origin, and
that the atmosphere is the dominant medium of transport,
Aware that persistent organic pollutants resist degradation under
natural conditions and have been associated with adverse effects on
human health and the environment,
Concerned that persistent organic pollutants can biomagnify in
upper trophic levels to concentrations which might affect the health of
exposed wildlife and humans,
Acknowledging that the Arctic ecosystems and especially its
indigenous people, who subsist on Arctic fish and mammals, are
particularly at risk because of the biomagnification of persistent
organic pollutants,
Mindful that measures to control emissions of persistent organic
pollutants would also contribute to the protection of the environment
and human health in areas outside the United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe's region, including the Arctic and international waters,
Resolved to take measures to anticipate, prevent or minimize
emissions of persistent organic pollutants, taking into account the
application of the precautionary approach, as set forth in principle 15
of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,
Reaffirming that States have, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international law, the
sovereign right to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own
environmental and development policies, and the responsibility to ensure
that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage
to the environment of other States or of areas beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction,
Noting the need for global action on persistent organic pollutants
and recalling the role envisaged in chapter 9 of Agenda 21 for regional
agreements to reduce global transboundary air pollution and, in
particular, for the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe to
share its regional experience with other regions of the world,
Recognizing that there are subregional, regional and global
regimes in place, including international instruments governing the
management of hazardous wastes, their transboundary movement and
disposal, in particular the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal,
Considering that the predominant sources of air pollution
contributing to the accumulation of persistent organic pollutants are
the use of certain pesticides, the manufacture and use of certain
chemicals, and the unintentional formation of certain substances in
waste incineration, combustion, metal production and mobile sources,
Aware that techniques and management practices are available to
reduce emissions of persistent organic pollutants into the air,
Conscious of the need for a cost-effective regional approach to
combating air pollution,
Noting the important contribution of the private and nongovernmental
sectors to knowledge of the effects associated with
persistent organic pollutants, available alternatives and abatement
techniques, and their role in assisting in the reduction of emissions of
persistent organic pollutants,
Bearing in mind that measures taken to reduce persistent organic
pollutant emissions should not constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on international
competition and trade,
Taking into consideration existing scientific and technical data
on emissions, atmospheric processes and effects on human health and the
environment of persistent organic pollutants, as well as on abatement
costs, and acknowledging the need to continue scientific and technical
cooperation to further the understanding of these issues,
Recognizing the measures on persistent organic pollutants already
taken by some of the Parties on a national level and/or under other
internat ional convent ions,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of the present Protocol,
1. "Convention" means the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air
Pollution, adopted in Geneva on 13 November 1979;
2. "EMEP" means the Cooperative Programme for Monitoring and
Evaluation of the Long-range Transmission of Air Pollutants in Europe;
3. "Executive Body" means the Executive Body for the Convention
constituted under article 10, paragraph 1, of the Convention;
4. "Commission" means the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe ;
5. "Parties" means, unless the context otherwise requires, the
Parties to the present Protocol ;
6. "Geographical scope of EMEP" means the area defined in article 1,
paragraph 4, of the Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-range
Transboundary Air Pollution on Long-term Financing of the Cooperative
Programme for Monitoring and Evaluation of the Long-range Transmission
of Air Pollutants in Europe (EMEP), adopted in Geneva on
28 September 1984;
7. "Persistent organic pollutants" (POPs) are organic substances
that: (i) possess toxic characteristics; (ii) are persistent;
(iii) bioaccumulate; (iv) are prone to long-range transboundary
atmospheric transport and deposition; and (v) are likely to cause
significant adverse human health or environmental effects near to and
distant from their sources;
8. "Substance" means a single chemical species, or a number of
chemical species which form a specific group by virtue of (a) having
similar properties and being emitted together into the environment; or
(b) forming a mixture normally marketed as a single article;
9. "Emission" means the release of a substance from a point or
diffuse source into the atmosphere;
10. "Stationary source" means any fixed building, structure, facility,
installation, or equipment that emits or may emit any persistent organic
pollutant directly or indirectly into the atmosphere;
11. "Major stationary source category" means any stationary source
category listed in annex VIII;
12. "New stationary source" means any stationary source of which the
construction or substantial modification is commenced after the expiry
of two years from the date of entry into force of: (i) this Protocol;
or (ii) an amendment to annex III or VIII, where the stationary source
becomes subject to the provisions of this Protocol only by virtue of
that amendment. It shall be a matter for the competent national
authorities to decide whether a modification is substantial or not,
taking into account such factors as the environmental benefits of the
modification.
Article 2
OBJECTIVE
The objective of the present Protocol is to control, reduce or
eliminate discharges, emissions and losses of persistent organic
pollutants.
Article 3
BASIC OBLIGATIONS
1. Except where specifically exempted in accordance with article 4,
each Party shall take effective measures:
(a) To eliminate the production and use of the substances listed
in annex I in accordance with the implementation requirements specified
therein;
(b) (i) To ensure that, when the substances listed in annex I
are destroyed or disposed of, such destruction or
disposal is undertaken in an environmentally sound
manner, taking into account relevant subregional,
regional and global regimes governing the management
of hazardous wastes and their disposal, in particular
the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal;
(ii) To endeavour to ensure that the disposal of substances
listed in annex I is carried out domestically, taking
into account pertinent environmental considerations;
(iii) To ensure that the transboundary movement of the
substances listed in annex I is conducted in an
environmentally sound manner, taking into
consideration applicable subregional, regional, and
global regimes governing the transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes, in particular the Basel Convention
on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and their Disposal;
(c) To restrict the substances listed in annex II to the uses
described, in accordance with the implementation requirements specified
therein.
2. The requirements specified in paragraph 1 (b) above shall become
effective for each substance upon the date that production or use of
that substance is eliminated, whichever is later.
3. For substances listed in annex I, II, or III, each Party should
develop appropriate strategies for identifying articles still in use and
wastes containing such substances, and shall take appropriate measures
to ensure that such wastes and such articles, upon becoming wastes, are
destroyed or disposed of in an environmentally sound manner.
4. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 to 3 above, the terms waste,
disposal, and environmentally sound shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with the use of those terms under the Basel Convention on the
Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their
Disposal.
5. Each Party shall:
(a) Reduce its total annual emissions of each of the substances
listed in annex III from the level of the emission in a reference year
set in accordance with that annex by taking effective measures,
appropriate in its particular circumstances;
(b) No later than the timescales specified in annex VI, apply:
(i) The best available techniques, taking into
consideration annex V, to each new stationary source
within a major stationary source category for which
annex V identifies best available techniques;
(ii) Limit values at least as stringent as those specified
in annex IV to each new stationary source within a
category mentioned in that annex, taking into
consideration annex V. A Party may, as an
alternative, apply different emission reduction
strategies that achieve equivalent overall emission
levels;
(iii) The best available techniques, taking into
consideration annex V, to each existing stationary
source within a major stationary source category for
which annex V identifies best available techniques,
insofar as this is technically and economically
feasible. A Party may, as an alternative, apply
different emission reduction strategies that achieve
equivalent overall emission reductions;
(iv) Limit values at least as stringent as those specified
in annex IV to each existing stationary source within
a category mentioned in that annex, insofar as this is
technically and economically feasible, taking into
consideration annex V. A Party may, as an
alternative, apply different emission reduction
strategies that achieve equivalent overall emission
reductions;
(v) Effective measures to control emissions from mobile
sources, taking into consideration annex VII.
6. In the case of residential combustion sources, the obligations set
out in paragraph 5 (b) (i) and (iii) above shall refer to all stationary
sources in that category taken together.
7. Where a Party, after the application of paragraph 5 (b) above,
cannot achieve the requirements of paragraph 5 (a) above for a substance
specified in annex III, it shall be exempted from its obligations in
paragraph 5 (a) above for that substance.
8. Each Party shall develop and maintain emission inventories for the
substances listed in annex III, and shall collect available information
relating to the production and sales of the substances listed in
annexes I and II, for those Parties within the geographical scope of
EMEP, using, as a minimum, the methodologies and the spatial and
temporal resolution specified by the Steering Body of EMEP, and, for
those Parties outside the geographical scope of EMEP, using as guidance
the methodologies developed through the work plan of the Executive Body.
It shall report this information in accordance with the reporting
requirements set out in article 9 below.
Article 4
EXEMPTIONS
1. Article 3, paragraph 1, shall not apply to quantities of a
substance to be used for laboratory-scale research or as a reference
standard.
2. A Party may grant an exemption from article 3, paragraphs 1 (a)
and (c), in respect of a particular substance, provided that the
exemption is not granted or used in a manner that would undermine the
objectives of the present Protocol, and only for the following purposes
and under the following conditions :
(a) Por research other than that referred to in paragraph 1
above, if:
(i) No significant quantity of the substance is expected
to reach the environment during the proposed use and
subsequent disposal;
(ii) The objectives and parameters of such research are
subject to assessment and authorization by the Party;
and
(iii) In the event of a significant release of a substance
into the environment, the exemption will terminate
immediately, measures will be taken to mitigate the
release as appropriate, and an assessment of the
containment measures will be conducted before research
may resume;
(b) To manage as necessary a public health emergency, if:
(i) No suitable alternative measures are available to the
Party to address the situation;
(ii) The measures taken are proportional to the magnitude
and severity of the emergency;
(iii) Appropriate precautions are taken to protect human
health and the environment and to ensure that the
substance is not used outside the geographical area
subject to the emergency;
(iv) The exemption is granted for a period of time that
does not exceed the duration of the emergency; and
(v) Upon termination of the emergency, any remaining
stocks of the substance are subject to the provisions
of article 3, paragraph 1 (b);
(c) For a minor application judged to be essential by the Party,
if:
(i) The exemption is granted for a maximum of five years;
(ii) The exemption has not previously been granted by it
under this article;
(iii) No suitable alternatives exist for the proposed use;
(iv) The Party has estimated the emissions of the substance
resulting from the exemption and their contribution to
the total emissions of the substance from the Parties;
(v) Adequate precautions are taken to ensure that the
emissions to the environment are minimized; and
(vi) Upon termination of the exemption, any remaining
stocks of the substance are subject to the provisions
of article 3, paragraph 1 (b).
3. Each Party shall, no later than ninety days after granting an
exemption under paragraph 2 above, provide the secretariat with, as a
minimum, the following information:
(a) The chemical name of the substance subject to the exemption;
(b) The purpose for which the exemption has been granted;
(c) The conditions under which the exemption has been granted;
(d) The length of time for which the exemption has been granted;
(e) Those to whom, or the organization to which, the exemption
applies; and
(f) For an exemption granted under paragraphs 2 (a) and (c)
above, the estimated emissions of the substance as a result of the
exemption and an assessment of their contribution to the total emissions
of the substance from the Parties.
4. The secretariat shall make available to all Parties the
information received under paragraph 3 above.
Article 5
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY
The Parties shall, in a manner consistent with their laws,
regulations and practices, create favourable conditions to facilitate
the exchange of information and technology designed to reduce the
generation and emission of persistent organic pollutants and to develop
cost-effective alternatives, by promoting, inter alia:
(a) Contacts and cooperation among appropriate organizations and
individuals in the private and public sectors that are capable of
providing technology, design and engineering services, equipment or
finance/
(b) The exchange of and access to information on the development
and use of alternatives to persistent organic pollutants as well as on
the evaluation of the risks that such alternatives pose to human health
and the environment, and information on the economic and social costs of
such alternatives;
(c) The compilation and regular updating of lists of their
designated authorities engaged in similar activities in other
international forums;
(d) The exchange of information on activities conducted in other
international forums.
Article 6
PUBLIC AWARENESS
The Parties shall, consistent with their laws, regulations and
practices, promote the provision of information to the general public,
including individuals who are direct users of persistent organic
pollutants. This information may include, inter alia;
(a) Information, including labelling, on risk assessment and
hazard;
(b) Information on risk reduction;
(c) Information to encourage the elimination of persistent
organic pollutants or a reduction in their use, including, where
appropriate, information on integrated pest management, integrated crop
management and the economic and social impacts of this elimination or
reduction; and
(d) Information on alternatives to persistent organic
pollutants, as well as an evaluation of the risks that such alternatives
pose to human health and the environment, and information on the
economic and social impacts of such alternatives.
Article 7
STRATEGIES, POLICIES, PROGRAMMES, MEASURES AND INFORMATION
1. Each Party shall, no later than six months after the date on which
this Protocol enters into force for it, develop strategies, policies and
programmes in order to discharge its obligations under the present
Protocol.
2. Each Party shall:
(a) Encourage the use of economically feasible, environmentally
sound management techniques, including best environmental practices,
with respect to all aspects of the use, production, release, processing,
distribution, handling, transport and reprocessing of substances subject
to the present Protocol and manufactured articles, mixtures or solutions
containing such substances ;
(b) Encourage the implementation of other management programmes
to reduce emissions of persistent organic pollutants, including
voluntary programmes and the use of economic instruments;
(c) Consider the adoption of additional policies and measures as
appropriate in its particular circumstances, which may include nonregulatory
approaches;
(d) Make determined efforts that are economically feasible to
reduce levels of substances subject to the present Protocol that are
contained as contaminants in other substances, chemical products or
manufactured articles, as soon as the relevance of the source has been
established;
(e) Take into consideration in its programmes for evaluating
substances, the characteristics specified in paragraph 1 of Executive
Body decision 1998/2 on information to be submitted and procedures for
adding substances to annex I, II or III, including any amendments
thereto.
3. The Parties may take more stringent measures than those required
by the present Protocol.
Article 8
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND MONITORING
The Parties shall encourage research, development, monitoring and
cooperation related, but not limited, to:
(a) Emissions, long-range transport and deposition levels and
their modelling, existing levels in the biotic and abiotic environment,
the elaboration of procedures for harmonizing relevant methodologies;
(b) Pollutant pathways and inventories in representative
ecosystems ;
(c) Relevant effects on human health and the environment,
including quantification of those effects,-
(d) Best available techniques and practices, including
agricultural practices, and emission control techniques and practices
currently employed by the Parties or under development;
(e) Methodologies permitting consideration of socio-economic
factors in the evaluation of alternative control strategies;
(f) An effects-based approach which integrates appropriate
information, including information obtained under subparagraphs (a) to
(e) above, on measured or modelled environmental levels, pathways, and
effects on human health and the environment, for the purpose of
formulating future control strategies which also take into account
economic and technological factors;
(g) Methods for estimating national emissions and projecting
future emissions of individual persistent organic pollutants and for
evaluating how such estimates and projections can be used to structure
future obligations;
(h) Levels of substances subject to the present Protocol that
are contained as contaminants in other substances, chemical products or
manufactured articles and the significance of these levels for
long-range transport, as well as techniques to reduce levels of these
contaminants, and, in addition, levels of persistent organic pollutants
generated during the life cycle of timber treated with
pentachlorophenol.
Priority should be given to research on substances considered to be the
most likely to be submitted under the procedures specified in article
14, paragraph 6.
Article 9
REPORTING
1. Subject to its laws governing the confidentiality of commercial
information:
(a) Each Party shall report, through the Executive Secretary of
the Commission, to the Executive Body, on a periodic basis as determined
by the Parties meeting within the Executive Body, information on the
measures that it has taken to implement the present Protocol;
(b) Each Party within the geographical scope of EMEP shall
report, through the Executive Secretary of the Commission, to EMEP, on a
periodic basis to be determined by the Steering Body of EMEP and
approved by the Parties at a session of the Executive Body, information
on the levels of emissions of persistent organic pollutants using, as a
minimum, the methodologies and the temporal and spatial resolution
specified by the Steering Body of EMEP. Parties in areas outside the
geographical scope of EMEP shall make available similar information to
the Executive Body if requested to do so. Each Party shall also provide
information on the levels of emissions of the substances listed in
annex III for the reference year specified in that annex.
2. The information to be reported in accordance with paragraph 1 (a)
above shall be in conformity with a decision regarding format and
content to be adopted by the Parties at a session of the Executive Body.
The terms of this decision shall be reviewed as necessary to identify
any additional elements regarding the format or the content of the
information that is to be included in the reports.
3. In good time before each annual session of the Executive Body,
EMEP shall provide information on the long-range transport and
deposition of persistent organic pollutants.
Article 10
REVIEWS BY THE PARTIES AT SESSIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE BODY
1. The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, pursuant to
article 10, paragraph 2 (a), of the Convention, review the information
supplied by the Parties, EMEP and other subsidiary bodies, and the
reports of the Implementation Committee referred to in article 11 of the
present Protocol.
2. The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, keep under
review the progress made towards achieving the obligations set out in
the present Protocol.
3. The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, review the
sufficiency and effectiveness of the obligations set out in the present
Protocol. Such reviews will take into account the best available
scientific information on the effects of the deposition of persistent
organic pollutants, assessments of technological developments, changing
economic conditions and the fulfilment of the obligations on emission
levels. The procedures, methods and timing for such reviews shall be
specified by the Parties at a session of the Executive Body. The first
such review shall be completed no later than three years after the
present Protocol enters into force.
Article 11
COMPLIANCE
Compliance by each Party with its obligations under the present
Protocol shall be reviewed regularly. The Implementation Committee
established by decision 1997/2 of the Executive Body at its fifteenth
session shall carry out such reviews and report to the Parties meeting
within the Executive Body in accordance with the terms of the annex to
that decision, including any amendments thereto.
Article 12
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
1. In the event of a dispute between any two or more Parties
concerning the interpretation or application of the present Protocol,
the Parties concerned shall seek a settlement of the dispute through
negotiation or any other peaceful means of their own choice. The
parties to the dispute shall inform the Executive Body of their dispute
2. When ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the present
Protocol, or at anytime thereafter, a Party which is not a regional
economic integration organization may declare in a written instrument
submitted to the Depositary that, in respect of any dispute concerning
the interpretation or application of the Protocol, it recognizes one or
both of the following means of dispute settlement as compulsory ipso
facto and without special agreement, in relation to any Party accepting
the same obligation:
(a) Submission of the dispute to the International Court of
Justice;
(b) Arbitration in accordance with procedures to be adopted by
the Parties at a session of the Executive Body, as soon as practicable,
in an annex on arbitration.
A Party which is a regional economic integration organization may make a
declaration with like effect in relation to arbitration in accordance
with the procedures referred to in subparagraph (b) above.
3. A declaration made under paragraph 2 above shall remain in force
until it expires in accordance with its terms or until three months
after written notice of its revocation has been deposited with the
Depositary.
4. A new declaration, a notice of revocation or the expiry of a
declaration shall not in any way affect proceedings pending before the
International Court of Justice or the arbitral tribunal, unless the
parties to the dispute agree otherwise.
5. Except in a case where the parties to a dispute have accepted the
same means of dispute settlement under paragraph 2, if after twelve
months following notification by one Party to another that a dispute
exists between them, the Parties concerned have not been able to settle
their dispute through the means mentioned in paragraph 1 above, the
dispute shall be submitted, at the request of any of the parties to the
dispute, to conciliation.
6. For the purpose of paragraph 5, a conciliation commission shall be
created. The commission shall be composed of equal numbers of members
appointed by each Party concerned or, where the Parties in conciliation
share the same interest, by the group sharing that interest, and a
chairperson chosen jointly by the members so appointed. The commission
shall render a recommendatory award, which the Parties shall consider in
good faith.
Article 13
ANNEXES
The annexes to the present Protocol shall form an integral part of
the Protocol. Annexes V and VII are recommendatory in character.
Article 14
AMENDMENTS
1. Any Party may propose amendments to the present Protocol.
2. Proposed amendments shall be submitted in writing to the Executive
Secretary of the Commission, who shall communicate them to all Parties.
The Parties meeting within the Executive Body shall discuss the proposed
amendments at its next session, provided that the proposals have been
circulated by the Executive Secretary to the Parties at least ninety
days in advance.
3. Amendments to the present Protocol and to annexes I to IV, VI and
VIII shall be adopted by consensus of the Parties present at a session
of the Executive Body, and shall enter into force for the Parties which
have accepted them on the ninetieth day after the date on which two
thirds of the Parties have deposited with the Depositary their
instruments of acceptance thereof. Amendments shall enter into force
for any other Party on the ninetieth day after the date on which that
Party has deposited its instrument of acceptance thereof.
4. Amendments to annexes V and VII shall be adopted by consensus of
the Parties present at a session of the Executive Body. On the expiry
of ninety days from the date of its communication to all Parties by the
Executive Secretary of the Commission, an amendment to any such annex
shall become effective for those Parties which have not submitted to the
Depositary a notification in accordance with the provisions of paragraph
5 below, provided that at least sixteen Parties have not submitted such
a notification.
5. Any Party that is unable to approve an amendment to annex V or VII
shall so notify the Depositary in writing within ninety days from the
date of the communication of its adoption. The Depositary shall without
delay notify all Parties of any such notification received. A Party may
at any time substitute an acceptance for its previous notification and,
upon deposit of an instrument of acceptance with the Depositary, the
amendment to such an annex shall become effective for that Party.
6. In the case of a proposal to amend annex I, II, or III by adding a
substance to the present Protocol :
(a) The proposer shall provide the Executive Body with the
information specified in Executive Body decision 1998/2, including any
amendments thereto; and
(b) The Parties shall evaluate the proposal in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Executive Body decision 1998/2, including
any amendments thereto.
7. Any decision to amend Executive Body decision 1998/2 shall be
taken by consensus of the Parties meeting within the Executive Body and
shall take effect sixty days after the date of adoption.
Article 15
SIGNATURE
1. The present Protocol shall be open for signature at Aarhus
(Denmark) from 24 to 25 June 1998, then at United Nations Headquarters
in New York until 21 December 1998, by States members of the Commission
as well as States having consultative status with the Commission
pursuant to paragraph 8 of Economic and Social Council resolution
36 (IV) of 28 March 1947, and by regional economic integration
organizations, constituted by sovereign States members of the
Commission, which have competence in respect of the negotiation,
conclusion and application of international agreements in matters
covered by the Protocol, provided that the States and organizations
concerned are Parties to the Convention.
2. In matters within their competence, such regional economic
integration organizations shall, on their own behalf, exercise the
rights and fulfil the responsibilities which the present Protocol
attributes to their member States. In such cases, the member States of
these organizations shall not be entitled to exercise such rights
individually.
Article 16
RATIFICATION, ACCEPTANCE, APPROVAL AND ACCESSION
1. The present Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance
or approval by Signatories.
2. The present Protocol shall be open for accession as from
21 December 1998 by the States and organizations that meet the
requirements of article 15, paragraph 1.
Article 17
DEPOSITARY
The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who
will perform the functions of Depositary.
Article 18
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. The present Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day
following the date on which the sixteenth instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession has been deposited with the
Depositary.
2. For each State and organization referred to in article 15,
paragraph l, which ratifies, accepts or approves the present Protocol or
accedes thereto after the deposit of the sixteenth instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the Protocol shall
enter into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit by
such Party of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession.
Article 19
WITHDRAWAL
At any time after five years from the date on which the present
Protocol has come into force with respect to a Party, that Party may
withdraw from it by giving written notification to the Depositary. Any
such withdrawal shall take effect on the ninetieth day following the
date of its receipt by the Depositary, or on such later date as may be
specified in the notification of the withdrawal.
Article 20
AUTHENTIC TEXTS
The original of the present Protocol, of which the English, French
and Russian texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto,
have signed the present Protocol.
Done at Aarhus (Denmark), this twenty-fourth day of June, one
thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight.



Annex I
SUBSTANCES SCHEDULED FOR ELIMINATION
Unless otherwise specified in the present Protocol, this annex
shall not apply to the substances listed below when they occur: (i) as
contaminants in products; or (ii) in articles manufactured or in use by
the implementation date; or (iii) as site-limited chemical intermediates
in the manufacture of one or more different substances and are thus
chemically transformed. Unless otherwise specified, each obligation
below is effective upon the date of entry into force of the Protocol.
Annex II
SUBSTANCES SCHEDULED FOR RESTRICTIONS ON USE
Unless otherwise specified in the present Protocol, this annex
shall not apply to the substances listed below when they occur: (i) as
contaminants in products; or (ii) in articles manufactured or in use by
the implementation date; or (iii) as site-limited chemical intermediates
in the manufacture of one or more different substances and are thus
chemically transformed. Unless otherwise specified, each obligation
below is effective upon the date of entry into force of the Protocol.
Annex III
SUBSTANCES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 3, PARAGRAPH 5 (a),
AND THE REFERENCE YEAR FOR THE OBLIGATION
a/ Polvcvclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs): For the purposes
of emission inventories, the following four indicator compounds shall be
used: benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, and
indeno(1,2,3 -cd)pyrene.
b/ Dioxins and furans (PCDD/F): Polychlorinated dibenzop-
dioxins (PCDD) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF) are tricyclic,
aromatic compounds formed by two benzene rings which are connected by
two oxygen atoms in PCDD and by one oxygen atom in PCDF and the hydrogen
atoms of which may be replaced by up to eight chlorine atoms.
Annex IV
LIMIT VALUES FOR PCDD/F FROM MAJOR STATIONARY SOURCES
I. INTRODUCTION
1. A definition of dioxins and furans (PCDD/F) is provided in
annex III to the present Protocol.
2 . Limit values are expressed as ng/m3 or mg/m3 under standard
conditions (273.15 K, 101.3 kPa, and dry gas).
3. Limit values relate to the normal operating situation, including
start-up and shutdown procedures, unless specific limit values have been
defined for those situations.
4. Sampling and analysis of all pollutants shall be carried out
according to the standards laid down by the Comite europeen de
normalisation (CEN), the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), or the corresponding United States or Canadian reference methods.
While awaiting the development of CEN or ISO standards, national
standards shall apply.
5. For verification purposes, the interpretation of measurement
results in relation to the limit value must also take into account the
inaccuracy of the measurement method. A limit value is considered to be
met if the result of the measurement, from which the inaccuracy of the
measurement method is subtracted, does not exceed it.
6. Emissions of different congeners of PCDD/F are given in tdxicity
equivalents (TE) in comparison to 2,3,7,8-TCDD using the system proposed
by the NATO Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society (NATO-CCMS) in
1988.
II. LIMIT VALUES FOR MAJOR STATIONARY SOURCES
7. The following limit values, which refer to 11% 02 concentration in
flue gas, apply to the following incinerator types:
Municipal solid waste (burning more than 3 tonnes per hour)
0.1 ng TE/m3
Medical solid waste (burning more than 1 tonne per hour)
0.5 ng TE/m3
Hazardous waste (burning more than 1 tonne per hour)
0.2 ng TE/m
Annex V
BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES TO CONTROL EMISSIONS OF PERSISTENT
ORGANIC POLLUTANTS FROM MAJOR STATIONARY SOURCES
I. INTRODUCTION
1. The purpose of this annex is to provide the Parties to the
Convention with guidance in identifying best available techniques to
allow them to meet the obligations in article 3, paragraph 5, of the
Protocol.
2. "Best available techniques" (BAT) means the most effective and
advanced stage in the development of activities and their methods of
operation which indicate the practical suitability of particular techniques
for providing in principle the basis for emission limit values
designed to prevent and, where that is not practicable, generally to
reduce emissions and their impact on the environment as a whole :
-	'Techniques' includes both the technology used and the way
in which the installation is designed, built, maintained,
operated and decommissioned;
-	'Available' techniques means those developed on a scale
which allows implementation in the relevant industrial
sector, under economically and technically viable
conditions, taking into consideration the costs and
advantages, whether or not the techniques are used or
produced inside the territory of the Party in question, as
long as they are reasonably accessible to the operator;
-	'Best' means most effective in achieving a high general
level of protection of the environment as a whole.
In determining the best available techniques, special consideration
should be given, generally or in specific cases, to the factors below,
bearing in mind the likely costs and benefits of a measure and the
principles of precaution and prevention:
-	The use of low-waste technology;
-	The use of less hazardous substances;
-	The furthering of recovery and recycling of substances
generated and used in the process and of waste;
-	Comparable processes, facilities or methods of operation
which have been tried with success on an industrial scale;
-	Technological advances and changes in scientific knowledge
and understanding;
-	The nature, effects and volume of the emissions concerned;
-	The commissioning dates for new or existing installations;
-	The time needed to introduce the best available technique;
-	The consumption and nature of raw materials (including
water) used in the process and its energy efficiency;
The need to prevent or reduce to a minimum the overall
impact of the emissions on the environment and the risks to
it;
-	The need to prevent accidents and to minimize their
consequences for the environment.
The concept of best available techniques is not aimed at the
prescription of any specific technique or technology, but at taking into
account the technical characteristics of the installation concerned, its
geographical location and the local environmental conditions.
3. Information regarding the effectiveness and costs of control
measures is based on documents received and reviewed by the Task Force
and the Preparatory Working Group on POPs. Unless otherwise indicated,
the techniques listed are considered to be well established on the basis
of operational experience.
4. Experience with new plants incorporating low-emission techniques,
as well as with retrofitting of existing plants, is continuously
growing. The regular elaboration and amendment of the annex will
therefore be necessary. Best available techniques (BAT) identified for
new plants can usually be applied to existing plants provided there is
an adequate transition period and they are adapted.
5. The annex lists a number of control measures which span a range of
costs and efficiencies. The choice of measures for any particular case
will depend on a number of factors, including economic circumstances,
technological infrastructure and capacity, and any existing air
pollution control measures.
6. The most important POPs emitted from stationary sources are:
(a) Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins/furans (PCDD/F);
(b) Hexachlorobenzene (HCB)/
(c) Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
Relevant definitions are provided in annex III to the present Protocol.
II. MAJOR STATIONARY SOURCES OF POP EMISSIONS
7. PCDD/F are emitted from thermal processes involving organic matter
and. chlorine as a result of incomplete combustion or chemical reactions.
Major stationary sources of PCDD/F may be as follows:
(a) Waste incineration, including co-incineration;
(b) Thermal metallurgical processes, e.g. production of
aluminium and other non-ferrous metals, iron and steel;
(c) Combustion plants providing energy;
(d) Residential combustion; and
(e) Specific chemical production processes releasing
intermediates and by-products.
8. Major stationary sources of PAH emissions may be as follows:
(a) Domestic wood and coal heating;
(b) Open fires such as refuse burning, forest fires and
after-crop burning;
(c) Coke and anode production;
(d) Aluminium production (via Soederberg process); and
(e) Wood preservation installations, except for a Party for
which this category does not make a significant contribution to its
total emissions of PAH (as defined in annex III).
9. Emissions of HCB result from the same type of thermal and chemical
processes as those emitting PCDD/F, and HCB is formed by a similar
mechanism. Major sources of HCB emissions may be as follows:
(a) Waste incineration plants, including co-incineration;
(b) Thermal sources of metallurgical industries; and
(c) Use of chlorinated fuels in furnace installations.
III. GENERAL APPROACHES TO CONTROLLING EMISSIONS OF POPs
10. There are several approaches to the control or prevention of POP
emissions from stationary sources. These include the replacement of
relevant feed materials, process modifications (including maintenance
and operational control) and retrofitting existing plants. The
following list provides a general indication of available measures,
which may be implemented either separately or in combination:
(a) Replacement of feed materials which are POPs or where there
is a direct link between the materials and POP emissions from the
source ;
(b) Best environmental practices such as good housekeeping,
preventive maintenance programmes, or process changes such as closed
systems (for instance in cokeries or use of inert electrodes for
electrolysis);
(c) Modification of process design to ensure complete
combustion, thus preventing the formation of persistent organic
pollutants, through the control of parameters such as incineration
temperature or residence time;
(d) Methods for flue-gas cleaning such as thermal or catalytic
incineration or oxidation, dust precipitation, adsorption;
(e) Treatment of residuals, wastes and sewage sludge by, for
example, thermal treatment or rendering them inert.
11. The emission levels given for different measures in tables 1, 2,
4, 5, 6, 8, and 9 are generally case-specific. The figures or ranges
give the emission levels as a percentage of the emission limit values
using conventional techniques.
12. Cost-efficient considerations may be based on total costs per year
per unit of abatement (including capital and operational costs). POP
emission reduction costs should also be considered within the framework
of the overall process economics, e.g. the impact of control measures
and costs of production. Given the many influencing factors, investment
and operating cost figures are highly case-specific.
IV. CONTROL TECHNIQUES FOR THE REDUCTION OF PCDD/F EMISSIONS
A. Waste incineration
13. Waste incineration includes municipal waste, hazardous waste,
medical waste and sewage sludge incineration.
14. The main control measures for PCDD/F emissions from waste
incineration facilities are:
(a) Primary measures regarding incinerated wastes;
(b) Primary measures regarding process techniques/
(c) Measures to control physical parameters of the combustion
process and waste gases (e.g. temperature stages, cooling rate, O2
content, etc.);
(d) Cleaning of the flue gas; and
(e) Treatment of residuals from the cleaning process.
15. The primary measures regarding the incinerated wastes, involving
the management of feed material by reducing halogenated substances and
replacing them by non-halogenated alternatives, are not appropriate for
municipal or hazardous waste incineration. It is more effective to
modify the incineration process and install secondary measures for
flue-gas cleaning. The management of feed material is a useful primary
measure for waste reduction and has the possible added benefit of
recycling. This may result in indirect PCDD/F reduction by decreasing
the waste amounts to be incinerated.
16. The modification of process techniques to optimize combustion
conditions is an important and effective measure for the reduction of
PCDD/F emissions (usually 850&#186;C or higher, assessment of oxygen supply
depending on the heating value and consistency of the wastes, sufficient
residence time -- 850&#186;C for ca. 2 sec -- and turbulence of the gas,
avoidance of cold gas regions in the incinerator, etc.). Fluidized bed
incinerators keep a lower temperature than 850&#186;C with adequate emission
results. For existing incinerators this would normally involve
redesigning and/or replacing a plant --an option which may not be
economically viable in all countries. The carbon content in ashes
should be minimized.
17. Flue gas measures. The following measures are possibilities for
lowering reasonably effectively the PCDD/F content in the flue gas. The
de novo synthesis takes place at about 250 to 450*C. These measures are
a prerequisite for further reductions to achieve the desired levels at
the end of the pipe:
(a) Quenching the flue gases (very effective and relatively
inexpensive);
(b) Adding inhibitors such as triethanolamine or triethylamine
(can reduce oxides of nitrogen as well), but side-reactions have to be
considered for safety reasons;
(c) Using dust collection systems for temperatures between 800
and 1000*C, e.g. ceramic filters and cyclones;
(d) Using low-temperature electric discharge systems; and
(e) Avoiding fly ash deposition in the flue gas exhaust system.
18. Methods for cleaning the flue gas are :
(a) Conventional dust precipitators for the reduction of
par tide-bound PCDD/F;
(b) Selective catalytic reduction (SCR) or selective
non-catalytic reduction (SNCR);
(c) Adsorption with activated charcoal or coke in fixed or
fluidized systems;
(d) Different types of adsorption methods and optimized
scrubbing systems with mixtures of activated charcoal, open hearth coal,
lime and limestone solutions in fixed bed, moving bed and fluidized bed
reactors. The collection efficiency for gaseous PCDD/F can be improved
with the use of a suitable pre-coat layer of activated coke on the
surface of a bag filter;
(e) H2O2-oxidation; and
(f) Catalytic combustion methods using different types of
catalysts (i.e. Pt/Al2O3 or copper-chromite catalysts with different
promoters to stabilize the surface area and to reduce ageing of the
catalysts).
19. The methods mentioned above are capable of reaching emission
levels of 0.1 ng TE/m3 PCDD/F in the flue gas. However, in systems
using activated charcoal or coke adsorbers/filters care must be taken to
ensure that fugitive carbon dust does not increase PCDD/F emissions
downstream. Also, it should be noted that adsorbers and dedusting
installations prior to catalysts (SCR technique) yield PCDD/F-laden
residues, which need to be reprocessed or require proper disposal.
20. A comparison between the different measures to reduce PCDD/F in
flue gas is very complex. The resulting matrix includes a wide range of
industrial plants with different capacities and configuration. Cost
parameters include the reduction measures for minimizing other
pollutants as well, such as heavy metals (particle-bound or not
particle-bound). A direct relation for the reduction in PCDD/F
emissions alone cannot, therefore, be isolated in most cases. A summary
of the available data for the various control measures is given in
table l.
Table 1: Comparison of different flue-gas cleaning measures and
process modifications in waste incineration plants to reduce
PCDD/F emissions
a/ Remaining emission compared to unreduced mode.
21. Medical waste incinerators may be a major source of PCDD/F in many
countries. Specific medical wastes such as human anatomical parts,
infected waste, needles, blood, plasma and cytostatica are treated as a
special form of hazardous waste, while other medical wastes are
frequently incinerated on-site in a batch operation. Incinerators
operating with batch systems can meet the same requirements for PCDD/F
reduction as other waste incinerators.
22. Parties may wish to consider adopting policies to encourage the
incineration of municipal and medical waste in large regional facilities
rather than in smaller ones. This approach may make the application of
BAT more cost-effective.
23. The treatment of residuals from the flue-gas cleaning process.
Unlike incinerator ashes, these residuals contain relatively high
concentrations of heavy metals, organic pollutants (including PCDD/F),
chlorides and sulphides. Their method of disposal, therefore, has to be
well controlled. Wet scrubber systems in particular produce large
quantities of acidic, contaminated liquid waste. Some special treatment
methods exist. They include:
(a) The catalytic treatment of fabric filter dusts under
conditions of low temperatures and lack of oxygen;
(b) The scrubbing of fabric filter dusts by the 3-R process
(extraction of heavy metals by acids and combustion for destruction of
organic matter);
(c) The vitrification of fabric filter dusts;
(d) Further methods of immobilization; and
(e) The application of plasma technology.
B. Thermal processes in the metallurgical industry
24. Specific processes in the metallurgical industry may be important
remaining sources of PCDD/F emissions. These are:
(a) Primary iron and steel industry (e.g. blast furnaces, sinter
plants, iron pelletizing);
(b) Secondary iron and steel industry; and
(c) Primary and secondary non-ferrous metal industry (production
of copper).
PCDD/F emission control measures for the metallurgical industries are
summarized in table 2.
25. Metal production and treatment plants with PCDD/F emissions can
meet a maximum emission concentration of 0.1 ng TE/m3 (if waste gas
volume flow > 5000 m3/h) using control measures.
Table 2: Emission reduction of PCDD/F in the metallurgical industry
a/ Remaining emission compared to unreduced mode.
Sinter plants
26. Measurements at sinter plants in the iron and steel industry have
generally shown PCDD/F emissions in the range of 0.4 to 4 ng TE/m3. A
single measurement at one plant without any control measures showed an
emission concentration of 43 ng TE/m3.
27. Halogenated compounds may result in the formation of PCDD/F if
they enter sinter plants in the feed materials (coke breeze, salt
content in the ore) and in added recycled material (e.g. millscale,
blast furnace top gas dust, filter dusts and sludges from waste water
treatment). However, similarly to waste incineration, there is no clear
link between the chlorine content of the feed materials and emissions of
PCDD/F. An appropriate measure may be the avoidance of contaminated
residual material and de-oiling or degreasing of millscale prior to its
introduction into the sinter plant.
28. The most effective PCDD/F emission reduction can be achieved using
a combination of different secondary measures, as follows:
(a) Recirculating waste gas significantly reduces PCDD/F
emissions. Furthermore, the waste gas flow is reduced significantly,
thereby reducing the cost of installing any additional end-of-pipe
control systems;
(b) Installing fabric filters (in combination with electrostatic
precipitators in some cases) or electrostatic precipitators with the
injection of activated carbon/open-hearth coal/limestone mixtures into
the waste gas;
(c) Scrubbing methods have been developed which include prequenching
of the waste gas, leaching by high-performance scrubbing and
separation by drip deposition. Emissions of 0.2 to 0.4 ng TE/m3 can be
achieved. By adding suitable adsorption agents like lignite coal
cokes/coal slack, an emission concentration of 0.1 ng TE/m3 can be
reached.
Primary and secondary production of copper
29. Existing plants for the primary and secondary production of copper
can achieve a PCDD/F emission level of a few picograms to 2 ng TE/m3
after flue-gas cleaning. A single copper shaft furnace emitted up to
29 ng TE/m3 PCDD/F before optimization of the aggregates. Generally,
there is a wide range of PCDD/F emission values from these plants
because of the large differences in raw materials used in differing
aggregates and processes.
30. Generally, the following measures are suitable for reducing PCDD/F
emissions :
(a) Pre-sorting scrap; ,
(b) Pretreating scrap, for example stripping of plastic or PVC
coatings, pretreating cable scrap using only cold/mechanical methods ;
(c) Quenching hot wasce gases (providing utilization of heat),
to reduce residence time in the critical region of temperature in the
waste gas system;
(d) Using oxygen or oxygen-enriched air in firing, or oxygen
injection in the shaft kiln (providing complete combustion and
minimization of waste gas volume);
(e) Adsorption in a fixed bed reactor or fluidized jet stream
reactor with activated charcoal or open-hearth coal dust; and
(f) Catalytic oxidation.
Production of steel
31. PCDD/F emissions from converter steelworks for steel production
and from hot blast cupola furnaces, electric furnaces and electric arc
furnaces for the melting of cast iron are significantly lower than
0.1 ng TE/m3. Cold-air furnaces and rotary tube furnaces (melting of
cast iron) have higher PCDD/F emissions.
32. Electric arc furnaces used in secondary steel production can
achieve an emission concentration value of 0.1 ng TE/m3 if the following
measures are used :
(a) Separate collection of emissions from loading and
discharging; and
(b) Use of a fabric filter or an electrostatic precipitator in
combination with coke injection.
33. The feedstock to electric arc furnaces often contains oils,
emulsions or greases. General primary measures for PCDD/F reduction can
be sorting, de-oiling and de-coating of scraps, which may contain
plastics, rubber, paints, pigments and vulcanizing additives.
Smelting plants in the secondary aluminium industry
34. PCDD/F emissions from smelting plants in the secondary aluminium
industry are in the range of approximately 0.1 to 14 ng TE/m3. These
levels depend on the type of smelting aggregates, materials used and
waste gas purification techniques employed.
35. In summary, single- and multi-stage fabric filters with the
addition of limestone/activated carbon/open-hearth coal in front of the
filter meet the emission concentration of 0.1 ng TE/m3, with reduction
efficiencies of 99%.
36. The following measures can also be considered:
(a) Minimizing and separately removing and purifying differently
contaminated waste gas flows;
(b) Avoiding waste gas particle deposition;
(c) Rapidly passing the critical temperature range;
(d) Improving the pre-sorting of scrap aluminium from shredders
by using swim-sink separation techniques and grading through whirling
stream deposition; and
(e) Improving the pre-cleaning of scrap aluminium by swarf
decoating and swarf drying.
37. Options (d) and (e) are important because it is unlikely that
modern fluxless smelting techniques (which avoid halide salt fluxes)
will be able to handle the low-grade scrap that can be used in rotary
kilns.
38. Discussions are continuing under the Convention for the Protection
of the Marine Environment of the North-east Atlantic regarding the
revision of an earlier recommendation to phase out the use of
hexachloroethane in the aluminium industry.
39. The melt can be treated using state-of-the-art technology, for
example with nitrogen/chlorine mixtures in the ratio of between 9:1 and
8:2, gas injection equipment for fine dispersion and nitrogen pre- and
post-flushing and vacuum degreasing. For nitrogen/chlorine mixtures, a
PCDD/F emission concentration of about 0.03 ng TE/m3 was measured (as
compared to values of > 1 ng TE/m3 for treatment with chlorine only).
Chlorine is required for the removal of magnesium and other undesired
components.
C. Combustion of fossil fuels in utility and industrial boilers
40. In the combustion of fossil fuels in utility and industrial
boilers (>50 MW thermal capacity), improved energy efficiency and energy
conservation will result in a decline in the emissions of all pollutants
because of reduced fuel requirements. This will also result in a
reduction in PCDD/F emissions. It would not be cost-effective to remove
chlorine from coal or oil, but in any case the trend towards gas-fired
stations will help to reduce PCDD/F emissions from this sector.
41. It should be noted that PCDD/F emissions could increase
significantly if waste material (sewage sludge, waste oil, rubber
wastes, etc.) is added to the fuel. The combustion of wastes for energy
supply should be undertaken only in installations using waste gas
purification systems with highly efficient PCDD/F reduction (described
in section A above).
42. The application of techniques to reduce emissions of nitrogen
oxides, sulphur dioxide and particulates from the flue gas can also
remove PCDD/F emissions. When using these techniques, PCDD/F removal
efficiencies will vary from plant to plant. Research is ongoing to
develop PCDD/F removal techniques, but until such techniques are
available on an industrial scale, no best available technique is
identified for the specific purpose of PCDD/F removal.
D. Residential combustion
43. The contribution of residential combustion appliances to total
emissions of PCDD/F is less significant when approved fuels are properly
used. In addition, large regional differences in emissions can occur
due to the type and quality of fuel, geographical appliance density and
usage.
44. Domestic fireplaces have a worse burn-out rate for hydrocarbons in
fuels and waste gases than large combustion installations. This is
especially true if they use solid fuels such as wood and coal, with
PCDD/F emission concentrations in the range of 0.1 to 0.7 ng TE/m3.
45. Burning packing material added to solid fuels increases PCDD/F
emissions. Even though it is prohibited in some countries, the burning
of rubbish and packing material may occur in private households. Due to
increasing disposal charges, it must be recognized that household waste
materials are being burned in domestic firing installations. The use of
wood with the addition of waste packing material can lead to an increase
in PCDD/F emissions from 0.06 ng TE/m3 (exclusively wood) to 8 ng TE/m3
(relative to 11% O2 by volume). These results have been confirmed by
investigations in several countries in which up to 114 ng TE/m3 (with
respect to 13% oxygen by volume) was measured in waste gases from
residential combustion appliances burning waste materials.
46. The emissions from residential combustion appliances can be
reduced by restricting the input materials to good-quality fuel and
avoiding the burning of waste, halogenated plastics and other materials.
Public information programmes for the purchasers/operators of
residential combustion appliances can be effective in achieving this
goal.
E. Firing installations for wood (<50 MW capacity)
47. Measurement results for wood-firing installations indicate that
PCDD/F emissions above 0.1 ng TE/m3 occur in waste gases especially
during unfavourable burn-out conditions and/or when the substances
burned have a higher content of chlorinated compounds than normal
untreated wood. An indication of poor firing is the total carbon
concentration in the waste gas. Correlations have been found between CO
emissions, burn-out quality and PCDD/F emissions. Table 3 summarizes
some emission concentrations and factors for wood-firing installations.
Table 3: Quantity-related emission concentrations and factors for
wood-firing installations
48. The combustion of urban waste wood (demolition wood) in moving
grates leads to relatively high PCDD/F emissions, compared to non-waste
wood sources. A primary measure for emission reduction is to avoid the
use of treated waste wood in wood-firing installations. Combustion of
treated wood should be undertaken only in installations with the
appropriate flue-gas cleaning to minimize PCDD/F emissions.
V. CONTROL TECHNIQUES FOR THE REDUCTION OF PAH EMISSIONS
A. Coke production
49. During coke production, PAHs are released into the ambient air
mainly:
(a) When the oven is charged through the charging holes;
(b) By leakages from the oven door, the ascension pipes and the
charging hole lids; and
(c) During coke pushing and coke cooling.
50. Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) concentration varies substantially between
the individual sources in a coke battery. The highest BaP
concentrations are found on the top of the battery and in the immediate
vicinity of the doors.
51. PAH from coke production can be reduced by technically improving
existing integrated iron and steel plants. This might entail the
closure and replacement of old coke batteries and the general reduction
in coke production, for instance by injecting high-value coal in steel
production.
52. A PAH reduction strategy for coke batteries should include the
following technical measures:
(a) Charging the coke ovens:
 - Particulate matter emission reduction when charging
the coal from the bunker into the charging cars;
-	Closed systems for coal transfer when coal pre-heating
is used;
-	Extraction of filling gases and subsequent treatment,
either by passing the gases into the adjacent oven or
by passing via a collecting main to an incinerator and
a subsequent dedusting device. In some cases the
extracted filling gases may be burned on the charging
cars, but the environmental performance and safety of
these charging-car-based systems is less satisfactory.
Sufficient suction should be generated by steam or
water injection in the ascension pipes;
(b) Emissions at charging hole lids during coking operation
should be avoided by:
-	Using charging hole lids with highly efficient
sealing;
-	Luting the charging hole lids with clay (or equally
effective material) after each charging operation;
-	Cleaning the charging hole lids and frames before
closing the charging hole;
- Keeping oven ceilings free from coal residuals,-
(c) Ascension pipe lids should, be equipped, with water seals to
avoid gas and tar emissions, and the proper operation of the seals
should be maintained by regular cleaning;
(d) Coke oven machinery for operating the coke oven doors should
be equipped with systems for cleaning the seals' surfaces on the oven
door frames and oven doors;
(e) Coke oven doors:
- Highly effective seals should be used (e.g.
spring-loaded membrane doors);
-	Seals on the oven doors and door frames should be
cleaned thoroughly at every handling operation;
-	Doors should be designed in a manner that allows the
installation of particulate matter extraction systems
with connection to a dedusting device (via a
collecting main) during pushing operations;
(f) The coke transfer machine should be equipped with an
integrated hood, stationary duct and stationary gas cleaning system
(preferably a fabric filter);
(g) Low-emission procedures should be applied for coke cooling,
e.g. dry coke cooling. The replacement of a wet quenching process by
dry coke cooling should be preferred, so long as the generation of waste
water is avoided by using a closed circulation system. The dusts
generated when dry quenched coke is handled should be reduced.
53. A coke-making process referred to as "non-recovery coke-making"
emits significantly less PAH than the more conventional by-product
recovery process. This is because the ovens operate under negative
pressure, thereby eliminating leaks to the atmosphere from the coke oven
doors. During coking, the raw coke oven gas is removed from the ovens
by a natural draught, which maintains a negative pressure in the ovens.
These ovens are not designed to recover the chemical by-products from
raw coke oven gas. Instead, the offgases from the coking process
(including PAH) are burned efficiently at high temperatures and with
long residence times. The waste heat from this incineration is used to
provide the energy for coking, and excess heat may be used to generate
steam. The economics of this type of coking operation may require a
cogeneration unit to produce electricity from the excess steam.
Currently there is only one non-recovery coke plant operating in the
United States, and one is in operation in Australia. The process is
basically a horizontal sole-flue non-recovery coke oven with an
incineration chamber adjoining two ovens. The process provides for
alternate charging and coking schedules between the two ovens. Thus,
one oven is always providing the incineration chamber with coke gases.
The coke gas combustion in the incineration chamber provides the
necessary heat source. The incineration chamber design provides the
necessary dwell time (approximately 1 second) and high temperatures
(minimum of 900*C).
54. An effective monitoring programme for leakages from coke oven door
seals, ascension pipes and charging hole lids should be operated. This
implies the monitoring and recording of leakages and immediate repair or
maintenance. A significant reduction of diffuse emissions can thus be
achieved.
55. Retrofitting existing coke batteries to facilitate condensation of
flue gases from all sources (with heat recovery) results in a PAH
reduction of 86% to more than 90% in air (without regard to waste water
treatment). Investment costs can be amortized in five years, taking
into account recovered energy, heated water, gas for synthesis and saved
cooling water.
56. Increasing coke oven volumes results in a decrease in the total
number of ovens, oven door openings (amount of pushed ovens per day),
number of seals in a coke battery and consequently PAH emissions.
Productivity increases in the same way by decreasing operating and
personnel costs.
57. Dry coke cooling systems require a higher investment cost than wet
methods. Higher operating costs can be compensated for by heat recovery
in a process of pre-heating the coke. The energy efficiency of a
combined dry coke cooling/coal pre-heating system rises from 38 to 65%.
Coal pre-heating boosts productivity by 30%. This can be raised to 40%
because the coking process is more homogeneous.
58. All tanks and installations for the storage and treatment of coal
tar and coal tar products must be equipped with an efficient vapour
recovery return and/or vapour destruction system. The operating costs
of vapour destruction systems can be reduced in an autothermal afterburning
mode if the concentration of the carbon compounds in the waste
is high enough.
59. Table 4 summarizes PAH emission reduction measures in coke
production plants.
Table 4 : PAH emission control for coke production
a/ Remaining emission compared to unreduced mode.
B. Anode production
60. PAH emissions from anode production have to be dealt with in a
similar fashion as those from coke production.
61. The following secondary measures for emission reduction of
PAH-contaminated dust are used:
(a) Electrostatic tar precipitation;
(b) Combination of a conventional electrostatic tar filter with
a wet electrostatic filter as a more efficient technical measure;
(c) Thermal after-burning of the waste gases; and
(d) Dry scrubbing with limestone/petroleum coke or aluminum
oxide (A12O3) .
62. The operating costs in thermal after-burning can be reduced in an
autothermal after-burning mode if the concentration of carbon compounds
in the waste gas is high enough. Table 5 summarizes PAH emission
control measures for anode production.
Table 5: PAH emission control for anode production
a/ Remaining emission compared to unreduced mode.
C. Aluminium industry
63. Aluminium is produced from aluminium oxide (A12O3) by electrolysis
in pots (cells) electrically connected in series. Pots are classified
as prebake or Soederberg pots, according to the type of the anode.
64. Prebake pots have anodes consisting of calcined (baked) carbon
blocks, which are replaced after partial consumption. Soederberg anodes
are baked in the cell, with a mixture of petroleum coke and coal tar
pitch acting as a binder.
65. Very high PAH emissions are released from the Soederberg process.
Primary abatement measures include modernization of existing plants and
optimization of the processes, which could reduce PAH emissions by
70-90%. An emission level of 0.015 kg B(a)P/tonne of Al could be
reached. Replacing the existing Soederberg cells by prebaked ones would
require major reconstruction of the existing process, but would nearly
eliminate the PAH emissions. The capital costs of such replacements are
very high.
66. Table 6 summarizes PAH emission control measures for aluminium
production.
Table 6: PAH emission control for aluminium production using the
Soederberg process
a/ Remaining emission compared to unreduced mode.
D. Residential combustion
67. PAH emissions from residential combustion can be detected from
stoves or open fireplaces especially when wood or coal is used.
Households could be a significant source of PAH emissions. This is the
result of the use of fireplaces and small firing installations burning
solid fuels in households. In some countries the usual fuel for stoves
is coal. Coal-burning stoves emit less PAH than wood-burning ones,
because of their higher combustion temperatures and more consistent fuel
quality.
68. Furthermore, combustion systems with optimized operation
characteristics (e.g. burning rate) effectively control PAH emissions
from residential combustion. Optimized combustion conditions include
optimized combustion chamber design and optimized supply of air. There
are several techniques which optimize combustion conditions and reduce
emissions. There is a significant difference in emissions between
different techniques. A modern wood-fired boiler with a water
accumulation tank, representing BAT, reduces the emission by more than
90% compared to an outdated boiler without a water accumulation tank. A
modern boiler has three different zones : a fireplace for the
gasification of wood, a gas combustion zone with ceramics or other
material which allow temperatures of some 1000*C, and a convection zone.
The convection part where the water absorbs the heat should be
sufficiently long and effective so that the gas temperature can be
reduced from 1000&#186;C to 250&#186;C or less. There are also several techniques
to supplement old and outdated boilers, for example with water
accumulation tanks, ceramic inserts and pellet burners.
69. Optimized burning rates are accompanied by low emissions of carbon
monoxide (CO), total hydrocarbons (THC) and PAHs. Setting limits (type
approval regulations) on the emission of CO and THCs also affects the
emission of PAHs. Low emission of CO and THCs results in low emission
of PAHs. Since measuring PAH is far more expensive than measuring CO,
it is more cost-effective to set a limit value for CO and THCs. Work is
continuing on a proposal for a CEN standard for coal- and wood-fired
boilers up to 300 kW (see table 7).
Table 7: Draft CEN standards in 1997
Note; Emission levels in mg/m3 at 10% O2.
70. Emissions from residential wood combustion stoves can be reduced:
(a) For existing stoves, by public information and awareness
programmes regarding proper stove operation, the use of untreated wood
only, fuel preparation procedures and the correct seasoning of wood for
moisture content ; and
(b) For new stoves, by the application of product standards as
described in the draft CEN standard (and equivalent product standards in
the United States and Canada).
71. More general measures for PAH emission reduction are those related
to the development of centralized systems for households and energy
conservation such as improved thermal insulation to reduce energy
consumption.
72. Information is summarized in table 8.
Table 8: PAH emission control for residential combustion
a/ Remaining emission compared to unreduced mode.
E. Wood preservation installations
73. Wood preservation with PAH-containing coal-tar products may be a
major source of PAH emissions to the air. Emissions may occur during
the impregnation process itself as well as during storage, handling and
use of the impregnated wood in the open air.
74. The most widely used PAH-containing coal-tar products are
carbolineum and creosote. Both are coal tar distillates containing PAHs
for the protection of timber (wood) against biological attack.
75. PAH emissions from wood preservation, installations and storage
facilities may be reduced using several approaches, implemented either
separately or in combination, such as:
(a) Requirements on storage conditions to prevent pollution of
soil and surface water by leached PAH and contaminated rainwater (e.g.
storage sites impermeable to rainwater, roof cover, reuse of
contaminated water for the impregnation process, quality demands for the
material produced);
(b) Measures to reduce atmospheric emissions at impregnation
plants (e.g. the hot wood should be cooled down from 90&#186;C to 30&#186;C at
least before transport to storage sites. However, an alternative method
using pressure steam under vacuum conditions to impregnate the wood with
creosote should be highlighted as BAT);
(c) The optimum loading of wood preservative, which gives
adequate protection to the treated wood product in situ, can be regarded
as a BAT as this will reduce the demand for replacements, thereby
reducing emissions from the wood preservation installations;
(d) Using wood preservation products with a lower content of
those PAHs that are POPs :
Possibly using modified creosote which is taken to be a
distillation fraction boiling between 270"C and 355*C, which
reduces both the emissions of the more volatile PAHs and the
heavier, more toxic PAHs;
Discouraging the use of carbolineum would also reduce PAH
emissions;
(e) Evaluating and then using, as appropriate, alternatives,
such as those in table 9, that minimize reliance on PAH-based products.
76. Burning of impregnated wood gives rise to PAH emissions and other
harmful substances. If burning does take place, it should be done in
installations with adequate abatement techniques.
Table 9: Possible alternatives to wood preservation involving PAH-based
Products
Annex VI
TXMESCALES FOR THE APPLICATION OF LIMIT VALUES AND BEST AVAILABLE
TECHNIQUES TO NEW AND EXISTING STATIONARY SOURCES
The tiraescales for the application of limit values and best
available techniques are:
(a) For new stationary sources: two years after the date of
entry into force of the present Protocol;
(b) For existing stationary sources: eight years after the date
of entry into force of the present Protocol. If necessary, this period
may be extended for specific existing stationary sources in accordance
with the amortization period provided for by national legislation.
Annex VII
RECOMMENDED CONTROL MEASURES FOR REDUCING EMISSIONS OF
PERSISTENT ORGANIC POLLUTANTS FROM MOBILE SOURCES
1. Relevant definitions are provided in annex III to the present
Protocol.
1. ACHIEVABLE EMISSION LEVELS FOR NEW VEHICLES AND FUEL PARAMETERS
A. Achievable emission levels for new vehicles
2. Diesel-fuelled passenger cars
3. Heavy-duty vehicles
4. Off-road engines
Step 1 (reference: ECE regulation No. 96) */
* Uniform provisions concerning the approval of compression
ignition (C.I.) engines to be installed in agricultural and
forestry tractors with regard to the emissions of pollutants
by the engine." The regulation came into force on 15
December 1995 and its amendment came into force on 5 March
1997.
Step 2
B. Fuel parameters
5. Diesel fuel
N.S.: Not specified.
I/ 1 January of year specified.
**/ Indicative value.
II. RESTRICTION OF HALOGENATED SCAVENGERS, ADDITIVES IN FUELS AND
LUBRICANTS
6. In some countries, l,2-dibromomethane in combination with
1,2-dichloromethane is used as a scavenger in leaded petrol. Moreover,
PCDD/F are formed during the combustion process in the engine. The
application of three-way catalytic converters for cars will require the
use of unleaded fuel. The addition of scavengers and other halogenated
compounds to petrol and other fuels and to lubricants should be avoided
as far as possible.
7. Table 1 summarizes measures for PCDD/F emission control from the
exhaust from road transport motor vehicles.
Table 1: PCDD/F emission control for the exhaust from road transport
motor vehicles
III. CONTROL MEASURES FOR EMISSIONS OF POPs FROM MOBILE SOURCES
A. POP emissions from motor vehicles
8. POP emissions from motor vehicles occur as particle-bound PAHs
emitted from diesel-fuelled vehicles. To a minor extent PAHs are also
emitted by petrol-fuelled vehicles.
9. Lubrication oil and fuels may contain halogenated compounds as a
result of additives or the production process. These compounds may be
transformed during combustion into PCDD/F and subsequently emitted with
the exhaust gases.
B. Inspection and maintenance
10. Por diesel-fuelled mobile sources, the effectiveness of the
control of emissions of PAHs may be ensured through programmes to test
the mobile sources periodically for particulate emissions, opacity
during free acceleration, or equivalent methods.
11. For petrol-fuelled mobile sources, the effectiveness of the
control of emissions of PAHs (in addition to other exhaust components)
may be ensured through programmes to test periodically the fuel metering
and the efficiency of the catalytic converter.
C. Techniques to control PAH emissions from diesel- and
petrol-fuelled motor vehicles
1. General aspects of control technologies
12. It is important to ensure that vehicles are designed to meet
emission standards while in service. This can be done by ensuring
conformity of production, lifetime durability, warranty of emissioncontrol
components, and recall of defective vehicles. For vehicles in
use, continued emission control performance can be ensured by an
effective inspection and maintenance programme.
2. Technical measures for emission control
13. The following measures to control PAH emissions are important:
(a) Fuel-quality specifications and engine modifications to
control emissions before they are formed (primary measures); and
(b) Addition of exhaust treatment systems, e.g. oxidizing
catalysts or particle traps (secondary measures).
(a) Diesel engines
14. Diesel-fuel modification can yield two benefits: a lower sulphur
content reduces emissions of particles and increases the conversion
efficiency of oxidizing catalysts, and the reduction in di- and triaromatic
compounds reduces the formation and emission of PAHs.
15. A primary measure to reduce emissions is to modify the engine to
achieve more complete combustion. Many different modifications are in
use. In general, vehicle exhaust composition is influenced by changes
in combustion chamber design and by higher fuel injection pressures. At
present, most diesel engines rely on mechanical engine control systems.
Newer engines increasingly use computerized electronic control systems
with greater potential flexibility in controlling emissions. Another
technology to control emissions is the combined technology of
turbocharging and intercooling. This system is successful in reducing
NOX as well as increasing fuel economy and power output. For heavy- and
light-duty engines the use of intake manifold tuning is also a
possibility.
16. Controlling the lubricating oil is important to reduce particulate
matter (PM), as 10 to 50% of particulate matter is formed from engine
oil. Oil consumption can be reduced by improved engine manufacturing
specifications and improved engine seals.
17. Secondary measures to control emissions are additions of exhaust
treatment systems. In general, for diesel engines the use of an
oxidizing catalyst in combination with a particulate filter has been
shown to be effective in reducing PAH emissions. A particle trap
oxidizer is being evaluated. It is located in the exhaust system to
trap PM and can provide some regeneration of the filter by burning the
collected PM, through electrical heating of the system or some other
means of regeneration. For proper regeneration of passive system traps
during normal operation, a burner-assisted regeneration system or the
use of additives is required.
(b) Petrol engines
18. PAH-reduction measures for petrol-fuelled engines are primarily
based on the use of a closed-loop three-way catalytic converter, which
reduces PAHs as part of the HC emission reductions.
19. Improved cold start behaviour reduces organic emissions in general
and PAHs in particular (for instance start-up catalysts, improved fuel
evaporation/atomization, heated catalysts).
20. Table 2 summarizes measures for PAH emission control from the
exhaust from road transport motor vehicles.
Table 2: PAH emission control for the exhaust from road transport motor
Vehicles
Annex VIII
MAJOR STATIONARY SOURCE CATEGORIES
I. INTRODUCTION
Installations or parts of installations for research, development
and the testing of new products are not covered by this list. A more
complete description of the categories may be found in annex V.
II. LIST OF CATEGORIES

