AGREEMENT FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF QUESTIONS RELATING TO WATERCOURSES
AND DIKES ON THE GERMAN-DANISH FRONTIER.
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Article 1.
List of Frontier Watercourses.
The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the following watercourses, lakes .and streams,
portions of which constitute the boundary between Germany and Denmark, i. e.
(i) The stretch of the Krusaa between Nyhus Lake (frontier post No. 43) and the Flensburg Fiord;
(2) The channel between the Jardelund and the Froesle meadows (from frontier posts No. 93 to
its junction with the Skelboek at frontier stones No. 124) ;
(3) The Skelboek from frontier stones No. 124 to frontier stones No. 155:
(4) The Gammelaa from frontier stones No. 157 to its junction with the Sonderaa at frontier stones
No. 191 ;
(5) The Sonderaa from frontier stones No. 191 to its junction with the Vidaa including the connecting
canals to and from the Haasberg Lake;
(6) The Ruderbol Lake, subject however to the provisions of Article 55.
The provisions shall also apply to the channel and canal systems connected up with watercourses
Nos. i to 5.
Article 2.
Frontier Water Commission.
A Frontier Water Commission shall be established for the purpose of examining and deciding all
matters connected with the watercourses mentioned in Article 1. The Commission shall be appointed
for a period of six years and shall, whenever the matter relates to a watercourse within the district (Kreis)
of Flensburg or South Tondern, consist of a member chosen by the district committee of the district
of Flensburg or South Tondern, and whenever the matter relates to a watercourse in the Danish County
(Amt) of Tonder or Aabenraa, of a member chosen by the District Council of Tonder or Aabenraa ;
it shall further consist of two judges or senior administrative officials appointed by the German and'
Danish Governments respectively, whose judicial or administrative departments do not lie in any of
the above districts (Kreise) or counties (Amter).
One of the last mentioned persons will act as president during the first three years and the other
during the remaining three years. The first president shall be chosen by lot. Subsequently the change
of president will be so arranged that a president appointed by one Government will always be succeeded
by a president appointed by the other Government.
The judge or administrative official who does not act as president shall be entitled to be present
at the sittings of the Commission and to express his opinion with regard to the matter in hand. He
shall, however, have no vote. The place and time of the sittings shall be communicated to him in due
course.
A deputy shall be appointed for each member and he shall sit on the Commission if the member
should be prevented from attending.
If the question at issue should concern landed property, which lies within both German districts
or within both Danish counties, the two German district committees or the two Danish county councils
shall come to an agreement as to which of the two elected German or Danish members shall sit on the
Commission.
Article 3.
Supreme Frontier Water Commission.
Appeal may be made from the decisions of the Frontier Water Commision - subject to the exception
mentioned in Article 6 - to a Supreme Frontier Water Commission as a court of final appeal. The
Supreme Frontier Water Commission shall be set up in each special case as occasion may require. It
shall consist of two members appointed by the German Government and two by the Danish Covernment,
together with a president appointed, by the Netherlands Government, who must be a man of legal
training and thoroughly conversant with the matters in question.
Notice of appeal must be given to the president of the Frontier Water Commission within eight
weeks after that Commission has given judgment. The president shall then arrange for the Supreme
Frontier Water Commission to be set up by applying for that purpose to the German and Danish Governments
(to the German and to the Danish Ministries for Foreign Affairs).
The person giving notice of appeal shall, if called upon to do so by the president of the Frontier 
Water Commission, give security for the costs of the appeal proceedings.
The appeal may be withdrawn at any tim. Any costs which have already been incurred shall
be borne by the person who has given notice of appeal.
Article 4.
Costs arising out of the work of the Commissions.
The Frontier Water Commission and the Supreme Frontier Water Commission shall determine
in each individual case who must bear the costs arising out of the work of the Commission, including
the technical preparatory work and other investigations.
If the Parties concerned are not directly liable for the costs in accordance with the following provisions,
such costs shall be paid in the form of advances by the district or county concerned. This
payment shall be effected, as far as possible, according to the proportion in which the German and Danish
properties respectively will have to bear the costs as a whole. If the costs which have been incurred
are not chargeable to the district or county, the parties shall pay the costs with or without interest
at a date or dates fixed in accordance with the decision of the district committee or county council
concerned. If payment should not be made voluntarily, legal measures may be taken to recover the
costs.
Statutes of the Commissions.
The procedure of the Frontier Water Commission and of the Supreme Frontier Water Commission
shall in other respects be governed by the annexed Statutes, which may only be modified by agreement
between the two Contracting Governments.
B. UPKEEP OF FRONTIER WATERCOURSES.
Article 5.
Contents of Regulations
Regulations shall be drawn up as soon as possible, in cases in which this has not already been done,
with regard to the watercourses mentioned in Article 1. They shall contain, in addition to an exact
description of the watercourse, detailed provisions regarding the configuration, course and gradient
of the watercourse, regarding the condition of underground conduits, dams, locks and bridges, regarding
the level of water for the mills or any other water installations and dams on the watercourse, and regarding
the upkeep of the watercourse. It shall, in particular, be stated who is liable for the upkeep of the
watercourse and, further, how the work of upkeep is to be executed, at what dates the customary cleaning
is to be effected, when inspection is to be made and also whether and in what manner special supervision
of the watercourse is to be carried out.
Mention shall be made in each set of regulations of the decisions, agreements or customs upon which
they are based.
Existing regulations shall be re-examined and additions t6 them made if necessary.
Water Levels.
In the case of each dam which already exists, in accordance with the law, or which may subsequently
be authorised, water levels shall be established for the purpose of indicating the height of water which
is permissible. Different water levels may be established for different seasons of the year, including 
if necessary a fixed minimum level. All water levels shall be indicated by reference to fixed points
by means of clear and durable marks. They must be accessible to those persons responsible for their
supervision.
The cost of establishing or altering a water level shall be borne by persons possessing damming
rights. Costs arising out of injustified objections or claims are, however, chargeable to the person
making the objection or claim.
The cost of the upkeep and renewal of water level marks shall be borne by the persons possessing
damming rights.
Article 6.
Framing of Regulations.
The regulations shall be framed or re-examined jointly by the head district official (Landrat) of
the German Kreis concerned and by the head county official (Amtmann) of the Danish county concerned,
with the necessary technical assistance.
Before the beginning of these proceedings all persons who claim to have special rights shall be called
upon by means of a notification in the local German and Danish newspapers to submit their claims
within a time limit of three weeks. As soon as the head district official and the head county official
have jointly prepared the draft regulations these shall - after notification in the local newspapers -
be exhibited for inspection during a period of four weeks. After consideration of any objections which
may then be made, the form of the regulations will be finally settled.
If an objection is not recognised as being well founded, notice against such decision may be made
to the Frontier Water Commission.
If the head district official and the head county official are unable to agree to a joint draft, both
drafts shall be exhibited for inspection as already provided. After the time limit already mentioned
has elapsed, the matter shall be decided by the Frontier Water Commission.
If a unanimous decision is arrived at by the three members of the Commission, it shall be final.
If the decision is not unanimous, appeal may be made to the Supreme Frontier Water Commission,
on condition that the party appealing gives security for all costs in connection with the appeal.
All other costs in connection with the drawing up of the regulations shall be borne in equal parts
by the district and county concerned.
The final regulations shall be printed, together with a list of the names of the persons responsible
for the upkeep and particulars of their landed property as given in the cadastral and land registers.
Copies shall be sent to the Councils of all communes in which there are estates under the obligations
of taking part in the upkeep of the watercourse.
If alterations are subsequently made in the apportionment of the liability for upkeep (allocations)
the Councils of the communes shall be informed accordingly.
Article 7.
Amendment of Regulations.
Amendments may be introduced into the regulations, according to the above-mentioned procedure,
by the authorities which drew up the regulations under the terms of Article 6.
If changes occur in the actual conditions with which the regulations deal, the latter shall be amended
accordingly, without delay.
Article 8.
Liability for general upkeep.
The liability for the upkeep of the watercourses mentioned in Article 1, falls, in accordance with
the regulations heretofore in force, either upon the riparian proprietors alone or upon them together
with other proprietors to whom the existence and the good condition of the watercourses is of use or
advantage.
Article 9.
Compensation in connection with general upkeep.
In connection with the general upkeep, the riparian proprietors must give permission for the deposit
without compensation of earth, stones, gravel, sand, wood, etc., on the banks, and they must provide
for the removal thereof in so far as such removal is essential for the maintenance of a free flow of water
and is possible without imposing an excessive burdlen on the proprietors.
The person liable for the upkeep, together with his duly authorised agents, shall be entitled,
in connection with the preparation and execution of the work of upkeep, to enter and move freely over the
riparian land and to deposit materials there for the time being. Compensation shall be given for any
damage resulting from such action.
If the matter cannot be settled by agreement, the amount of the compensation shall be determined
by the Frontier Water Commission.
Article 10.
Costs of upkeep.
The sums to be paid as compensation in connection with the upkeep, together with the cost of the
work undertaken for the maintenance of the watercourses, shall, in so far as the work is not carried out
by the persons themselves who are liable therefor, be paid for in the form of advances by the district
or county concerned, as far as possible according to the proportion in which the expenditure as a whole
is chargeable to the German or Danish estates. These advances will be repaid with or without interest
at a date or dates fixed in accordance with the decision of the district committee or county council
concerned.
If the money is not paid voluntarily, legal measures may be taken to recover the advances.
Article 11.
Liability for upkeep in connection with divisions of land.
If a landed property which must contribute towards the upkeep is divided up, the burden falling
upon such property shall be apportioned by the competent district committee or county council at the
cost of the owners of the component parts of the property, among such parts as continue to benefit
by the watercourse.
The proprietors of the divided landed property are under the obligation themselves to cause such
apportionment. to be made. Until such action has been taken, each of them shall be responsible for the
whole of the contribution payable in respect of the property which is divided up. Each part-owner
may, within four weeks after receiving notification of the apportionment, give notice of objection to the
Frontier Water Commission.
Article 12.
Liability to contribute in the case of usufructuaries.
The liability for che ordinary upkeep of the watercourse falls primarily upon the person possessing
the usufruct of the land in question ; the owner may, however, also be called upon to fulfil such liability
if the contribution cannot be recovered from the person in question.
Article 13.
Decisions regarding liability for general upkeep.
If any person concerned desires to obtain the decision of the Frontier Water Commission with regard
to questions which relate exclusively to liability for general upkeep, he must make an application
to the Commission himself. The costs shall in this case be borne, not by the district or county, but by
the person concerned; the amount shall be determined by the Commission.
Article 14.
Supervision of frontier watercourses.
The supervision of the frontier watercourses shall be carried out on the German side by the Chairman
of the competent Supervisory Board (Schauamt), or by the Dike-grave as the case may be and on the
Danish side by the District Water Inspector, appointed for the county concerned. These persons shall
jointly carry out inspections at regular intervals, as laid down in the regulations, and they shall inform
the head district official on the German side and the head county official on the Danish side of any defects
which they may discover. The latter shall cause any work which has been left undone to be carried out
at the cost of the negligent party, and in certain circumstances and more particularly in the case of a
repetition of the offence, they may take steps to secure the punishment of the offender.
The money required to pay the cost of the work carried out at the expense of the negligent party,
together with the cost of any inspection rendered necessary by such neglect, may, if not paid voluntarily,
be recovered as a result of legal proceedings.
C. REGULARISATION OF FRONTIER WATERCOURSES.
Article 15.
Proposals for regularisation in connection with the preparation of the regulations.
If the head district official (Landrat) or head county official (Amtmann) is of opinion, in drawing
up a set of regulations, that there is good reason for making alterations in any matters concerning the
watercourse, or if detailed proposals cause him, in accordance with Paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 6, to
adopt suggestions of such a nature with the result that the question of a legal regularisation of the watercourse
arises, the matter shall be laid by him before the Frontier Water Commission, together with a
plan for regularisation and the necessary technical preparatory work.
Article 16.
Decisions regarding regularisation.
When the Frontier Water Commission assembles to consider a proposal for the regularisation of
one of the watercourses in question, in accordance with Article 15, it will first of all investigate all the
circumstances of the case and will give an opportunity to all persons concerned to express their opinion
and to put forward objections or suggestions regarding the proposed regularisation in accordance with
the provisions of Article 31. It will then be decided whether and to what extent the proposed regularisation
shall be carried out, and, if it is decided to proceed with the matter, what plan shall be adopted.
In such investigations the general advantages which the proposed regulansation would confer
must be weighed against the expenditure entailed, and also incidental disturbance or damage.
The proposed regularisation may consist in:
1. The establishment of a new bed and the carrying out of high water regularisation, or
2. other improvements of a more extensive character than those constituting ordinary upkeep.
The artificial creation of new land adjacent to riparian land shall be regarded as an improvement
of the same nature as those mentioned in this paragraph under No. 2.
Article 17.
Detailed provisions regarding regularisation.
Detailed and exhaustive provisions shall be issued regarding the carrying out of the regularisation,
including the scope and conditions thereof, and the time limits to be observed. All the objections or
proposals put forward in connection with the regularisation, shall, in the absence of agreement, be dealt
with by means of an official decision.
The fact that matters concerning a watercourse have already been regulated at an earlier date
by means of agreements or decisions shall not necessarily prevent the issue of new and different regulations
regarding the same matter if either the facts upon which the former arrangement was based
have subsequently undergone modification, or experience has shown that the earlier arrangement does
not in essential particulars fulfil its purpose. Care must, however, be taken in this connection to see
that no lawfully obtained right is impaired without full compensation.
Article 18.
Change of ownership of lands separated from an estate.
If in the future a watercourse in consequence of regularisation, traverses an estate in such a manner
that part of the estate is situated on one bank and part on the other, the Frontier Water Commission
shall endeavour to effect an appropriate change of ownership, either by means of a transfer subject
to compensation in money or by means of an exchange. If a friendly agreement cannot be reached,
the Frontier Water Commission may, in cases in which local conditions render such a course necessary,
by means of a decision, order and enforce the exchange of plots of land of the same value or the addition
of plots belonging to one owner to a plot belonging to another owner subject to the payment of compen,
sation in money.
Action of the last-mentioned character may, however, only be taken in cases in which not more than
one hectare of land is actually added to any single plot of land.
Any person who takes over in this way, subject to compensation, a plot of land which has been
separated from another estate, may choose whether he will pay for it in a single sum or in annual instalments.
After any measure of regularisation has been carried out, the head district official (Landrat) or
head county official (Amtmann) shall, without delay, cause the plots of land which have changed hands
to be measured and the necessary alterations to be made in the survey records and in the land register.
The change of ownership shall be effected by the entry in the land register.
If an exchange is made of plots of land of equal value, the new plot of land shall exactly replace
the former from a legal point of view.
The tenant of the estate from which a portion has been separated subject to compensation in money,
has the right to give notice up to the end of the current economic year, unless he has suffered no serious
damage in consequence of the division of land.
If the lease remains in force, the tenant has the right during the period of the lease, to receive payment
to the extent of 4 % per annum of the money compensation, or, if the compensation is paid in
instalments, of the capitalized value of such instalments.
Article 19.
Alterations of the frontier.
In drawing up the regularisation plans for the watercourses mentioned in Article 1, the following
rules adopted by the International Boundary Commission in its statement of September 3, 1921, with
regard to the frontier, shall also be observed:
"Les projets de regularisation des cours d'eau frontieres pourront etre mis a execution
apres accord entre les deux Etats, a condition que les changements envisages par ces projets
soient de peu d'importance et n'atteignent pas au total une superficie de plus de 4 hectares
par kilometre en moyenne. La ligne frontiere suivra alors en general la ligne mediane du cours
d'eau frontiere regularise"
Stretches of watercourses on the frontier, which have been artificially altered, shall be measured
by surveyors belonging to both Parties on the basis of the frontier survey work. Supplementary official
records in regard to this matter shall be drawn up in duplicate in the German and Danish languages
by the head district officials (Landrate) or head county officials (Amtmanner). All relevant documents
shall be forwarded by the head of the Government in Sleswig to the Boundary Office in Berlin or by
the head county officials to the Danish Government in Copenhagen.
Article 20.
Costs of regularisation.
All proprietors of land which may be expected to benefit from the regularisation, no matter whether
their land is bounded by the watercourse or not, are under the obligation to pay a share of the cost
of the regularisation work or to undertake a part of any work imposed in accordance with Article 22.
The share of each owner shall be determined according to the advantage which accrues to him
from the regularisation. In the practical application of this principle of apportionment due regard
shall, however, be paid to local conditions in deciding each individual case.
The sums to be paid as compensation in connection with regularisation together with the cost of
the work of regularisation shall, in so far as the work is not carried out by the person himself who is
liable therefor, be paid in the form of advances by the district (Kreis) or county (Amt) concerned, as
far as possible according to the proportion in which the expenditure as a whole is chargeable to the
German or Danish estates. These advances will be repaid with or without interest, at a date or dates
fixed in accordance with the decision of the proper district committee or county council concerned.
If the money is not paid voluntarily, legal measures may be taken to recover it.
Article 21.
Liability to contribute in the case of usufructuaries.
The proprietor shall pay the contribution due from land in respect of the regularisation of the watercourse,
even if the land is in the possession of a usufructuary.
Agreements to the contrary between the owner and the usufructuary will not be recognised by
the authorities.
Article 22.
Execution of regularisation work.
Notice of the work necessitated by the regularisation of the watercourses shall be published in
both countries, and the work shall be entrusted to the person submitting the lowest tender, subject
to the giving of satisfactory security for the execution of the work. If no tender is obtained which
appears to the Frontier Water Commission to be acceptable, the contract may be given without tender.
If it should appear desirable, the Frontier Water Commission may, however, direct that certain regularisation
work on a small scale should be carried out by the parties concerned on their own account.
Article 23.
Supervision of regularisation work.
The supervision of regularisation work shall be carried out in common by the chairman of the Supervisory
Board (Schauamt) or by the Dike-grave (Deichgraf) on the German side and the District Water
Inspector (Amtswasserinspektor) on the Danish side. Differences of opinion which may arise shall
be submitted to the Frontier Water Commission for its decision.
Article 24.
Failure to carry out work,
If an owner who is under the obligation to carry out certain work does not execute it properly, the
chairman of the Supervisory Board or the Dike-grave or the District Water Inspector shall report the
matter to the head district official or head county official. The latter shall arrange for the work to
be carried out at the cost of the defaulting party.
All expenses connected with such work may, if not paid voluntarily, be recovered by means of
legal proceedings.
Article 25.
Installations rendered necessary by the regularisation.
Any person undertaking the regularisation of one of the watercourses mehtioned in Article i 'ghf.ll
erect the installations which are required for the protection of land and the works necessary to guard
against danger and damage, if such installations are closely related to the undertaking and economically
justifiable. He must also take such measures as the public interest may require. These will include
such alterations in public and private roads and in the bridges situated on these roads as are rendered
necessary by the regularisation. The person responsible for the upkeep of the roads and bridges shall,
without prejudice to any special liabilities, contribute to the cost a sum equivalent to the amount which
he saves in consequence of the alterations and which he would otherwise have had to spend in order
to discharge. his liability for upkeep. If, however, the reconstruction or alteration renders the work
of upkeep more expensive in the future without benefiting the person responsible for the upkeep of the
bridges and roads, suitable compensation shall be paid to him.
Article 26.
Compensation for damage caused by regularisation.
Any person who suffers loss or damage in consequence of the regularisation or of the alteration in
the condition of the watercourse occasioned by such regularisation has the right to claim full compensation
from the person who benefits by the work in question. The matter shall be decided by the Frontier
Water Commission.
The riparian proprietors must permit, subject to compensation, the erection at or in the watercourse
of subsidiary works necessary to carry out the regularisation of a river bed, the deposit of earth, stones,
gravel, sand, wood, etc.,on the land on the banks,the transport to and fro of such materials and the storing
and transport to and fro of building materials, and must also grant regular right of access to the workmen
and inspectors.
These provisions are also applicable to land situated behind the riparian land and to the proprietors
thereof.
In the absence of agreement, the Frontier Water Commission shall determine the amount of compensation.
Article 27.
Liability for upkeep after regularisation.
If the cost of upkeep is increased by the regularisation of a watercourse, the increase shall be apportioned
among all the proprietors to whom the regularisation is of use or advantage, regardless of
the fact whether they previously shared in the cost of upkeep or not.
Article 28.
Subsequent proposals for regularisation.
Proposals for regularisation or for the alteration of previous measures of regularisation may also
be laid before the competent head district or head county official at a later date by any person concerned.
The head district or head county official shall submit such proposal to the Frontier Water
Commission. The person making the proposal shall, if called upon to do so, provide adequate security
for all costs which the proceedings may entail.
D. - ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW AND ALTERATION OF EXISTING WORKS.
Article 29.
General Principles.
The establishment of new, or the extensive alteration of existing works on any of the watercourses
mentioned in Article 1, requires the authorisation of the Frontier Water Commission.
This provision shall apply in particular to the right :
(1) of using and consuming water, especially the right of diverting it directly or indirectly and above
or beneath the land surface;
(2) of conveying water or other liquids directly or indirectly and over or under the land surface;
(3) of lowering or raising the level of the water, especially the right of causing a permanent accumulation
of water, by checking the flow of the stream.
The watercourse may not be used in such a manner that:
(1) The height of the tidal water would be altered or the water polluted to the detriment of other persons;;
(2) the height of the water would be so altered that prejudice would be caused to others in the exercise
of their rights or that harm would be done to the land of other;
(3) additional burdens would be placed on any other party for the upkeep of watercourses or their banks,
unless the advantages which may be obtained by means of the works are greatly in excess of the
loss or damage anticipated. If the proposed use of the watercourse, is likely to prove highly detrimental
to the public interest, authorisation should be refused or granted only upon conditions
which would take the public interest fully into account.
An application relating to drainage should in general be given precedence over applications dealing
with other improvements.
The works should, as a rule, be so constructed that the water which is not employed in the works
themselves should be conveyed back into the original watercourse in such a way that the water is not
caused to flow round a property abutting on the watercourse unless the owners and usufructuaries of
the property have given their consent.
In the case of works on a large scale, the Frontier Water Commission may, however, direct that
the water should be caused to flow round one or more properties adjacent to the watercourse, or that
the water shall be discharged into another watercourse without regard to the opposition of the parties
concerned. In such cases, compensation shall be granted to persons suffering prejudice for any loss
and damage caused.
Protective measures taken in cases of necessity when danger is threatening require no authorisation.
If, however, they become permanent, authorisation shall be obtained when the immediate danger
has been averted.
Article 30.
Procedure to be followed in making applications.
The necessary drawings and explanations shall be attached to all applications for the erection of
new works or the alteration of existing works in accordance with Article 29. Applications shall be laid
before the head district official or head county official concerned whose duty it is to submit them to
the Frontier Water Commission, subject, if necessary, to the provision of suitable security for the costs.
If the Frontier Water Commission is definitely of opinion that a proposal should not be adopted,
it may at once reject such proposal by means of a decision in which the reasons for the rejection are
given.
In other cases, the proposed use of the watercourse shall be brought to the notice of the public
in the manner which is customary in the locality in all Communes or manorial districts (Gutsbezirke),
the land of which might be affected by the operation of the works in the event of their being authorised.
Further, the attention of all persons who will clearly suffer damage from the authorisation of the
works shall be drawn to the public notification by means of registered letters.
Article 31.
Contents of Notifications.
Notifications shall state where the drawings and explanations which have been submitted may be
inspected, and shall mention the authorities to which objections to the authorisation and also applications
for the erection and upkeep of installations for the prevention of damage, or applications for compensation
shall be addressed in writing or be made orally in official form. A time limit shall also be
fixed for lodging objections or making applications. The period allowed shall be not less than two,
and not more than six weeks. It shall begin .to run from the day following that upon which the gazette
containing the final notification is published.
It shall be stated in the notification that all persons who have not lodged any objection or made
any application within the time limit fixed shall lose their rights in that connection, but that applications
for the erection and upkeep of installations or for compensation may be made at a later date if they
are based upon damage which could not be foreseen during the period covered by the time limit.
Even after the expiration of the appointed time a person who has suffered damage shall not be
debarred from submitting a claim provided he can show that he was prevented by circumstances over
which he had no control from submitting such claim within the time limit.
The right of establishing claims after the expiration of the appointed time is subject to prescription
three years after the date on which the person who suffered damage learned of the existence of such
damage.
The same time limit shall also be fixed in the notification for other applications for the authorisation
of a particular use of the watercourse by which the use proposed by the first applicant would be
restricted. It shall also be made clear that applications of this kind made after the expiration of the
appointed time in connection with the same matter will not be taken into consideration.
A suitable additional period may be allowed for the production of evidence.
Atticle 32.
Contents of Decisions.
The decision of the Frontier Water Commission shall contain an exact description of the rights
conferred and of the undertakings in respect of which they are conferred, and, if the rights are bound
up with the ownership of landed property, an exact description of such property.
In the case of a grant of damming rights the decision shall further contain provisions:
(1) regarding the construction of works which affect the volume of water flowing or the height of the
tide
(2) regarding the times of damming which are to be observed;
(3) regarding the height of the water which has been fixed and, if the water must be kept at a fixed
minimum, regarding that height also-;
(4) regarding the quantity of water to be used if its restriction is necessary
(5) regarding measures necessary for protection against damage from tides.
Article 33.
Measures for the prevention of illegal installations.
Should any person without proper authorisation establish installations, as mentioned in Article 29,
on a watercourse, or should he be responsible for damage to a watercourse caused by cattle breaking
loose, by earth or rubbish being thrown into the stream by fences, hedges or the sloping banks of the
watercourse being broken down, etc., the competent head district official or head county official may
cause the damage to be repaired at the cost of the person concerned, or may cause the installations
which occasioned the damage to be removed if the person concerned does not remove them himself
when called upon to do so. The guilty party may also be punished.
If such installations already exist on the watercourse, the head district or head county official may
insist upon their removal if he obtains a decision of the Frontier Water Commission to the effect that the
installations cannot be maintained without doing harm to the watercourse. If the person concerned
asserts that he has obtained on special grounds the right to maintain such installations, and if this claim
is not allowed by the head district or official or the head county official, the latter shall lay the matter
before the ordinary Courts for their decision.
If the water is dammed by means of a work up to a height which exceeds the specified water-level,
the owner of the work or the person using it may be fined if he is responsible for the infringement of
the regulations. He shall also make good all damage due to the illegal damming.
The money required to pay the cost of the work to be carried out in this connection, at the expense
of the person concerned and the cost of the necessary inspection, including the charges in respect of
compensation which may be imposed on him may, if not paid voluntarily, be recovered as a result of
legal proceedings.
Article 34.
Irrigation Works.
In general, the water which is taken for purposes of irrigation from one of the watercourses mentioned
in Article 1 may only be used for the irrigation of land abutting on the watercourse. If, however,
the quantity of water available is sufficient, the Frontier Water Commission may, as regards larger
irrigation works erected by associations (See Article 40), allow the owners of land situated in the neighbourhood
of the watercourse in question but not directly bordering on the watercourse, to take part
in the irrigation. Special regard shall be had in this connection to the land across which the canals
and conduit pipes required for the irrigation works must be constructed. (See Article 38.)
In deciding whether the use of the water may be granted to persons other than the riparian proprietors,
care shall also be taken to ensure that no noticeable diminution in the quantity of water is
occasioned to the detriment of land adjacent to the watercourse below the irrigation works.
Article 35.
Distribution of Water in connection with irrigation works.
The proprietors on both banks of any one of the watercourses mentioned in Article 1 have equal
rights as regards the use of the water, so that, if irrigation works are erected upon one bank, only half
of the water of the watercourses may be assigned to these works. The Frontier Water Commission
shall establish detailed regulations for the apportionment the water in connection with the erection
of irrigation works.
If, however, all the proprietors and usufructuaries of the land on the opposite bank of the watercourse
between the point at which the water is diverted and the point at which it re-enters the watercourse
give their assent, more than half the water may be applied to irrigation works on one bank.
Article 36.
Compensation for damage caused by irrigation works.
If irrigation works on one bank of any of the watercourses mentioned in Article 1 cause loss or
damage to proprietors on the other bank by making the land too dry or in any other way, and if such
loss or damage is not counterbalanced by the advantages derived from the works by the parties concerned
e. g., by improved drainage, or if the Frontier Water Commission has not been able to prevent such
loss or damage by suitable measures, the Frontier Water Commission shall grant compensation to the
parties prejudiced, to be paid by those persons who have interests in the irrigation works.
Such compensation is to be fixed, in the absence of agreements to the contrary, on an annual basis,
and it may subsequently be reduced or increased by the Commission, according as to whether the damage
sustained is reduced or increased as a result of altered circumstances.

Article 37.
Obligations of riparian and other proprietors.
The riparian proprietors and the owners of land which is not directly situated on the watercourse
must, subject to compensation, grant the use of the necessary ground for the erection of the works mentioned
in Article 29, including places for working and for storage. The works may also be connected
with land belonging to third parties on the other bank.
A dam may, if considered desirable by the Frontier Water Commission, be erected at a point on the
watercourse situated higher up than any part of the land to be irrigated, in such a manner that on both
banks the installation rests on land belonging to third parties. Full compensation must be given to the
persons concerned in this case, in the same manner as for the temporary use of land belonging to third
parties in connection with the erection, working and upkeep of the installation.

Article 38.
Construction of canals and conduits across land owne-d by third parties.
The main canal required for the installation of drainage or irrigation works, together with other
canals and conduits connected with the installation, may be constructed compulsorily across land belonging
to the third parties, if the Frontier Water Commission considers it to be necessary for the successful
establishment of the works. The Commission shall determine the compensation which the person 
concerned may claim for loss and damage sustained in connection with the works themselves and with
their subsequent upkeep. The conditions for the regular use of the works by other persons shall likewise
be established.

Article 39.
Subsequent part-use of drainage or irrigation works.
A proprietor who has not taken part in the construction of drainage or irrigation works, and has,
therefore, not contributed to the costs of such works, may subsequently obtain permission to share in
the use of the machinery or other installations erected in connection with such works, for the purpose
of the drainage or irrigation of his land (e. g. a dam which prirnrily belongs to drainage or irrigation
works erected on the other bank, or the water from a canal which forms part of an already existing.drainage
or irrigation work, and which bounds or traverses his land). Permission. shall,. however, only be
granted if no serious prejudice can be caused by such part-use to the persons who were associated in the
original drainage or irrigation works. The party concerned must pay a reasonable share of the cost
of the original works and of their future upkeep.
In the absence of a voluntary agreement, the Frontier Water Commission shall decide whether,
and if necessary, under what conditions such part-use may be allowed.

Article 40.
Formation of drainage and irrigation associations.
When more than five land owners or usufructuaries combine to erect drainage or irrigation works
on one of the watercourses mentioned in Article i, they shall form a drainage or irrigation association.
The conditions of the association shall be determined by statutes agreed upon by all the members, except
in cases in which the head district official and the head county official jointly exempt them from the
necessity of having statutes in consideration of the comparative unimportance of the works. Drainage
or irrigation works, in which more than five proprietors or usufructuaries are interested, may not be
constructed, and the number of the persons taking part in already existing drainage or irrigation works
may not be increased to more than five, until statutes have been drawn up in conformity with the provisions
of this Article. All the parties concerned must give their assent before such statutes are valid.
The statutes also require the joint authorisation of the head district official and the head county official.
If the latter refuse to authorise the statutes, or if they cannot come to an agreement, their authorisation
may be replaced by that of the Frontier Water Commission. If an association is not formed in accordance
with these regulations, it may be prohibited from using the.water of the watercourse in question
until the statutes have been authorised.
The statutes shall contain : a description of the works, a list of the landed properties which share
in the use of these works, together with particulars regarding the proprietors and the lands, the name
of the drainage or irrigation association, its seat and legal position, regulations regarding the governing
body, and the rights and duties of the members, the use and upkeep of the works of the association, the
special obligations of the association in its relations with third parties, the method of keeping accounts,
the admission and retirement of members, and the method of amending the statutes.
Alterations in, or additions to, the statutes are subject to the provisions contained in paragraph z.
The statutes shall be published in the manner customary in the locality in the communes and
manorial districts in which the landed properties in question are situated.
The rights conferred and duties imposed upon a member of the association as such, pass without
further formality to any person subsequently acquiring the property in question.
As regards already existing drainage or irrigation works, the association shall, within a year after
the coming into force of this Agreement, comply with the provisions of the first paragraph.of this Article.
Persons participating in old or new drainage or irrigation works for which statutes are not necessary,
shall appoint a fully-authorised agent to represent them jointly in dealings with third parties. Notification
thereof shall be given to the head district official or head county official.

Article 41.
Supervision of drainage and irrigation works.
The inspectors mentioned in Article 14 shall be responsible for seeing that canals and also dams,
locks and bridges forming part of the drainage or irrigation works situated on the watercourse are maintained
in accordance with the authorised plans and statutes.
Defects shall be brought to the notice of the head district or county official concerned by the inspectors.
The head district official or head county official may cause the work which has been neglected to be
carried out, and compel the parties who are responsible to fulfil their obligations in accordance with Article 14.
If the head district official or the head county official is of opinion that the original construction
of the canals together with dams, locks and bridges forming part of the drainage or irrigation works,
is not in accordance with the authorised plan, the matter may be brought before the Frontier Water
Commission by him, or by the participators in the drainage or irrigation works. Should this Commission,
or, if necessary, the Supreme Frontier Water Commission, decide that the work which has been executed
is not in accordance with the authorised plan, action shall be taken in accordance with the provisions
contained at the end of paragraph I, of Article 40.

Article 42.
Arbitrary alterations in drainage or iirigation works.
Persons interested in drainage or irrigation works who make alterations of their own accord in the
installations connected with the works, or who, by their neglect, render alterations necessary, with
the result that the apportionment of the water prescribed or agreed to is altered to the detriment of
other persons, shall be punished.

E. USE OF WATERCOURSES.
Article 43.
Common use of the water.
All persons are entitled to use the water of the watercourses and lakes mentioned in Article 1 for
watering cattle, for washing and for ordinary domestic requirements, provided that such use can be
made without trespassing upon the land of third parties.
The Frontier Water Commission may, at the request of the head district official or the head county
official concerned, control, restrict or prohibit the common use of the water. Reasons shall be given
for decisions in this connection.
Article 44.
Existing works.
Machinery authorised at the time of the coming into force of this Agreement may not, in consequence
of the use of the water by other persons, be deprived of the water necessary for its working, to the extent
which has heretofore been customary. If the right to enlarge the works has been established by means
of an earlier authorisation, the works may not be deprived of the water necessary for the extended operations.
(See, however, Articles 17 and 29.)
Article 45.
Discharge of harmful substances into watercourses.
If refuse or harmful substances are discharged into any of the watercourses mentioned in Article 1
in consequence of operations carried out on the land by mills, factories, dairy-farms, slaughter-houses
etc., and if such refuse or harmful substances seriously increase the work in connection with the cleaning
of the watercourse, or cause floods which damage fishing or which inflict other injury on riparian
proprietors,
the persons who suffer damage thereby are entitled to appeal to the Frontier Water Commission.
The fact that works have been authorised by the Frontier Water Commission does not release
the person undertaking such works from the above-mentioned responsibilities.
Article 46.
Decision regarding claims for compensation.
The decision shall state whether the complaint is justified, and if so, what amount of compensation
must be paid to each of the injured parties, who is to pay the compensation, whether it is payable in a
single sum or in the form of an annual indemnity, and further, how the costs of the action are to be defrayed.
If the payment of an annual indemnity is ordered by way of compensation, the provisions of paragraph
2 of Article 36 shall be applicable in cases in which one of the parties subsequently considers that his
interests are prejudiced.
Sums of money due in respect of compensation and in respect of the costs of the proceedings may,
if not paid volutarily, be recovered as a result of legal proceedings.
F. OTHER LEGAL PROVISIONS.
Article 47.
Protection of the rights of third parties in connection with the payment of compensation.
Compensation which is accorded to proprietors in respect of the division of their lands or the diminution
in the value of their lands consequent upon the decision of the Commission or of a settlement
arrived at in presence of the Commission may only be paid to the proprietors subject to the rights of
mortgagees or of other persons possessing legal claims.
The President shall, for this purpose, cause an exact list to be drawn up, of the proprietors and
landed properties, together with particulars from the land register and the survey records and also of
the sums due in respect of ccmp-ensation.
This list shall be published, together with a notification in -which any person who claims payment
of the whole amount of compensation or of a part thereof for the protection of his rights, shall be summoned
to appear at a particular date (time and place being given) ; notice shall be given that the claims of any
person to compensation will not be recognised if he should fail to appear. Jhe notification and list
shall be published, at least 14 days before the appointed date, in the newspapers which are employed
in both countries for official notifications, and the notification shall also be published in the local newspapers.
If no objection is raised at the appointed date to the payment of ccmpensation to a proprietor,
such payment may be made to him.
If, on the contrary, objection is raised at the appointed date, efforts shall be made to obtain an
agreement between the proprietor and the claimant. If such efforts do not succeed, the compensation
money shall be retained by the Commission until it has been determined by a decision of the ordinary
Courts to whom the money should be paid.
Article 48.
Obligation to allow suiveys, etc., to be made.
Every proprietor must permit levelling, surveys, or other technical preparatory work and investigations
which may be necessary in connection with a plan for any contemplated measures of regularisation,
drainage or irrigation works to be carried out on his land. The fixed marks which are necessary
for these purposes may not be arbitrarily removed.
Information shall, however, be given by means of a public notification or otherwise, at least one
day in advance, of any intention to undertake such work or investigations. Compensation shall be given
for any damage which may be caused.
Article 49.
Roads and railways to be regarded as landed properties.
For the purposes of this Agreement public and private roads and railways shall in general be treated
as landed properties, regard being paid, however, to their character as roads and railways.
Article 50.
Recovery of costs.
In all cases in which the imposition of costs or the recovery of costs as a result of legal proceedings
is provided for in this Agreement, the laws of the country concerned shall be applicable.
Article 51.
Provisions relating to penalties.
Persons who, by performing or failing to perform some act, render themselves liable to punishment
under the provisions of this Agreement, shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with the laws
of the country concerned. If the latter should not contain any special penalties, a fine shall be imposed,
which, however, must not exceed the maximum fine applicable in similar cases under the laws of the
country.
Fines which are inflicted in accordance with these provisions are payable to the district or county
in which the offence was committed unless otherwise provided for by law.
Article 52.
Use of unstamped paper.
Unstamped paper may be used for protocols, applications, summonses, written statements, extracts,
inventories and other documents which are required in connection with the matters dealt with
in this Agreement.
Article 53.
Legal position with regard to watercourses which are connected with frontier watercourses,
but do not form part of them.
If the water from land or from drainage or irrigation works on the one side of the frontier has its
regular outlet in a watercourse situated on the other side of the frontier which does not come within
the provisions of this Agreement, the proprietor of the land or the association, as the case may be, is
entitled to address complaints regarding the upkeep of the watercourse to the Authorities responsible
for the watercourse, through the intermediary of the head district official of the district or the head
county official of the county in which the land or the works are situated. Such complaints shall be
dealt with according to the water laws of the country concerned, in the same manner as if the estate
in connection with which the complaint is made were situated in the same country as the watercourse.
Neither the proprietors nor the association can be compelled to contribute towards the cost of the
regularisation of such watercourses. If they are not prepared to share in the costs of regularisation
to an extent which is considered reasonable by the water authorities, the latter are empowered to make
arrangements for the erection of such installations on the watercourse in such a manner that the drainage
conditions on the land in question shall remain unchanged.
If proprietors on one side of the frontier take steps to alter existing conditions by means of installations
which increase the flow of water into a watercourse on the other side of the frontier without being
authorised to do so by a decision of the Frontier water Commission or of the competent water authorities
-on the other side of the frontier, the other persons who participate in the use of the watercourse are
entitled to adopt measures on their side of the frontier to prevent the increase in the flow of water.
The persons responsible for the latter measures must, however, submit to the decisions of their own
water authorities if complaints are made through the intermediary of the competent head district
official or head county official regarding the measures in question.

Article 54.
Damming rights in connection with such watercourses.
If damming rights on a watercourse on one side of the frontier which does not come within the provisions
of this Agreement has heretofore belonged to land on the other side of the frontier, the right
of the proprietor or usufructuary shall remain unimpaired. The right must, however, be established,
if necessary by bringing an action, to the satisfaction of the water authorities of the other country in
accordance with the water legislation of that country.
Article 55.
Extent to which the Agreement shall have binding force.
The water laws in force and the provisions for their execution shal remain in force in Germany
and Denmark, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement.
Should doubt arise as to whether, and to what extent, a matter lies within the competence of the
Frontier Water Commission, the decision of this Commission shall be linding upon all persons concerned,
subject however, to an appeal to the Supreme Frontier Water Commission.
Questions concerning the diversion of water from the reclaimed land south of the frontier, through
the locks at Neumark and Merlingsmark, and concerning the Wiedau from the Rutterbuel Lake to the
sea near the H6jer lock, and the canal at Hdjer, may not be brought before the Frontier Water Commission
without the consent of all the parties concerned.
G. DIKES.
Article 56.
Upkeep of dikes.
The area controlled by the First Sleswig Dike Union, which includes the stretch of dike between
H6jer and the southern boundary of the district of South Tondern, has been so divided, as a result of
the fixing of the frontier, that the part of the dike north of the frontier has been excluded from the area
under the Union.
The upkeep of the dikes on both sides of the frontier, shall be carried out in future under economic
and technical supervision in accordance with the legislation of each country. The two Governments
shall give information to each other regarding the laws and regulations in force for the time being for
the dikes in question.
Persons concerned in the one State who consider that their interests are prejudiced in connection
with the upkeep of the dikes in the other country, shall be entitled to bring complaints before the competent
dike authorities - the same rights being accorded to them as to the inhabitants of the country
itself - through the intermediary of the head district official or head county official concerned.

FINAL PROTOCOL.
(1) The German Government has informed the Danish Government:
that
according to the Expert-Report of the First Sleswig Dike Union of April 25, 1913, the profile
of the Sea dike in front of the New Friedrichenkoog which has now become Danish, did not satisfy
the prescribed conditions throughout its entire length
that
the New Friedrichenkoog which is responsible for the upkeep of this stretch of dike has not yet
carried out the restoration of the dike, and consequently that the necessary protection against the
danger of floods due to spring tides of storm has not been provided,.
that
however, according to the expert opinion of the German dike authorities, there is no objection to
transferring the dike in question, in compliance with the proposal of the proprietors of the Koog
of February 16, 1916, from the first class of dikes to the second, under the terms of the regulations
which have heretofore been in force, for that dike, provided that the profile of the dike is actually
brought, as a whole, up to the dimensions applicable in the case of the second class of dikes.
(2) The Danish Government takes cognisance of these statements, and declares that it will
take steps to provide as soon as possible and maintain permanently the necessary security against
the danger of floods due to spring tides by enlarging the dike in such a manner that its profile
may at least correspond to that of the second class of dikes, i. e., that it should rise to a height of
5.25 metres above the ordinary high water mark.
(3) The German Government gives a corresponding guarantee in connection with the Sea
dike between the German-Danish frontier and the southern boundary of the district of South
Tondern.
(4) Both Governments agree that the inspecting authorities of both parties on both sides of
the frontier shall undertake a levelling of the surface of the dike every five years. Information
regarding the results of these levelling operations shall be exchanged between the above-mentioned.
authorities.

STATUTES OF THE FRONTIER WATER COMMISSION AND THE SUPREME FRONTIER
WATER COMMISSION.
I. FRONTIER WATER COMMISSION.
A. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
(1) The German and Danish Governments will communicate to each other the names of the judges
or high administrative officials whom they have appointed in acordance with Article 2 of the Agreement
as members of the Frontier Water Commission and as deputies. Lots will be drawn in the German
Embassy at Copenhagen to determine which of the members representing the German and Danish Governments
is to act as president during the first three years. The German Government will notify the German
member of the result and the Danish Government will notify the Danish member. The two members
will inform their deputies of the result and the German member will inform the head district officials
(Landrate) of South Tondern and Flensburg and the Danish member will inform the head county officials
(Amtmllnner) of T6nder and Aabenraa.
When new members or deputies are appointed, or when former members or deputies are reappointed,
on the expiration of their period of office, such appointments or reappointments shall also be notified
as described above.
(2) Three years after the date on which the lots were drawn and also every three years thereafter,
the president will vacate his office and his successor will be chosen in such a manner that a president
appointed by one Government will always be succeeded by a president appointed by the other Government.
The retiring president will make arrangements with his successor for handing over his duties.
When the handing over or the taking over of these duties, as the case may be, has been completed the
German and the Danish Governments will be notified of the fact by the former and the new presidents.
Similarly, the remaining members and also the head district and head county officials will be advised
of the change by the new president.
(3) The president will apply to the German and Danish Governments and request them to appoint
new members and deputies at an early date, so that the latter may enter upon their official duties immediately
after the expiration of the term of office of the retiring members and deputies.
(4) Retiring members and deputies may be reappointed by the Governments.
(5) If it should be necessary before the expiration of the period of six years to replace a member
appointed by one of the Governments or to replace a deputy, the Government concerned will inform
the other Government of the change. Further intimation and notice will be given in accordance with
Nos. 7 and 8. The new appointment will only be valid for the remainder of the period of office of the
retiring member or deputy.
(6) The domicile of the president will be the official seat of the Frontier Water Commission.
(7) The president will notify the Governments, and also the head district officials of South Tondern
and Flensburg and the head county officials of Tondern and Apenrade, of his domicile and exact address
and the names and domiciles of the other members and deputies appointed by the Governments. He
will request the above-mentioned head district and County officials to take the necessary steps to secure
the election - provided it has not already taken place - of the remaining members and deputies by
the district committees and the county councils, and to inform him of the names of the persons elected,
together with particulars regarding their place of residence.
Retiring members and deputies may be re-elected by the district committees and county councils.
(8) As soon as the president is in possession of all the names of the members and deputies, he'will
forward a list of the same to the head district officials of the districts of South Tondern and Flensburg
and to the head county officials of the Counties of Tondern and kpenrade, with the request that the
list should be published in the district gazettes or in the newspapers in which official notifications of the
county councils usually appear. The cost of such publications will be borne by the districts and the
counties respectively.
(9) Should a vacancy occur before the expiration of the period of six years among the members
elected by the district committees or county councils or among the deputies, the president will be advised
of the fact by the head district or head county official concerned. He will then arrange that due
notice shall be given as prescribed in No. 8.
The newly-elected member or deputy will only hold office for the remainder of the term of office
ofJthe member or deputy who has retired.
B. TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS.
io) The president will be responsible for the conduct of business. He will keep a register in
which all documents received and despatched will be entered.
(iu) He may entrust the permanent or temporary control of the secretarial work to one of the
other members entitled to vote, and may, in case of necessity, employ a paid secretary and amanuenses.
(2) The Governments will supply the president with as many copies as may be required of the
Agreement for the regulation of watercourses and dikes on the German-Danish frontier, together with
the Statutes and the laws and decrees necessary for the satisfactory transaction of business.
C. ACCOUNTS.
(13) The president is responsible for seeing that the accounts are properly kept. He will keep
a cash book in which all monies received and paid out will be entered.
(14) He may delegate, temporarily or permanently, to one of the other members entitled to vote
the duty of keeping the accounts.
(15) General expenses connected with the transaction of business (writing material, postage,
secretarial work) which cannot ba included, under the provisions of the Agreement, in the costs of any
definite case, will be borne by the country of which the president is a national. The German and Danish
Governments will issue decrees stating by whom such expenses are to be borne and the office to which
the president must apply to obtain advances in view of such outlay.
The districts and counties will, upon application being made by the president, pay the necessary
advances for all other expenses.
(i6) The president will furnish a report at the close of each official year, and will forward his statement
of accounts with the necessary documents for examination to the member appointed by the other
Government and to the members who are entitled to vote. These members will give him all necessary
assistance. In the event of a member declining to give assistance, the matter will be dealt with, as far
as possible, by the Commission itself, by means of written or oral proceedings. If no solution can be
reached in this way, the president will report the matter to the German and the Danish Governments
which will settle it by joint action.
D. TRAVELLING EXPENSES AND SUBSISTENCE ALLOWANCE.
(17) The members of the Commission and their deputies will receive no remuneration for their
services. They will, however, be paid travelling expenses and subsistence allowance in accordance
with the laws of their respective countries.
(18) The German and Danish Governments will inform the president of the amounts payable in
respect of travelling expenses and subsistence allowances to the members and deputies of their respective
countries. The president will arrange for paying over these fees and their recovery from the parties
concerned in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement.
(ig) Witnesses may at the discretion of the Commission receive reasonable compensation for any
expenses they may have incurred.
E. PROCEDURE.
(2o) Applications to the Frontier Water Commission will be made to the president in writing,
accompanied by the essential documents and, where necessary, in accordance with Articles 28 and 30
of the Agreement, through the intermediary of the head district or head county officials concerned.
(21) The president may transfer to the competent German or Danish authorities, or may entirely
reject, an application which, according to the provisions of the Agreement, obviously does not come
within the jurisdiction of the Frontier Water Commission. Should the applicant insist upon his application
being finally dealt with by the Frontier Water Commission, the president will bring forward the
question of jurisdiction before the Commission for the purpose of obtaining a decision. However, he
will, first of all, point out to the applicant that in the event of his application being refused, he will be
called upon to bear the cost of the proceedings and he will then grant him a period of fourteen days in
which to withdraw his application. (As regards rejection of an application by the Commission, see
Agreement, paragraph 2, Article 30.)
(22) In all other cases, the president will bring the matter before the Commission for the purpose
of obtaining a decision. He will first of all consider which of the elected members ought to be admitted
to the Commission and, if the case is one affecting both German districts or both Danish counties, he
will, in accordance with Article 2 of the Agreement, obtain, through the intermediary of the head district
or head county officials, the decision of the two German district committees or the two Danish
county councils as to which of the two German or Danish members is to be admitted to the Commission.
The member appointed by the Government of the other side will, in accordance with Article 2 of the
Agreement, take part in all the proceedings.
(23) The president may require the applicant to support his application by fuller statements, by
the production of evidence or by naming witnesses and experts ; he may also require 'him to produce
definite papers or other similar documents by the date on which proceedings are opened.
(24) The application will be submitted for consideration to the three other members of the Commission
after it has been examined by the president and after having been completed if necessary. By
arrangement with the members, the president will fix the date on which proceedings will be opened and
will issue a summons by registered letter to the members, the applicant, other parties whose presence
may be desirable in view of the documents submitted and such witnesses and experts as may be necessary,
to attend the Court, such persons being given at least eight days' notice. In cases of considerable importance,
a public announcement inserted on three occasions in the newspapers with the largest circulation
in the districts and counties concerned may be made, in addition to the above-mentioned summons,
if the president deems such a course desirable. The former notice must be published at least two weeks
before the date on which proceedings open. In addition to the date, hour and place of holding the Court,
the question to be dealt with will be briefly described in the summons and in any announcement which
may be published.
(25) Written notice of the date of all proceedings will be forwarded to the competent head district
and head county officials. They are entitled to be present at the proceedings or to be represented thereat
and also to give their views as to the matter before the Commission, but they are not entitled to vote.
(26) The preliminary proceedings of the Frontier Water Commission with regard to any case will
be conducted on the spot.
(27) Any matter officially brought forward by a head district official or head county official will
be dealt with at the appointed time even if such official is not represented. If a case is brought forward
by a private person it may, on the other hand, even if it is submitted through the head district officials
or the head county officials, be disir'ssed as a result of a unanimous decision of the Commission, provided
the applicant does not appear. LUder such circumstances the Commission may award the parties who
have appeared in Court reasonable compensation at the cost of the applicant.
If one of the parties who has been duly summoned to appear is not present, the matter will, if the
parties who have appeared so desire, be dealt with in accordance with the information which these parties
bring forward or which the Frontier Water Commission has itself obtained as a result of its investigation
on the spot.
28. When the parties appear at the opening of the proceedings, the Frontier Water :.Ccmmission
will endeavour to bring about an amicable agreement between them. Proceedings for 'the purpose
of effecting a settlement may also be opened later. Any settlement concluded in the presence olt]the
Frontier Water Commission will have the same validity as a decision given by the Commission.
29. If one of the parties in a case considers that the Frontier Water Commission is not competent
to deal with the question, he must raise the matter at the opening of the proceedings to which he has
been summoned, in the manner described above. Before proceeding further with the case the Ccrnmission
will first settle the question of ccmpetEncy.
An appeal may naturally be lodged with the Supreme Frontier Water Commission against any such
decision. The period in which the appeal may be made will be counted as from the date on which the
decision was forwarded by registered letter.
3o. The parties may appear in Court accompanied by counsel or ,may be represented by' counsel
or any other person. Any person appearing on behalf of another must be urovided with all the necessary
powers.
31. Proceedings will be oral, and will be carried on under 'the direction' of the ,president. The
latter will arrange for the keeping of a record containing the substance of the statements made during
the proceedings. Any statement may be taken down verbatim if one of the members of the Commission
or one of the parties make such a request. The record will be signed by all the mrwm'rs of the
Commission.
32. The Frontier Water Commission must hear the witnesses and experts rnamed by theparties,
and is empowered, of its own motion, to invite and to hear the evidence of experts and other persons.
Any decision to refuse to hear the evidence of witnesses and experts can only be taken by a unanimous
vote. The Commitsion may also call upon the ordinary Courts to hear witnesses and experts-on cath.
33. If in the opinion of the Commission sufficient light has been thrown upon the matter by the
evidence adduced and the information obtained during the oral proceedings to enable a decision to
be made, this decision shall, if possible, be given in the Court itself, or, if not, as soon as practicable
and in any case within six weeks. If, on the other hand, the Ccmmission deems it essential to obtain
further material, to hear witnesses or experts who were not present, to apply for legal or other opinions,
or, in exceptional cases, submit documents, the case is to be postponed and a new and convenient date
will be fixed. If the new date cannot be appointed during the hearing itself, the summons to attend
the Court will be issued as in the case of the summons for the first proceedings.
If after the conclusion of the proceedings the Court feels convinced that further information is
necessary, it may reopen proceedings, and may issue summonses for a new date. This procedure must
also be adopted if, when the case is first brought forward or when it is being dealt with, it appears that
certain official formalities have not been carried out, without which a decision cannot be taken in the
case.
34. If maps, surveyors' plans, documents relating to levelling, estin..! s of costs or similar papers
are required for the settlement of the case, and if none of the parties are prepared of their own accord
to procure such papers, the Ccmmission will decide which of the parties shall be responsible for supplying
them.
35. If the members of the Commission do not reach 'a unanimous decision, the decisicns.ard
resolutions of the Ccmmission will be adopted by a majority vote, provided that a unanimous vote is
not expressly prescribed in these Statutes. Only the three members named in Article 2 of the Agreement
are entitled to vote.
36. If the decision is given within the Court itself, such decision shall be entered in the records,
together with a statement of the grounds of the decision, and will be announced forthwith to the parties
who have appeared.
Should it prove impossible to give judgment in the Court itself, the president is authorised to appoint
a date for a meeting of the members of the Frontier Water Ccmmission, or to take a vote in writing.
37. The terms of the decision will be drawn up by the president and signed by all :the members
entitled to vote.
A copy of the decision, together with the grounds for the same, will be forwarded by registered
letter to all the parties as soon as possible, and at latest within two weeks after the decision has been
given. A copy of the decision will also be forwarded to the head district or head county officials concerned.
Should any member entitled to vote dissent from the decision, his opinion will, if he so desires,
be entered in the records and attached to the written copy of the decision.
II. SUPREME FRONTIER WATER COMMISSION.
A.- COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
38. Upon the request of the president of the Frontier Water Commission, the Supreme Frontier
Water Commission will, in accordance with Article 3 of the Agreement, be constituted by the German
and Danish Governments by mutual agreement. The names of the president and the members, together
with particulars regarding their domicile, will be communicated by both Governments to the president
of the Frontier Water Commission. The latter will thereupon apprise the head district and head county
officials concerned in the case that the Supreme Frontier Water Commission has been constituted, and
will also give the names of the members.
39. The official seat of the Commission, which must be a place situated within the -German-
Danish frontier area, shall be selected by the president of the Supreme Frontier Water Commission.
"B. TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS.
40. As regards the transaction of business, the provisions for the Frontier Water Commission
(Nos. 10-12 of these Statutes) shall apply mutatis mutandis. The requisite number of copies of the
documents, laws and provisions mentioned in No. 12 will be forwarded to the president by the German
and Danish Governments.
C. ACCOUNTS.
41. - As regards the keeping of accounts, the provisions for the Frontier Water Commission (Nos. 13-
16 of these Statutes) shall apply mulatis mutandis, subject, however, to the following modifications :
The president will receive the necessary advances paid out by the president of the Frontier Water
Commission, and thereafter the president of the Frontier Water Commission will cause the sums in
question to be collected from the parties liable for payment under the provisions of the Agreement.
On the conclusion of the case for which the Supreme Frontier Water Commission is summoned,
the president will submit to the other members of the Supreme Frontier Water Commission accounts
showing all the expenditure, together with the relevant documents, and thereafter these members will
give him the necessary assistance under the provisions of No. 16. The president will then forward
the accounts and the relevant documents to the president of the Frontier Water Commission, to enable
the latter to make arrangements for finally settling the accounts with those parties who have to pay
the costs of the case. The accounts will be filed among the documents of the Frontier Water Commission.
D. INDEMNITIES, TRAVELLING EXPENSES AND SUBSISTENCE ALLOWANCE.
42. The indemnity for the president will be settled by agreement between the German and Danish
Governments on the one hand and the Government of the Netherlands on the other. The fees payable
to the other members and to witnesses will be fixed on the same basis as in the case of the Frontier Water
Commission (Nos. 17-19 of these Statutes).
E. PROCEDURE.
43. The president of the Supreme Frontier Water Commission will request the president of the
Frontier Water Commission to forward to him all the documents connected with the case for which
the Supreme Frontier Water Commission has been summoned, together with copies of the records taken
down during the hearing of the case. After noting the contents of these documents, and after ordering
any further enquiries which he may think necessary, he will forward the documents in the case, etc.
to the other members of the Commission for their consideration.
44. If the president is of opinion that the case is sufficiently complete, he will, by arrangement
with the other members of the Commission, determine the date, hour and place of the opening proceedings,
which, whenever necessary, must be conducted on the spot. All persons whose evidence appears to be
necessary will be summoned to attend the Court. The members of the Frontier Water Commission
and also the head district and head county officials concerned will, even if it appears uncessary to summon
them to Court, nevertheless be notified of the date of the proceedings, and must be heard if they
desire to give evidence.
45. If any party does not appear in court, it is assumed that he has nothing to add to the statements
which he made before the Frontier Water Commission. Should the parties appear in court,
the Supreme Frontier Water Commission will first of all endeavour to bring about an agreement. The
Commission may, if the progress of the hearing occasions it, order or allow the productions of further
documents and evidence, hear further explanations, or apply to the ordinary courts to take the evidence
of witnesses and experts on oath. In the event of new evidence being produced against any party,
he must, if he has not appeared before the Supreme Frontier Water Commission, be expressly notified
of such evidence and be given an opportunity to make a counterstatement. In other respects, the
procedure before the Supreme Frontier Water Commission shall conform mutatis mutandis to the provisions
laid down for the procedure for the Frontier Water Commission (Nos. 20-37 of these Statutes).
In any case, the decision will be given within a period of eight weeks after the close of the hearing.
The decision will also be communicated by the president of the Supreme Frontier Water Commission to
the president of the Frontier Water Commission. The latter will notify the competent head district
and head county officials.
46. All the documents connected with the case will be preserved by the Frontier Water Commission.
III. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
METHOD OF SUPPLEMENTING THE STATUTES.
47. The Frontier Water Commission and also the Supreme Water Commission may issue provisions
supplementary to these Statutes. It is, however, a necessary condition that supplementary
provisions must not be inconsistent with the foregoing provisions in these Statutes and that they should
be passed by a unanimous vote of the members of the Commission and, in the case of the Frontier Water
Commission, with the assent of the fourth member also. Otherwise, any additions and also any amendments
require the assent of the German and Danish Governments.
