AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT
OF THE CZECHOSLOVAK SOCIALIST REPUBLIC AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE HUNGARIAN PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
A RIVER ADMINISTRATION IN THE RAJKA-GONYV
SECTOR OF THE DANUBE. SIGNED AT PRAGUE,
ON 27 FEBRUARY 1968
The Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Government
of the Hungarian People's Republic, considering the Convention regarding
the regime of navigation on the Danube, signed at Belgrade on 18 August 1948,
and the resolution adopted by the Danube Commission at its third session, held
from 10 to 15 December 1950 at Galatz, have agreed, in the interests of safeguarding
and improving the conditions for navigation in the Czechoslovak-Hungarian
frontier sector of the Danube, to conclude an agreement concerning the establishment
of a River Administration in the Rajka-G6nyui sector of the Danube.
They have for this purpose appointed as their plenipotentiaries
The Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic:
Josef Smrkovsk , Minister of Forest and Water Resources;
The Government of the Hungarian People's Republic:
Imre D6gen, Chief of the General Water Resources Administration of the
State,
who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have
agreed as follows :
Article 1
PURPOSE AND TITLE OF THE RIVER ADMINISTRATION
(1) The Contracting Parties shall establish a River Administration (hereinafter
referred to as "the Administration") in the joint Czechoslovak-Hungarian
sector of the Danube between Rajka and G6nyii for the purpose of ensuring that
the hydraulic works necessary for maintaining and improving the fairway are
carried out and for the purpose of regulating navigation conditions.
(2) The Administration shall be designated:
"Rie~na administricia v fiseku Dunaja Rajka-Gonyii" in the Slovak language;
"Rajka-Gnyiii Dunaszakasz Folyami Igazgat6sdg" in the Hungarian
language.
Article 2
HEADQUARTERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION
The headquarters of the Administration shall be at Komirno in the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
Article 3
JURISDICTION OF THE ADMINISTRATION
The jurisdiction of the Administration shall comprise that sector of the
Danube river-bed (hereinafter referred to as "the sector") extending from
Rajka to G6nyii between km 1850 and km 1791.
Article 4
LEGAL STATUS AND PRIVILEGES OF THE ADMINISTRATION
(1) The Administration, as a joint Czechoslovak-Hungarian organization,
shall be a body corporate.
(2) The Administration shall consist of a Council (with ten members) and
of a secretariat, headed by a director.
(3) The legal status and privileges of the Administration shall be governed
by the Convention on the legal status and privileges of international organisations
concerned with economic co-operation, signed at Warsaw on 9 September 1966.
Article 5
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES, SEAL AND FLAG OF THE ADMINISTRATION
(1) The official languages of the Administration shall be Czech, Slovak and
Hungarian.
(2) The official seal and flag of the Administration shall be decided upon by
the Council.
Article 6
FUNCTIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATION
(1) The functions of the Administration shall specifically include:
(a) The making of provisions for studies, investigations and research, for
preparatory and project documentation and for the contracting for and supervision
and acceptance of hydraulic works to be carried out in the sector;
(b) The safeguarding of navigation conditions, the establishment of navigation
regulations for the sector and supervision to ensure compliance therewith;
(c) Determination of the amount and method of collection of navigation charges;
(d) The collection of navigation charges;
(e) The conduct of the technical, economic, administrative, legal and financial
business connected with its activities.
(2) The functions of the Administration shall extend to water-management
activities outside the fairway in so far as such activities have a bearing on the
maintenance of -the fairway and the improvement of navigation conditions; they
shall not extend to flood-control or ice-control activities or the maintenance of
ports and dikes.
Article 7
EXECUTION OF HYDRAULIC WORKS
(1) For the purposes of article 6, paragraph 1 (a), the term "hydraulic
  works" means all activities, including maintenance and dredging operations,
intended to establish suitable dimensions for the fairway and to ensure the regular
flow of high, mean and low water and the unimpeded movement of ice along the
river-bed.
(2) The Administration shall provide for the execution of the hydraulic
works in such a way that the relevant contracts are given to the competent
organizations of the two States.
(3) The works for which they have been given contracts shall ordinarily
be carried out by the organizations of the two States in the territory of their own
State. This provision shall not apply to dredging operations or to the supply
and transport of construction materials.
(4) Provision for the buoyage of the fairway and for a signal service in the
sector shall be made by the Administration by means, as a rule, of its own staff
and resources.
Article 8
STUDIES AND SURVEYS
The Contracting Parties shall make available to the Administration the
results of previous studies and surveys which relate to the fairway and are needed
by the Administration, including existing documentation on completed construction
and project documentation on construction in progress or being
planned. The Administration shall inform the competent organizations of the
two States of the results of surveys and studies and of work carried out in the
sector.
Article 9
NAVIGATION REGULATIONS
(1) The special regulations governing navigation and the safety of vessels in
the sector (article 6, paragraph I (b)) must take account of the special nature of
the sector and be in harmony with the recommendations of the Danube Commission
concerning navigation.
(2) Temporary measures shall be taken by the Administration as required
for safe and orderly navigation or the execution of hydraulic works. A navigation
notice shall be issued by the Administration concerning such measures.
Article 10
THE COUNCIL
The activities of the Administration shall be directed by a Council, which
shall be composed of a representative of the Government of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic and a representative of the Government of the Hungarian
People's Republic, who shall be appointed in accordance with the Agreement
in force between the two States concerning the regulation of water-management
questions relating to frontier waters.
Article 11
FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL
The functions of the Council shall specifically include:
(a) The direction and supervision of the activities of the Administration;
(b) Approval of the staffing arrangements and wage schedules for the staff of the
Administration;
(c) Approval of the annual plan of works to be carried out in the sector as part
of the comprehensive annual plan of works for the entire joint Czechoslovak-
Hungarian sector of the Danube, and approval of the budget of the Administration;
(d) Approval of the preparatory and project documentation for hydraulic works
and of the acceptance of completed works;
(e) Supervision of the management of the Administration and approval of the
annual report and accounts;
(f) The appointment and recall of the director and his deputy;
(g) Consideration of the reports and proposals of the director and the taking of
appropriate action on the basis thereof;
(h) Supervision of measures relating to the improvement of navigation conditions
in the sector, and approval of regulations concerning the r6gime of
navigation;
(i) Approval of the amount and method of collection of navigation charges;
(j) Approval of the organizational statute of the secretariat and amendments
thereto;
(k) Settlement of disputes arising out of the application of this Agreement.
Article 12
SESSIONS OF THE COUNCIL
(1) The Council shall hold regular and special sessions.
(2) Regular sessions shall as a rule be held once a year, and special sessions
as necessary. A special session shall be held on the proposal of one of the representatives
and shall be convened within one month.
(3) The regular sessions of the Council shall be held alternately in the territories
of the two States, and the special sessions at the headquarters of the Administration.
(4) The session shall be convened by the representative of the Contracting
Party in whose territory the session is to be held.
(5) The agenda shall be agreed upon by the representatives before the session;
it may be modified in the course of the session by mutual agreement.
(6) The sessions of the Council shall also be attended by deputy representatives
designated in accordance with the Agreement in force between the Contracting
Parties concerning the regulation of water-management questions relating to
frontier waters. The deputy representatives shall carry out the duties of the
representatives in the Council when the representatives are unable to discharge
their functions or when they delegate their functions to the deputy representatives.
(7) The representatives may, where necessary, call in expert advisers to
attend a session of the Council.
Article 13
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE COUNCIL
(1) Regular sessions of the Council shall be presided over by the representative
of the Contracting Party in whose territory the session is held. In the case
of special sessions, the representatives shall alternate as chairmen.
(2) The decisions of the Council shall be adopted unanimously. The
Council shall keep minutes of its meetings.
(3) Detailed rules of procedure shall be drawn up by the Council.
Article 14
ORGANIZATION OF THE SECRETARIAT
The organization of the secretariat, the legal status of the director and of his
deputy and the contractual relations of the employees shall be governed by the
organizational statute.
Article 15
COSTS CONNECTED WITH THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATION
(1) The hydraulic works to be carried out in the sector shall be apportioned
between the Contracting Parties in physical units on an equal basis. Provision
for the costs of such works shall be made by the Contracting Parties in their
budgets. The Administration shall keep a record of completed hydraulic works
in physical units and of the expenditure by the Contracting Parties on such works.
(2) Any balance in connexion with the hydraulic works contracted for by
the Administration which remains in favour of one Contracting Party at the end
of the year shall be settled by the other Contracting Party in physical units
during the following year. If settlement cannot be effected in this manner
within five years, the balance shall be settled within the framework of the payments
agreement in force between the two States.
(3) Detailed regulations concerning the method of apportioning hydraulic
works and settling balances shall be made by the Council.
(4) The funds required to cover the expenditure estimates in the budget of
the Administration (wages of staff, rent of office premises, buoyage of the fairway
and so on) shall be provided by the Contracting Parties to the Administration in
equal shares. Settlements between the two States in respect of such funds shall
be effected through the accounts for non-commercial payments.
(5) The material costs of regular sessions of the Council shall be borne by
the receiving Party, and those of special sessions shall be borne by the Administration.
Travel and per diem shall be paid by the sending authorities.
Article 16
DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF INCOME OF THE ADMINISTRATION
Navigation charges shall be apportioned equally between the Contracting
Parties in the currency in which they were collected. They shall be used for
the payment of costs connected with the activities of the Administration and
with hydraulic works carried out in the sector.
Article 17
CROSSING OF THE STATE FRONTIERS
The crossing of the State frontiers by staff of the Administration shall be
effected in accordance with the frontier-traffic agreements in force between the
two States.
Article 18
PROVISION OF BUILDINGS AND ACCOMMODATION
.The Contracting Party in whose territory the Administration has its headquarters
shall, in return for payment of the rent, provide for the office and
working premises of the Administration and for the accommodation of its staff.
Article 19
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ADMINISTRATION AND THE DANUBE COMMISSION
Relations between the Administration and the Danube Commission shall
be governed by the provisions of the Convention regarding the r~gime of navigation
on the Danube, signed at Belgrade on 18 August 1948.
Article 20
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ADMINISTRATION AND THE MIXED CZECHOSLOVAKHUNGARIAN
TECHNICAL COMMISSION
(1) Save as otherwise provided in the present Agreement, the provisions of
the Agreement in force between the two States concerning the regulation of water-
management questions relating to frontier waters shall apply to water-management
questions affecting the sector. Accordingly, the Mixed Czechoslovak-
Hungarian Technical Commission shall continue to be responsible for the regulation
of all water-management questions affecting the sector other than those
directly connected with the maintenance of the fairway and the improvement
of navigation conditions.
(2) The comprehensive annual plan of hydraulic works in the joint Czechoslovak-
Hungarian sector of the Danube, including the Administration sector,
shall be discussed and co-ordinated by the Mixed Technical Commission in
accordance with the proposals of the competent water-management agencies of
the two States and of the Administration. In making its proposals for the annual
plan, the secretariat shall be guided by the principle that the amount of works in
the sector shall, in so far as possible, be equal on both sides. A decision by the
Council shall be required in the case of any exceptions to this principle. The
plan of the Administration must be approved by the Council.
Article 21
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Any disputes arising out of the application of this Agreement which are not
settled by the Council shall be referred to the Contracting Parties for a decision.
Article 22
FINAL PROVISIONS
(1) This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of its signature.
(2) The date on which the Administration shall commence operations shall
be determined by the Council.
(3) The Agreement shall remain in force for a period of fifteen years and,
unless denounced by one of the Contracting Parties, shall continue in force for
an additional fifteen-year period.
(4) The Agreement may not be denounced until seven years have elapsed
from the commencement of operations by the Administration. After the expiry
of that period, it may be denounced in writing at any time, with effect from 31
December of the year following notification of the denunciation to the other
Contracting Party.
(5) The liquidation of the Administration shall be effected on a basis of
mutual agreement by representatives of the Contracting Parties especially
appointed for that purpose.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Plenipotentiaries of the Contracting Parties have
signed the present Agreement and have thereto affixed their seals.
DONE at Prague on 27 February 1968 in duplicate in the Slovak and Hungarian
languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government For the Government
of the Czechoslovak of the Hungarian
Socialist Republic: People's Republic:
J. SMRKOVSKY D GEN Imre
EXCHANGE OF LETTERS
I
Prague, 27 February 1968
Dear Comrade,
On the occasion of the signing of the Agreement between the Government
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Government of the Hungarian
People's Republic concerning the establishment of a River Administration in the
Rajka-G6nyui sector of the Danube, I have the honour to inform you that in the
course of the discussions relating to the conclusion of this Agreement the government
delegations reached agreement on the following basic questions :
1. The Administration shall commence operations in the sector on 1 April
1968, by which date its technical status will have been registered.
2. The budget estimates of the Administration for the year 1968 are Kcs
2,008,000, of which Kcs 690,000 are allocated to the wage fund.
3. Under the manning table which has been agreed upon, the secretariat
will have a staff of twenty-five persons in the year 1968.
4. On the basis of the principles accepted by both Parties for the calculation
of navigation charges, the charges for the year 1968 will be 0.127 transferable
roubles or $US 0.141 per ton of capacity.
With comradely greetings,
J. SMRKOVSK C
Comrade D6gen Imre
Chief, General Water Resources
Administration
II
Prague, 27 February 1968
Dear Comrade,
[See letter I]
DEGEN IMRE
Comrade Josef Smrkovsky
Minister of Forest and Water Resources
