AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS CONCERNING THE PEACEFUL USES
OF NUCLEAR ENERGY
The Government of Australia and the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Desiring to promote their cooperation in the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy;
Reaffirming their commitment to ensure that the
international development and the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes furthers the objective of the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons;
Mindful that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
Australia are participants in the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of 1 July 1968,
hereinafter referred to as the "Treaty";
Mindful that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is a
nuclear-weapon State as defined by the Treaty and that on
21 February 1985 it concluded an agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency, hereinafter referred to
as the "Agency", entitled Agreement between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the International Atomic
Energy Agency for the application of safeguards in the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;
  Mindful that Australia, as a non-nuclear-weapon State, has,
  under the Treaty, undertaken not to manufacture or
  otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear
  explosive devices and that on 10 July 1974 it concluded an
  agreement with the Agency entitled "Agreement between
Australia and the International Atomic Energy A;ency for
the application of safeguards in connection with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons";
  Reaffirming their support for the Treaty and their desire
  to promote universal adherence to the Treaty;
  Reaffirming their support for the Agency safeguards system
  and their desire to work together to ensure its continued
  effectiveness;
  Taking account of their commitment to the principles of
  openness and transparency in matters relating to nuclear
  energy, non-proliferation and safeguards practice;
  Recalling that they have both adhered to the Convention on
  the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material of 3 March 1980;
  Have agreed as follows:
    ARTICLE I
  For the purposes of this Agreement:
    (a) 'nuclear material' means any 'source material' or
  'special fissionable material' as those terms are defined
  in Article XX of the Statute  of the Agency. Any
  determination by the Board of Governors of the Agency
  altering the effect of Article XX of the Statute shall have
  effect under this Agreement only when the Parties have
  informed each other in writing that they accept such
  alteration;
  (b) 'military purpose' means direct military applications
  of nuclear energy such as nuclear weapons, military nuclear
  propulsion, military nuclear rocket engines or military
  nuclear reactors;
  (c) 'Agency Agreement with the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics' means the Agreement between the Union of Soviet
  Socialist Republics and the International Atomic Energy
  Agency for the application of safeguards in the Union of
  Soviet Socialist Republics of 21 February 1985 or any
  subsequent agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist
  Republics and the Agency which provides for the application
  in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of safeguards at
  least equivalent in scope to those applied under that
  Agreement.
  ARTICLE II
  1. The Parties shall encourage and facilitate cooperation
  on matters within the scope of this Agreement.
  2. This Agreement shall apply to:
    (a) all nuclear material transferred between the Union of
  Soviet Socialist Republics and Australia whether the
  nuclear material is transferred directly or through a third
  country; and
  (b) all forms of nuclear material prepared by chemical or
  physical processes or isotopic separation provided that the
  quantity of nuclear material so prepared shall only be
  regarded as falling within the scope of this Agreement in
  the same proportion as the quantity of nuclear material
  used in its preparation, and subject to this Agreement,
  bears to the total quantity of nuclear material so used.
  3. Nuclear material subject to this Agreement shall be
  transferred only to a natural or legal person identified by
  the receiving Party to the supplying Party as duly
  authorised to receive that material.
  ARTICLE III
  1. Nuclear material subject to this Agreement in the
  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall remain subject to
  the provisions of this Agreement until it has been
  transferred beyond the jurisdiction of the Union of Soviet
  Socialist Republics in accordance with paragraph 1 of
  Article VIII of this Agreement.
  2. Nuclear material subject to this Agreement in
  Australia shall remain subject to the provisions of this
  Agreement until it has been transferred beyond the
  jurisdiction of Australia.
  ARTICLE IV
  1. Nuclear material subject to this Agreement in the
  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall undergo only
  toll-processing for the purposes of conversion, enrichment
  and fuel fabrication and shall not be for use there.
  2. Neither Party shall enrich nuclear material subject to
  this Agreement to 20 per cent or greater in the isotope
  uranium-235 without the prior written consent of the other
  Party.
  ARTICLE V
  Nuclear material subject to this Agreement shall not be
  diverted to the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other
  nuclear explosive devices, or for research on or
  development of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
  devices, or be diverted in any way to further any military
  purpose.
  ARTICLE VI
  1. The Parties shall notify each other of transfers and
  retransfers of nuclear material subject to this Agreement
  in accordance with the procedures set out in the
  administrative arrangements.
  2. The Parties shall make periodic reports to each other
  on nuclear material subject to this Agreement.
  3. Each Party shall inform the Agency of all transfers
  and retransfers of nuclear material subject to this
  Agreement to and from its jurisdiction.
  ARTICLE VII
  1. Each Party shall take such measures as are necessary
  to ensure adequate physical protection of nuclear material
  subject to this Agreement within its jurisdiction.
  2. In addition to its obligations under the Convention on
  the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material of
  3 March 1980, each Party shall, as a minimum, apply the
  physical protection measures set out in Annex B to Agency
  document INFCIRC/254 entitled "Communications received from
certain Member States regarding Guidelines for the Export
of Nuclear Material, Equipment or Technology". Any
  alteration to or replacement of Annex B to Agency document
  INFCIRC/254 shall have effect under this Agreement only
  when the Parties have informed each other in writing that
  they accept such alteration or replacement.
  3. Each Party shall be guided by the recommendations of
  Agency document INFCIRC/225/Rev.2 entitled "The Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material" in the implementation of
  its physical protection measures. Any alteration to or
  replacement of Agency document INFCIRC/225/Rev.2 shall have
  effect under this Agreement only when the Parties have
  informed each other in writing that they accept such
  alteration or replacement.
  4. The Parties shall consult within thirty days at the
  request of either Party on matters concerning levels of
  physical protection and general matters relating to
  physical protection, including on recommendations made on
  the subject from time to time by international expert
  groups.
  ARTICLE VIII
  1. At the conclusion of the processing referred to in
  paragraph I of Article IV of this Agreement, quantities of
  nuclear material as referred to in paragraph 2(b) of
  Article II shall be retransferred as expeditiously as
  possible to a country in relation to which an agreement is
  in force with the Government of Australia concerning
  nuclear transfers and in relation to which country the
  Government of Australia has not advised the Government of
  the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that it has found
  it necessary to suspend, cancel or refrain from making
  nuclear transfers.
  2. In the event that the Parties determine that nuclear
  material subject to this Agreement cannot for the time
  being be retransferred from the Union of Soviet Socialist
  Republics in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article,
  then such nuclear material shall be subject either to
  safeguards under the Agency Agreement with the Union of
  Soviet Socialist Republics or to other safeguards
  arrangements jointly accepted by the Parties.
  ARTICLE IX
  The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
  shall, upon the request of the Government of Australia,
  provide the Government of Australia in writing with the
  overall conclusions which the Agency has drawn from its
  verification activities, under the Agency Agreement with
  the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, in so far as they
  relate to nuclear material subject to this Agreement.
  ARTICLE X
  The competent authorities of the Parties shall establish
  administrative arrangements to ensure the effective
  implementation of this Agreement including notification
  procedures to implement Articles VI and VIII of this
  Agreement. Until the appropriate Party notifies the other
  Party otherwise, the competent authority of the Government
  of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics the Ministry of
  Atomic Power and Industry of the U.S.S.R and for the
  Government of Australia shall be the Australian Safeguards
  Office.
  ARTICLE XI
  The Parties shall consult as required concerning
  implementation of this Agreement and in any case shall
  consult within thirty days at the request of either Party.
  When a request for consultations is made either Party may
  invite the Agency to participate in these consultations.
  ARTICLE XII
  1. Any dispute arising out of the interpretation or
  application of this Agreement shall be settled by
  negotiations that the Parties undertake to carry out in
  good faith.
  2. If after the best efforts of both Parties, such a
  dispute is not settled by negotiations, it shall, be
  submitted, at the request of either Party, to an arbitral
  tribunal composed of three arbitrators appointed in
  accordance with the provisions of this Article.
  3. Each Party shall designate one arbitrator who may be
  its national and the two arbitrators so designated shall
  appoint a third, a national of a third state, who shall be
  Chairman.
  4. If within sixty days of the request for arbitration
  either Party has not designated an arbitrator, either Party
  to the dispute may request the Secretary General of the
  United Nations to appoint an arbitrator. The same
  procedure shall apply if, within sixty days of the
  designation or appointment of the second arbitrator, the
  third arbitrator has not been appointed.
  5. All decisions shall be made by majority vote of all
  the members of the arbitral tribunal. The decisions of the
  tribunal, including those concerning its procedure,
  jurisdiction and the apportionment of the expenses of
  arbitration between the Parties, shall be binding on both
  Parties and shall be implemented by them in good faith.
  ARTICLE XIII
  If either Party at any time following entry into force of
  this Agreement does not comply with this Agreement or
  materially breaches, terminates or abrogates its Agreement
  with the Agency as defined in the preamble and Article 1(c)
  of this Agreement, the other Party shall have the right:
    (a) to suspend or cancel further transfers of nuclear
  material; and
  (b) to require the return of nuclear material subject to
  this Agreement.
  ARTICLE XIV
  This Agreement may be amended by agreement between the
  Parties.
  ARTICLE XV
  This Agreement shall enter into force on the date that the
  Parties, by an exchange of Notes, specify for its entry
  into force and shall remain in force indefinitely unless it
  is otherwise agreed by the Parties.
  Done at Canberra on the 15th day of February 1990 in
  duplicate in the Russian and English languages, each text
  being equally authoritative.
  For the Government
  of the Union of Soviet
  Socialist Republics:
    I. Rogachev
  For the Government of Australia:
    S. Crean
