Joint statement issued at Madrid on 19 October 1989 by the
delegations of the Republic of Argentina and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
1. Delegations of the British and Argentine Governments met in Madrid from 17 to
19 October 1989. The British delegation was led by Sir Crispin Tickell, United
Kingdom Permanent Representative to the United Nations, and the Argentine
delegation by Ambassador Lucio Garcia del Solar, Special Representative of the 
Government of Argentina.
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the topics agreed at their first
meeting in New York in August, namely:
"(i) Introductory statements;
"(ii) Formula on sovereignty
"(iii) Organisation of work
"(iv) British-Argentine relations (including the future of diplomatic and
consular relations):
"(a) Measures to build confidence and avoid incidents in the military sphere;
"(b) Trade and financial relations;
"(c) Communication links: air and sea;
"(d) Fishery conservation and future co-operation on fisheries;
"(e) Contacts between the Falkland Islands and the continental mainland;
"(f) Cultural, scientific and sporting relations;
"(g) Other bilateral matters".
2. Both Governments agreed that:
"(i) Nothing in the conduct or content of the present meeting or of any
similar subsequent meetings shall be interpreted as:
"(a) A change in the position of the United Kingdom with regard to
sovereignty or territorial and maritime jurisdiction over the
Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands and
the surrounding maritime areas;
"(b) A change in the position of the Argentine Republic with regard to
sovereignty or territorial and maritime jurisdiction over the
Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands and
the surrounding maritime areas;
"(c) Recognition of or support for the position of the United Kingdom or the
Argentine Republic with regard to sovereignty or territorial and
maritime jurisdiction over the Falkland Islands, South Georgia and
the South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas;
"(ii) No act or activity carried out by the United Kingdom, the Argentine
Republic or third parties as a consequence and in implementation of
anything agreed to in the present meeting or in any similar subsequent
meetings shall constitute a basis for affirming, supporting, or denying
the position of the United Kingdom or the Argentine Republic regarding
the sovereignty or territorial and maritime jurisdiction over the
Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas".
3. The Governments confirmed their commitment to respect fully the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular:
- The obligation to settle disputes exclusively by peaceful means; and
- The obligation to refrain from the threat or the use of force.
The two Governments noted that all hostilities between them had ceased. Each
Government undertook not to pursue any claim against the other, including nationals
of the other, in respect of loss or damage arising from the hostilities
and all other actions in and around the Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands before 1989.
4. Both Governments agreed, following notification of the two protecting Powers,
to re-establish consular relations at the level of Consul General.
5. Both Governments reaffirmed their wish to normalize relations between their
two countries with a view to resuming diplomatic relations and agreed to include
the question of diplomatic relations on the agenda for their next meeting.
6. The delegations exchanged views and proposals about measures to build
confidence and avoid incidents in the military sphere. As a result of these
exchanges, they agreed to set up a working group to consider these views and
proposals, and to report to their respective Governments with the aim of pursuing
the issue at the next substantive meeting.
Meanwhile, with the aim of strengthening mutual confidence, the British
delegation announced the British Government's decisions:
To dispense with the current requirement of prior agreement for Argentine
merchant shipping to enter the Protection Zone;
To align the limits of the Protection Zone with those of the Conservation Zone.
These changes will come into effect at an early date to be announced.
The Argentine delegation took note of this announcement.
7. Each delegation affirmed the wish of its Government to promote commercial and
financial relations. Both Governments agreed to lift all remaining restrictions
and restrictive practices imposed since 1982. In the light of this agreement, the British
Government agreed to facilitate the establishment of co-operative links
between Argentina and the European Community.
8. The British delegation announced that the Export Credit Guarantee Department
would make available short-term cover for British exporters to Argentina under
irrevocable letters of credit from Argentine banks. The British delegation also
announced that a trade mission organized by the Latin American Trade Advisory Group
of the British Overseas Trade Board would visit Argentina from 27 November to 1 December
1989 with the financial support of the Department of Trade and Industry. The Argentine
delegation welcomed this proposed visit.
9. Both Governments agreed to the resumption of air and maritime communications
between the two countries. They will invite their respective civil aviation
authorities to open appropriate negotiations.
10. As regards fisheries, both delegations put forward their respective
positions. They agreed to set up a working group with a view to making proposals
for exchanges of information for measures of co-operation and for conservation
measures, to be reported to a future meeting.
11. The two delegations exchanged views on contacts between the Falkland Islands
and the continental mainland, and agreed on the benefit of developing such links
and to keep the matter under review.
12. Both delegations expressed their support for the cultural, scientific and 
sporting relations which already existed and look forward to their further
development. They expressed their hope that as normalization advanced more formal
relations in these fields would be resumed, for example through a new cultural
agreement.
13. It was agreed that both Governments would jointly send the text of the present
statement to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the distribution as an
official document of the General Assembly, under item 35 of the agenda of the current session,
and of the Security Council. The United Kingdom will transmit this joint statement to the Commission
of the European Community, and, for its part, the Republic of Argentina will do likewise to the
Organization of American States.
14. Both delegations agreed to hold their next substantive meeting in Madrid on 14 and 15 February 1990.
15. In conclusion, both delegations expressed their thanks to the Spanish
Government for its generous hospitality and support.


