PROTOCOL TO THE 1979 CONVENTION ON LONG-RANGE TRANSBOUNDARY
AIR POLLUTION TO ABATE ACIDIFICATION, EUTROPHICATION AND
GROUND-LEVEL OZONE
The Parties.
Determined to implement the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air
Pollution,
Aware that nitrogen oxides, sulphur, volatile organic compounds and
reduced nitrogen compounds have been associated with adverse effects on human
health and the environment,
Concerned that critical loads of acidification, critical loads of
nutrient nitrogen and critical levels of ozone for human health and vegetation
are still exceeded in many areas of the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe's region,
Concerned also that emitted nitrogen oxides, sulphur and volatile organic
compounds, as well as secondary pollutants such as ozone and the reaction
products of ammonia, are transported in the atmosphere over long distances and
may have adverse transboundary effects,
Recognizing that emissions from Parties within the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe's region contribute to air pollution on the
hemispheric and global scales, and recognizing the potential for transport
between continents and the need for further study with regard to that
potential,
Recognizing also that Canada and the United States of America are
bilaterally negotiating reductions of emissions of nitrogen oxides and
volatile organic compounds to address the transboundary ozone effect,
Recognizing furthermore that Canada will undertake further reductions of
emissions of sulphur by 2010 through the implementation of the Canada-wide
Acid Rain Strategy for Post-2000, and that the United States is committed to
the implementation of a nitrogen oxides reduction programme in the eastern
United States and to the reduction in emissions necessary to meet its national
ambient air quality standards for particulate matter,
Resolved to apply a multi-effect, multi-pollutant approach to preventing
or minimizing the exceedances of critical loads and levels,
Taking into account the emissions from certain existing activities and
installations responsible for present air pollution levels and the development
of future activities and installations,
Aware that techniques and management practices are available to reduce
emissions of these substances,
Resolved to take measures to anticipate, prevent or minimize emissions of
these substances, taking into account the application of the precautionary
approach as set forth in principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development,
Reaffirming that States have, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international law, the sovereign right to
exploit their own resources pursuant to their own environmental and
developmental policies, and the responsibility to ensure that activities
within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of
other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
Conscious of the need for a cost-effective regional approach to combating
air pollution that takes account of the variations in effects and abatement
costs between countries,
Noting the important contribution of the private and non-governmental
sectors to knowledge of the effects associated with these substances and
available abatement techniques, and their role in assisting in the reduction
of emissions to the atmosphere,
Bearing in mind that measures taken to reduce emissions of sulphur,
nitrogen oxides, ammonia and volatile organic compounds should not constitute
a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised
restriction on international competition and trade,
Taking into consideration best available scientific and technical
knowledge and data on emissions, atmospheric processes and effects on human
health and the environment of these substances, as well as on abatement costs,
and acknowledging the need to improve this knowledge and to continue
scientific and technical cooperation to further understanding of these issues,
Noting that under the Protocol concerning the Control of Emissions of
Nitrogen Oxides or their Transboundary Fluxes, adopted at Sofia on
31 October 1988, and the Protocol concerning the Control of Emissions of
Volatile Organic Compounds or their Transboundary Fluxes, adopted at Geneva on
18 November 1991, there is already provision to control emissions of nitrogen
oxides and volatile organic compounds, and that the technical annexes to both
those Protocols already contain technical guidance for reducing these
emissions,
Noting also that under the Protocol on Further Reduction of Sulphur
Emissions, adopted at Oslo on 14 June 1994, there is already provision to
reduce sulphur emissions in order to contribute to the abatement of acid
deposition by diminishing the exceedances of critical sulphur depositions,
which have been derived from critical loads of acidity according to the
contribution of oxidized sulphur compounds to the total acid deposition in
1990,
Noting furthermore that this Protocol is the first agreement under the
Convention to deal specifically with reduced nitrogen compounds,
Bearing in mind that reducing the emissions of these substances may
provide additional benefits for the control of other pollutants, including in
particular transboundary secondary particulate aerosols, which contribute to
human health effects associated with exposure to airborne particulates,
Bearing in mind also the need to avoid, in so far as possible, taking
measures for the achievement of the objectives of this Protocol that aggravate
other health and environment-related problems,
Noting that measures taken to reduce the emissions of nitrogen oxides and
ammonia should involve consideration of the full biogeochemical nitrogen cycle
and, so far as possible, not increase emissions of reactive nitrogen including
nitrous oxide which could aggravate other nitrogen-related problems,
Aware that methane and carbon monoxide emitted by human activities
contribute, in the presence of nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds,
to the formation of tropospheric ozone, and
Aware also of the commitments that Parties have assumed under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of the present Protocol,
1. "Convention" means the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air
Pollution, adopted at Geneva on 13 November 1979;
2. "EMEP" means the Cooperative Programme for Monitoring and Evaluation of
Long-range Transmission of Air Pollutants in Europe;
3. ''Executive Body" means the Executive Body for the Convention constituted
under article 10, paragraph l, of the Convention;
4. "Commission" means the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe;
5. "Parties" means, unless the context otherwise requires, the Parties to
the present Protocol;
6. "Geographical scope of EMEP" means the area defined in article 1,
paragraph 4, of the Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-range
Transboundary Air Pollution on Long-term Financing of the Cooperative
Programme for Mcnitoring and Evaluation of the Long-range Transmission of Air
Pollutants in Europe (EMEP), adopted at Geneva on 28 September 1984;
7. "Emission" means the release of a substance from a point or diffuse
source into the atmosphere;
8. "Nitrogen oxides" means nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide, expressed as
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) ;
9. "Reduced nitrogen compounds" means ammonia and its reaction products;
10. "Sulphur" means all sulphur compounds, expressed as sulphur dioxide
(S02) ;
11. "Volatile organic compounds", or "VOCs", means, unless otherwise
specified, all organic compounds of an anthropogenic nature, other than
methane, that are capable of producing photochemical oxidants by reaction with
nitrogen oxides in the presence of sunlight;
12. "Critical load" means a quantitative estimate of an exposure to one or
more pollutants below which significant harmful effects on specified sensitive
elements of the environment do not occur, according to present knowledge;
13. "Critical levels" means concentrations of pollutants in the atmosphere
above which direct adverse effects on receptors, such as human beings, plants,
ecosystems or materials, may occur, according to present knowledge;
14. "Pollutant emissions management area", or "PEMA", means an area
designated in annex III under the conditions laid down in article 3,
paragraph 9;
15. "Stationary source" means any fixed building, structure, facility,
installation or equipment that emits or may emit sulphur, nitrogen oxides,
volatile organic compounds or ammonia directly or indirectly into the
atmosphere ;
16 . "New stationary source" means any stationary source of which the
construction or substantial modification is commenced after the expiry of one
year from the date of entry into force of the present Protocol. It shall be a
matter for the competent national authorities to decide whether a modification
is substantial or not, taking into account such factors as the environmental
benefits of the modification.
Article 2
OBJECTIVE
The objective of the present Protocol is to control and reduce emissions
of sulphur, nitrogen oxides, ammonia and volatile organic compounds that are
caused by anthropogenic activities and are likely to cause adverse effects on
human health, natural ecosystems, materials and crops, due to acidification,
eutrophication or ground-level ozone as a result of long-range transboundary
atmospheric transport, and to ensure, as far as possible, that in the long
term and in a stepwise approach, taking into account advances in scientific
knowledge, atmospheric depositions or concentrations do not exceed:
(a) For Parties within the geographical scope of EMEP and Canada, the
critical loads of acidity, as described in annex I ;
(b) For Parties within the geographical scope of EMEP, the critical
loads of nutrient nitrogen, as described in annex I; and
(c) For ozone:
(i) For Parties within the geographical scope of EMEP, the
critical levels of ozone, as given in annex I,-
(ii) For Canada, the Canada-wide Standard for ozone; and
(iii) For the United States of America, the National Ambient Air
Quality Standard for ozone.
Article 3
BASIC OBLIGATIONS
1. Each Party having an emission ceiling in any table in annex II shall
reduce and maintain the reduction in its annual emissions in accordance with
that ceiling and the timescales specified in that annex. Each Party shall, as
a minimum, control its annual emissions of polluting compounds in accordance
with the obligations in annex II.
2. Each Party shall apply the limit values specified in annexes IV, V and VI
to each new stationary source within a stationary source category as
identified in those annexes, no later than the timescales specified in annex
VII. As an alternative, a Party may apply different emission reduction
strategies that achieve equivalent overall emission levels for all source
categories together.
3. Each Party shall, in so far as it is technically and economically
feasible and taking into consideration the costs and advantages, apply the
limit values specified in annexes IV, V and VI to each existing stationary
source within a stationary source category as identified in those annexes, no
later than the timescales specified in annex VII. As an alternative, a Party
may apply different emission reduction strategies that achieve equivalent
overall emission levels for all source categories together or, for Parties
outside the geographical scope of EMEP, that are necessary to achieve national
or regional goals for acidification abatement and to meet national air quality
standards.
4. Limit values for new and existing boilers and pi-ocess heaters with a
rated thermal input exceeding 50 MWth and new heavy-duty vehicles shall be
evaluated by the Parties at a session of the Executive Body with a view to
amending annexes IV, V and VIII no later than two years after the date of
entry into force of the present Protocol.
5. Each Party shall apply the limit values for the fuels and new mobile
sources identified in annex VIII, no later than the timescales specified in
annex vil.
6. Each Party should apply best available techniques to mobile sources and
to each new or existing stationary source, taking into account guidance
documents I to V adopted by the Executive Body at its seventeenth session
(decision 1999/1) and any amendments thereto.
7. Each Party shall take appropriate measures based, inter alia, on
scientific and economic criteria to reduce emissions of volatile organic
compounds associated with the use of products not included in annex VI or
VIII. The Parties shall, no later than at the second session of the Executive
Body after the entry into force of the present Protocol, consider with a view
to adopting an annex on products, including criteria for the selection of such
products, limit values for the volatile organic compound content of products
not included in annex VI or VIII, as well as timescales for the application of
the limit values.
8. Each Party shall, subject to paragraph 10:
(a) Apply, as a minimum, the ammonia control measures specified in
annex IX; and
(b) Apply, where it considers it appropriate, best available techniques
for preventing and reducing ammonia emissions, as listed in guidance document
V adopted by the Executive Body at its seventeenth session (decision 1999/1)
and any amendments thereto.
9. Paragraph 10 shall apply to any Party:
(a) Whose total land area is greater than 2 million square kilometres;
(b) Whose annual emissions of sulphur, nitrogen oxides, ammonia and/or
volatile organic compounds contributing to acidification, eutrophication or
ozone formation in areas under the jurisdiction of one or more other Parties
originate predominantly from within an area under its jurisdiction that is
listed asa PEMAin annex III, and which has presented documentation in
accordance with subparagraph (c) to this effect;
(c) Which has submitted upon signature, ratification, acceptance or
approval of, or accession to, the present Protocol a description of the
geographical scope of one or more PEMAs for one or more pollutants, with
supporting documentation, for inclusion in annex III; and
(d) Which has specified upon signature, ratification, acceptance or
approval of, or accession to, the present Protocol its intention to act in
accordance with this paragraph.
10. A Party to which this paragraph applies shall:
(a) If within the geographical scope of EMEP, be required to comply with
the provisions of this article and annex II only within the relevant PEMA for
each pollutant for whicha PEMAwithin its jurisdiction is included in annex
III; or
(b) If not within the geographical scope of EMEP, be required to comply
with the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 and annex II, only
within the relevant PEMA for each pollutant (nitrogen oxides, sulphur and/or
volatile organic compounds) for whicha PEMAwithin its jurisdiction is
included in annex III, and shall not be required to comply with paragraph 8
anywhere within its jurisdiction.
11. Canada and the United States of America shall, upon their ratification,
acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the present Protocol, submit to
the Executive Body their respective emission reduction commitments with
respect to sulphur, nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds for
automatic incorporation into annex II.
12. The Parties shall, subject to the outcome of the first review provided
for under article 10, paragraph 2, and no later than one year after completion
of that review, commence negotiations on further obligations to reduce
emissions.
Article 4
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY
1. Each Party- shall, in a manner consistent with its laws, regulations and
practices and in accordance with its obligations in the present Protocol,
create favourable conditions to facilitate the exchange of information,
technologies and techniques, with the aim of reducing emissions of sulphur,
nitrogen oxides, ammonia and volatile organic compounds by promoting inter
alia;
(a) The development and updating of databases on best available
techniques, including those that increase energy efficiency, low-emission
burners and good environmental practice in agriculture;
(b) The exchange of information and experience in the development of
less polluting transport systems;
(c) Direct industrial contacts and cooperation, including joint
ventures ; and
(d) The provision of technical assistance.
2. In promoting the activities specified in paragraph 1, each Party shall
create favourable conditions for the facilitation of contacts and cooperation
among appropriate organizations and individuals in the private and public
sectors that are capable of providing technology, design and engineering
services, equipment or finance.
Article 5
PUBLIC AWARENESS
1. Each Party shall, in a manner consistent with its laws, regulations and
practices, promote the provision of information to the general public,
including information on:
(a) National annual emissions of sulphur, nitrogen oxides, ammonia and
volatile organic compounds and progress towards compliance with the national
emission ceilings or other obligations referred to in article 3 ;
(b) Depositions and concentrations of the relevant pollutants and, where
applicable, these depositions and concentrations in relation to critical loads
and levels referred to in article 2;
(c) Levels of tropospheric ozone; and
(d) Strategies and measures applied or to be applied to reduce air
pollution problems dealt with in the present Protocol and set out in
article 6.
2. Furthermore, each Party may make information widely available to the
public with a view to minimizing emissions, including information on:
(a) Less polluting fuels, renewable energy and energy efficiency,
including their use in transport;
(b) Volatile organic compounds in products, including labelling;
(c) Management options for wastes containing volatile organic compounds
that are generated by the public;
(d) Good agricultural practices to reduce emissions of ammonia;
(e) Health and environmental effects associated with the pollutants
covered by the present Protocol; and
(f) Steps which individuals and industries may take to help reduce
emissions of the pollutants covered by the present Protocol.
Article 6
STRATEGIES, POLICIES, PROGRAMMES, MEASURES AND INFORMATION
1. Each Party shall, as necessary and on the basis of sound scientific and
economic criteria, in order to facilitate the implementation of its
obligations under article 3:
(a) Adopt supporting strategies, policies and programmes without undue
delay after the present Protocol enters into force for it;
(b) Apply measures to control and reduce its emissions of sulphur,
nitrogen oxides, ammonia and volatile organic compounds;
(c) Apply measures to encourage the increase of energy efficiency and
the use of renewable energy;
(d) Apply measures to decrease the use of polluting fuels;
(e) Develop and introduce less polluting transport systems and promote
traffic management systems to reduce overall emissions from road traffic;
(f) Apply measures to encourage the development and introduction of
low-polluting processes and products, taking into account guidance documents I
to V adopted by the Executive Body at its seventeenth session (decision
1999/1) and any amendments thereto;
(g) Encourage the implementation of management programmes to reduce
emissions, including voluntary programmes, and the use of economic
instruments, taking into account guidance document VI adopted by the Executive
Body at its seventeenth session (decision 1999/1) and any amendments thereto;
(h) Implement and further elaborate policies and measures in accordance
with its national circumstances, such as the progressive reduction or phasingout
of market imperfections, fiscal incentives, tax and duty exemptions and
subsidies in all sectors that emit sulphur, nitrogen oxides, ammonia and
volatile organic compounds which run counter to the objective of the Protocol,
and apply market instruments; and
(i) Apply measures, where cost-effective, to reduce emissions from waste
products containing volatile organic compounds.
2, Each Party shall collect and maintain information on:
(a) Actual levels of emissions of sulphur, nitrogen compounds and
volatile organic compounds, and of ambient concentrations and depositions of
these compounds and ozone, taking into account, for those Parties within the
geographical scope of EMEP, the work plan of EMEP; and
(b) The effects of ambient concentrations and of the deposition of
sulphur, nitrogen compounds, volatile organic compounds and ozone on human
health, terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and materials.
3. Any Party may take more stringent measures than those required by the
present Protocol.
Article 7
REPORTING
1. Subject to its laws and regulations and in accordance with its
obligations under the present Protocol :
(a) Each Party shall report, through the Executive Secretary of the
Commission, to the Executive Body, on a periodic basis as determined by the
Parties at a session of the Executive Body, information on the measures that
it has taken to implement the present Protocol. Moreover:
(i) Where a Party applies different emission reduction strategies
under article 3, paragraphs 2 and 3, it shall document the
strategies applied and its compliance with the requirements
of those paragraphs;
(ii) Where a Party judges certain limit values, as specified in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 3, not to be technically
and economically feasible, taking into consideration the
costs and advantages, it shall report and justify this;
(b) Each Party within the geographical scope of EMEP shall report,
through the Executive Secretary of the Commission, to EMEP, on a periodic
basis to be determined by the Steering Body of EMEP and approved by the
Parties at a session of the Executive Body, the following information:
(i) Levels of emissions of sulphur, nitrogen oxides, ammonia and
volatile organic compounds using, as a minimum, the
methodologies and the temporal and spatial resolution
specified by the Steering Body of EMEP;
(ii) Levels of emissions of each substance in the reference year
(1990) using the same methodologies and temporal and spatial
resolution;
(iii) Data on projected emissions and current reduction plans; and
(iv) Where it deems it appropriate, any exceptional circumstances
justifying emissions that are temporarily higher than the
ceilings established for it for one or more pollutants; and
(c) Parties in areas outside the geographical scope of EMEP shall make
available information similar to that specified in subparagraph (b), if
requested to do so by the Executive Body.
2. The information to be reported in accordance with paragraph 1 (a) shall
be in conformity with a decision regarding format and content to be adopted by
the Parties at a session of the Executive Body. The terms of this decision
shall be reviewed as necessary to identify any additional elements regarding
the format or the content of the information that is to be included in the
reports.
3. In good time before each annual session of the Executive Body, EMEP shall
provide information on:
>
(a) Ambient concentrations and depositions of sulphur and nitrogen
compounds as well as, where available, ambient concentrations of volatile
organic compounds and ozone; and
(b) Calculations of sulphur and oxidized and reduced nitrogen budgets
and relevant information on the long-range transport of ozone and its
precursors.
Parties in areas outside the geographical scope of EMEP shall make available
similar information if requested to do so by the Executive Body.
4. The Executive Body shall, in accordance with article 10, paragraph 2 (b),
of the Convention, arrange for the preparation of information on the effects
of depositions of sulphur and nitrogen compounds and concentrations of ozone.
5. The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, arrange for the
preparation, at regular intervals, of revised information on calculated and
internationally optimized allocations of emission reductions for the States
within the geographical scope of EMEP, using integrated assessment models,
including atmospheric transport models, with a view to reducing further, for
the purposes of article 3, paragraph 1, the difference between actual
depositions of sulphur and nitrogen compounds and critical load values as well
as the difference between actual ozone concentrations and the critical levels
of ozone specified in annex I, or such alternative assessment methods as
approved by the Parties at a session of the Executive Body.
Article 8
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND MONITORING
The Parties shall encourage research, development, monitoring and
cooperation related to:
(a) The international harmonization of methods for the calculation and
assessment of the adverse effects associated with the substances addressed by
the present Protocol for use in establishing critical loads and critical
levels and, as appropriate, the elaboration of procedures for such
harmonization;
(b) The improvement of emission databases, in particular those on
ammonia and volatile organic compounds;
(c) The improvement of monitoring techniques and systems and of the
modelling of transport, concentrations and depositions of sulphur, nitrogen
compounds and volatile organic compounds, as well as of the formation of ozone
and secondary particulate matter;
(d) The improvement of the scientific understanding of the long-term
fate of emissions and their impact on the hemispheric background
concentrations of sulphur, nitrogen, volatile organic compounds, ozone and
particulate matter, focusing, in particular, on the chemistry of the free
troposphere and the potential for intercontinental flow of pollutants;
(e) The further elaboration of an overall strategy to reduce the adverse
effects of acidification, eutrophication and photochemical pollution,
including synergisms and combined effects;
(f) Strategies for the further reduction of emissions of sulphur,
nitrogen oxides, ammonia and volatile organic compounds based on critical
loads and critical levels as well as on technical developments, and the
improvement of integrated assessment modelling to calculate internationally
optimized allocations of emission reductions taking into account the need to
avoid excessive costs for any Party. Special emphasis should be given to
emissions from agriculture and transport;
(g) The identification of trends over time and the scientific
understanding of the wider effects of sulphur, nitrogen and volatile organic
compounds and photochemical pollution on human health, including their
contribution to concentrations of particulate matter, the environment, in
particular acidification and eutrophication, and materials, especially
historic and cultural monuments, taking into account the relationship between
sulphur oxides, nitrogen oxides, ammonia, volatile organic compounds and
tropospheric ozone;
(h) Emission abatement technologies, and technologies and techniques to
improve energy efficiency, energy conservation and the use of renewable
energy;
(i) The efficacy of ammonia control techniques for farms and their
impact on local and regional deposition;
(j) The management of transport demand and the development and promotion
of less polluting modes of transport;
(k) The quantification and, where possible, economic evaluation of
benefits for the environment and human health resulting from the reduction of
emissions of sulphur, nitrogen oxides, ammonia and volatile organic compounds;
and
(1) The development of tools for making the methods and results of this
work widely applicable and available.
Article 9
COMPLIANCE
Compliance by each Party with its obligations under the present Protocol
shall be reviewed regularly. The Implementation Committee established by
decision 1997/2 of the Executive Body at its fifteenth session shall carry out
such reviews and report to the Parties at a session of the Executive Body in
accordance with the terms of the annex to that decision, including any
amendments thereto.
Article 10
REVIEWS BY THE PARTIES AT SESSIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE BODY
1. The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, pursuant to
article 10, paragraph 2 (a), of the Convention, review the information
supplied by the Parties, EMEP and subsidiary bodies of the Executive Body, the
data on the effects of concentrations and depositions of sulphur and nitrogen
compounds and of photochemical pollution as well as the reports of the
Implementation Committee referred to in article 9 above.
2. (a) The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, keep under
review the obligations set out in the present Protocol, including:
(i) Their obligations in relation to their calculated and
internationally optimized allocations of emission reductions
referred to in article 7, paragraph 5, above; and
(ii) The adequacy of the obligations and the progress made towards
the achievement of the objective of the present Protocol;
(b) Reviews shall take into account the best available scientific
information on the effects of acidification, eutrophication and photochemical
pollution, including assessments of all relevant health effects, critical
levels and loads, the development and refinement of integrated assessment
models, technological developments, changing economic conditions, progress
made on the databases on emissions and abatement techniques, especially
related to ammonia and volatile organic compounds, and the fulfilment of the
obligations on emission levels;
(c) The procedures, methods and timing for such reviews shall be
specified by the Parties at a session of the Executive Body. The first such
review shall commence no later than one year after the present Protocol enters
into force.
Article 11
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
1. In the event of a dispute between any two or more Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of the present Protocol, the parties concerned
shall seek a settlement of the dispute through negotiation or any other
peaceful means of their own choice. The parties to the dispute shall inform
the Executive Body of their dispute.
2. When ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the present Protocol,
or at any time thereafter, a Party which is not a regional economic
integration organization may declare in a written instrument submitted to the
Depositary that, in respect of any dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of the Protocol, it recognizes one or both of the following means
of dispute settlement as compulsory ipso facto and without special agreement,
in relation to any Party accepting the same obligation:
(a) Submission of the dispute to the International Court of Justice;
(b) Arbitration in accordance with procedures to be adopted by the
Parties at a session of the Executive Body, as soon as practicable, in an
annex on arbitration.
A Party which is a regional economic integration organization may make a
declaration with like effect in relation to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures referred to in subparagraph (b).
3. A declaration made under paragraph 2 shall remain in force until it
expires in accordance with its terms or until three months after written
notice of its revocation has been deposited with the Depositary.
4. A new declaration, a notice of revocation or the expiry of a declaration
shall not in any way affect proceedings pending before the International Court
of Justice or the arbitral tribunal, unless the parties to the dispute agree
otherwise.
5. Except in a case where the parties to a dispute have accepted the same
means of dispute settlement under paragraph 2, if after twelve months
following notification by one party to another that a dispute exists between
them, the parties concerned have not been able to settle their dispute through
the means mentioned in paragraph 1, the dispute shall be submitted, at the
request of any of the parties to the dispute, to conciliation.
6. For the purpose of paragraph 5, a conciliation commission shall be
created. The commission shall be composed of an equal number of members
appointed by each party concerned or, where parties in conciliation share the
same interest, by the group sharing that interest, and a chairperson chosen
jointly by the members so appointed. The commission shall render a
recommendatory award, which the parties to the dispute shall consider in good
faith.
Article 12
ANNEXES
The annexes to the present Protocol shall form an integral part of the
Protocol.
Article 13
AMENDMENTS AND ADJUSTMENTS
1. Any Party may propose amendments to the present Protocol. Any Party to
the Convention may propose an adjustment to annex II to the present Protocol
to add to it its name-, together with emission levels, emission ceilings and
percentage emission reductions.
2. Proposed amendments and adjustments shall be submitted in writing to the
Executive Secretary of the Commission, who shall communicate them to all
Parties. The Parties shall discuss the proposed amendments and adjustments at
the next session of the Executive Body, provided that those proposals have
been circulated by the Executive Secretary to the Parties at least ninety days
in advance.
3. Amendments to the present Protocol, including amendments to annexes II to
IX, shall be adopted by consensus of the Parties present at a session of the
Executive Body, and shall enter into force for the Parties which have accepted
them on the ninetieth day after the date on which two thirds of the Parties
have deposited with the Depositary their instruments of acceptance thereof.
Amendments shall enter into force for any other Party on the ninetieth day
after the date on which that Party has deposited its instrument of acceptance
thereof.
4. Amendments to the annexes to the present Protocol, other than to the
annexes referred to in paragraph 3, shall be adopted by consensus of the
Parties present at a session of the Executive Body. On the expiry of ninety
days from the date of its communication to all Parties by the Executive
Secretary of the Commission, an amendment to any such annex shall become
effective for those Parties which have not submitted to the Depositary a
notification in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5, provided that
at least sixteen Parties have not submitted such a notification.
5. Any Party that is unable to approve an amendment to an annex, other than
to an annex referred to in paragraph 3, shall so notify the Depositary in
writing within ninety days from the date of the communication of its adoption.
The Depositary shall without delay notify all Parties of any such notification
received. A Party may at any time substitute an acceptance for its previous
notification and, upon deposit of an instrument of acceptance with the
Depositary, the amendment to such an annex shall become effective for that
Party.
6. Adjustments to annex II shall be adopted by consensus of the Parties
present at a session of the Executive Body and shall become effective for all
Parties to the present Protocol on the ninetieth day following the date on
which the Executive Secretary of the Commission notifies those Parties in
writing of the adoption of the adjustment.
Article 14
SIGNATURE
1. The present Protocol shall be open for signature at Gothenburg (Sweden)
on 30 November and 1 December 1999, then at United Nations Headquarters in New
York until 30 May 2000, by States members of the Commission as well as States
having consultative status with the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 8 of
Economic and Social Council resolution 36 (IV) of 28 March 1947, and by
regional economic integration organizations, constituted by sovereign States
members of the Commission, which have competence in respect of the
negotiation, conclusion and application of international agreements in matters
covered by the Protocol, provided that the States and organizations concerned
are Parties to the Convention and are listed in annex II.
2. In matters within their competence, such regional economic integration
organizations shall, on their own behalf, exercise the rights and fulfil the
responsibilities which the present Protocol attributes to their member States.
In such cases, the member States of these organizations shall not be entitled
to exercise such rights individually.
Article 15
RATIFICATION, ACCEPTANCE, APPROVAL AND ACCESSION
1. The present Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or
approval by Signatories.
2. The present Protocol shall be open for accession as from 31 May 2000 by
the States and organizations that meet the requirements of article 14,
paragraph 1.
3. The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall
be deposited with the Depositary.
Article 16
DEPOSITARY
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the Depositary.
Article 17
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. The present Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day
following the date on which the sixteenth instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession has been deposited with the Depositary.
2. For each State and organization that meets the requirements of
article 14, paragraph 1, which ratifies, accepts or approves the present
Protocol or accedes thereto after the deposit of the sixteenth instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the Protocol shall enter into
force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit by such Party of its
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
Article 18
WITHDRAWAL
At any time after five years from the date on which the present Protocol
has come into force with respect to a Party, that Party may withdraw from it
by giving written notification to the Depositary. Any such withdrawal shall
take effect on the ninetieth day following the date of its receipt by the
Depositary, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification of
the withdrawal.
Article 19
AUTHENTIC TEXTS
The original of the present Protocol, of which the English, French and
Russian texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have
signed the present Protocol.
DONE at Gothenburg (Sweden), this thirtieth day of November one thousand
nine hundred and ninety-nine.





Annex I
CRITICAL LOADS AND LEVELS
I. CRITICAL LOADS OP ACIDITY
A. For Parties within the geographical scope of EMEP
1. Critical loads (as defined in article 1} of acidity for ecosystems are
determined in accordance with the Convention's Manual on methodologies and
criteria for mapping critical levels/loads and geographical areas where they
are exceeded. They are the maximum amount of acidifying deposition an
ecosystem can tolerate in the long term without being damaged. Critical loads
of acidity in terms of nitrogen take account of within-ecosystem nitrogen
removal processes (e.g. uptake by plants). Critical loads of acidity in terms
of sulphur do not. A combined sulphur and nitrogen critical load of acidity
considers nitrogen only when the nitrogen deposition is greater than the
ecosystem nitrogen removal processes. All critical loads reported by Parties
are summarized for use in the integrated assessment modelling employed to
provide guidance for setting the emission ceilings in annex II.
B. For Parties in North America
2. For eastern Canada, critical sulphur plus nitrogen loads for forested
ecosystems have been determined with scientific methodologies and criteria
(1997 Canadian Acid Rain Assessment) similar to those in the Convention's
Manual on methodologies and criteria for mapping critical levels/loads and
geographical areas where they are exceeded. Eastern Canada critical load
values (as defined in article 1) of acidity are for sulphate in precipitation
expressed in kg/ha/year. Alberta in western Canada, where deposition levels
are currently below the environmental limits, has adopted the generic critical
load classification systems used for soils in Europe for potential acidity.
Potential acidity is defined by subtracting the total (both wet and dry)
deposition of base cations from that of sulphur and nitrogen. In addition to
critical loads for potential acidity, Alberta has established target and
monitoring loads for managing acidifying emissions.
3. For the United States of America, the effects of acidification are
evaluated through an assessment of the sensitivity of ecosystems, the total
loading within ecosystems of acidifying compounds, and the uncertainty
associated with nitrogen removal processes within ecosystems.
4. These loads and effects are used in integrated assessment modelling and
provide guidance for setting the emission ceilings and/or reductions for
Canada and the United States of America in annex II.
II. CRITICAL LOADS OF NUTRIENT NITROGEN
For Parties within the geographical scope of EMEP
5. Critical loads (as defined in article 1) of nutrient nitrogen
(eutrophication) for ecosystems are determined in accordance with the
Convention's Manual on methodologies and criteria for mapping critical
levels/loads and geographical areas where they are exceeded. They are the
maximum amount of eutrophying nitrogen deposition an ecosystem can tolerate in
the long term without being damaged. All critical loads reported by Parties
are summarized for use in the integrated assessment modelling employed to
provide guidance for setting the emission ceilings in annex II.
III. CRITICAL LEVELS OF OZONE
A. For Parties within the geographical scope of EMEP
6. Critical levels (as defined in article 1) of ozone are determined to
protect plants in accordance with the Convention's Manual on methodologies and
criteria for mapping critical levels/loads and geographical areas where they
are exceeded. They are expressed as a cumulative exposure over a threshold
ozone concentration of 40 ppb (parts per billion by volume) . This exposure
index is referred to as AOT40 (accumulated exposure over a threshold of
40 ppb) . The AOT40 is calculated as the sum of the differences between the
hourly concentration (in ppb) and 40 ppb for each hour when the concentration
exceeds 40 ppb.
7. The long-term critical level of ozone for crops of an AOT40 of 3000
ppb.hours for May-July (used as a typical growing season) and for daylight
hours was used to define areas at risk where the critical level is exceeded.
A specific reduction of exceedances was targeted in the integrated assessment
modelling undertaken for the present Protocol to provide guidance for setting
the emission ceilings in annex II. The long-term critical level of ozone for
crops is considered also to protect other plants such as trees and natural
vegetation. Further scientific work is under way to develop a more
differentiated interpretation of exceedances of critical levels of ozone for
vegetation. .
8. A critical level of ozone for human health is represented by the WHO Air
Quality Guideline level for ozone of 120 ?ig/m3 as an 8-hour average. In
collaboration with the World Health Organization's Regional Office for Europe
(WHO/EURO), a critical level expressed as an AOT60 (accumulated exposure over
a threshold of 60 ppb), i.e. 120 /xg/m3, calculated over one year, was adopted
as a surrogate for the WHO Air Quality Guideline for the purpose of integrated
assessment modelling. This was used to define areas at risk where the
critical level is exceeded. A specific reduction of these exceedances was
targeted in the integrated assessment modelling undertaken for the present
Protocol to provide guidance for setting the emission ceilings in annex II.
B. For Parties in North America
9. For Canada, critical levels of ozone are determined to protect human
health and the environment and are used to establish a Canada-wide Standard
for ozone. The emission ceilings in annex II are defined according to the
ambition level required to achieve the Canada-wide Standard for ozone.
10. For the United States of America, critical levels of ozone are determined
to protect public health with an adequate margin of safety, to protect public
welfare from any known or expected adverse effects, and are used to establish
a national ambient air quality standard. Integrated assessment modelling and
the air quality standard are used in providing guidance for setting the
emission ceilings and/or reductions for the United States of America in
annex II.
Annex II
EMISSION CEILINGS
The emission ceilings listed in the tables below relate to the provisions
of article 3, paragraphs 1 and 10, of the present Protocol. The 1980 and 1990
emission levels and the percentage emission reductions listed are given for
information purposes only.
Table 1. Emission ceilings for sulphur (thousands of tonnes of SO2 per year)
a/ Upon ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the
present Protocol, Canada shall submit an emission ceiling for sulphur, either
at a national level or for its PEMA, and will endeavour to provide a ceiling
for 2010. The PEMA for sulphur will be the sulphur oxides management area
(SOMA) that was designated pursuant to annex III to the Protocol on Further
Reduction of Sulphur Emissions adopted at Oslo on 14 June 1994 as the Southeast
Canada SOMA. This is an area of 1 million km2 which includes all the
territory of the provinces of Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New
Brunswick, all the territory of the province of Quebec south of a straight
line between Havre-St. Pierre on the north coast of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence
and the point where the Quebec-Ontario boundary intersects the James Bay
coastline, and all the territory of the province of Ontario south of a
straight line between the point where the Ontario-Quebec boundary intersects
the James Bay coastline and Nipigon River near the north shore of Lake
Superior.
b/ Figures apply to the European part within the EMEP area.
c/ Upon ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the
present Protocol, the United States of America shall provide for inclusion in
this annex: (a) specific emission reduction measures applicable to mobile and
stationary sources of sulphur to be applied either nationally or within a PEMA
if it has submitteda PEMAfor sulphur for inclusion in annex III; (b) a value
for total estimated sulphur emission levels for 1990, either national or for
the PEMA; (c) an indicative value for total sulphur emission levels for 2010,
either national or for the PEMA; and (d) associated estimates of the
percentage reduction in sulphur emissions. Item (b) will be included in the
table and items (a), (c) and (d) will be included in a footnote to the table.
Table 2. Emission ceilings for nitrogen oxides (thousands of tonnes of NO2
per year)
a/ Upon ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the
present Protocol, Canada shall submit 1990 emission levels and 2010 emission
ceilings for nitrogen oxides, either at a national level or for its PEMA for
nitrogen oxides, if it has submitted one.
b/ Figures apply to the European part within the EMEP area.
c/ Upon ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the
present Protocol, the United States of America shall provide for inclusion in
this annex: (a) specific emission reduction measures applicable to mobile and
stationary sources of nitrogen oxides to be applied either nationally or
withina PEMAif it has submitteda PEMAfor nitrogen oxides for inclusion in
annex III; (b) a value for total estimated nitrogen oxide emission levels for
1990, either national or for the PEMA; (c) an indicative value for total
nitrogen oxide emission levels for 2010, either national or for the PEMA; and
(d) associated estimates of the percentage reduction in nitrogen oxide
emissions. Item (b) will be included in the table and items (a), (c) and (d)
will be included in a footnote to the table.
Table 3. Emission ceilings for ammonia (thousands of tonnes of NH3 per year)
a/ Figures apply to the European part within the EMEP area.
Table 4. Emission ceilings for volatile organic compounds (thousands of
tonnes of VOC per year)
a/ Upon ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the
present Protocol, Canada shall submit 1990 emission levels and 2010 emission
ceilings for volatile organic compounds, either at a national level or for its
PEMA for volatile organic compounds, if it has submitted one.
b/ Figures apply to the European part within the EMEP area.
c_/ Upon ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the
present Protocol, the United States of America shall provide for inclusion in
this annex: (a) specific emission reduction measures applicable to mobile and
stationary sources of volatile organic compounds to be applied either
nationally or withina PEMAif it has submitteda PEMAfor volatile organic
compounds for inclusion in annex III; (b) a value for total estimated volatile
organic compound emission levels for 1990, either national or for the PEMA;
(c) an indicative value for total volatile organic compound emission levels
for 2010, either national or for the PEMA; and (d) associated estimates of the
percentage reduction in volatile organic compound emissions. Item (b) will be
included in the table and items (a), (c) and (d) will be included in a
footnote to the table.
Annex III
DESIGNATED POLLUTANT EMISSIONS MANAGEMENT AREA (PEMA)
The following PEMA is listed for the purpose of the present Protocol:
Russian Federation PEMA
This is the area of Murmansk obi as t. the Republic of Karelia, Leningrad
oblast {including St. Petersburg), Pskov oblast. Novgorod oblast and
Kaliningrad oblast. The boundary of the PEMA coincides with the State and
administrative boundaries of these constituent entities of the Russian
Federation.
Annex IV
LIMIT VALUES FOR EMISSIONS OF SULPHUR FROM STATIONARY SOURCES
1. Section A applies to Parties other than Canada and the United States of
America, section B applies to Canada and section C applies to the United
States of America.
A. Parties other than Canada and the United States of America
2. For the purpose of section A, except table 2 and paragraphs 11 and 12,
limit value means the quantity of a gaseous substance contained in the waste
gases from an installation that is not to be exceeded. Unless otherwise
specified, it shall be calculated in terms of mass of pollutant per volume of
the waste gases (expressed as mg/m3) , assuming standard conditions for
temperature and pressure for dry gas (volume at 273.15 K, 101.3 kPa). With
regard to the oxygen content of the exhaust gas, the values given in the
tables below for each source category shall apply. Dilution for the purpose
of lowering concentrations of pollutants in waste gases is not permitted.
Start-up, shutdown and maintenance of equipment are excluded.
3. Emissions shall be monitored I/in all cases. Compliance with limit
values shall be verified. The methods of verification can include continuous
or discontinuous measurements, type approval, or any other technically sound
method.
4. Sampling and analysis of pollutants, as well as reference measurement
methods to calibrate any measurement system, shall be carried out in
accordance with the standards laid down by the European Committee for
Standardization (CEN) or by the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO). While awaiting the development of CEN or ISO standards, national
standards shall apply.
5. Measurements of emissions should be carried out continuously when
emissions of SO2 exceed 75 kg/h.
6. In the case of continuous measurement for new plant, compliance with the
emission standards is achieved if the calculated daily mean values do not
exceed the limit value and if no hourly value exceeds the limit value by 100%.
"7 . in the case of continuous measurements for existing plant, compliance
with the emission standards is achieved if (a) none of the monthly mean values
exceeds the limit values; and (b) 97% of all the 48-hour mean values do not
exceed 110% of the limit values.
8. In the case of discontinuous measurements, as a minimum requirement,
compliance with the emission standards is achieved if the mean value based on
an appropriate number of measurements under representative conditions does not
exceed the value of the emission standard.
9. Boilers and process heaters with a rated thermal input exceeding 50 MWth:
Table 1. Limit values for SOx emissions released from boilers
a/ In particular, the limit values shall not apply to:
-	Plant in which the products of combustion are used for direct
heating, drying, or any other treatment of objects or materials, e.g.
reheating furnaces, furnaces for heat treatment;
-	Post-combustion plant, i.e. any technical apparatus designed to
purify the waste gases by combustion that is not operated as an independent
combustion plant;
-	Facilities for the regeneration of catalytic cracking catalysts;
-	Facilities for the conversion of hydrogen sulphide into sulphur,-
-	Reactors used in the chemical industry;
-	Coke battery furnaces;
-	Cowpers;
-	Waste incinerators; and
-	Plant powered by diesel, petrol or gas engines or by combustion
turbines, irrespective of the fuel used.
b/ The O2 reference content is 6% for solid fuels and 3% for others,
c/ 400 with heavy fuel oil S <0.25%.
d/ If an installation reaches 300 mg/Nm3 SO2, it may be exempted from
applying the removal efficiency.
10. Gas oil:
-	Table 2. Limit values for the sulphur content of gas oil


a/ "Gas oil" means any petroleum product within HS 2710, or any
petroleum product which, by reason of its distillation limits, falls within
the category of middle distillates intended for use as fuel and of which at
least 85 per cent by volume, including distillation losses, distils at 350&#186;C.
Fuels used in on-road and non-road vehicles and agricultural tractors are
excluded from, this definition. Gas oil intended for marine use is included in
the definition if it meets the description above or it has a viscosity or
density falling within the ranges of viscosity or density defined for marine
distillates in table I of ISO 8217 (1996).
11. Claus plant: for plant that produces more than 50 Mg of sulphur a day:
(a) Sulphur recovery 99.5% for new plant;
(b) Sulphur recovery 97% for existing plant.
12. Titanium dioxide production: in new and existing installations,
discharges arising from digestion and calcination steps in the manufacture of
titanium dioxide shall be reduced to a value of not more than 10 kg of S02
equivalent per Mg of titanium dioxide produced.
13. Limit values for controlling emissions of sulphur dioxide from new
stationary sources in the following stationary source category will be
determined on the basis of available information on control technology and
levels including limit values applied in other countries and the following
document: Canada Gazette, Part I. Department of the Environment, Thermal
Power Generation Emissions - National Guidelines for New Stationary Sources.
May 15, 1993. pp. 1633-1638.
C. United States of America
14. Limit values for controlling emissions of sulphur dioxide from new
stationary sources in the following stationary source categories are specified
in the following documents :
(a) Electric Utility Steam Generating Units - 40 Code of Federal
Regulations (C.F.R.) Part 60, Subpart D, and Subpart Da,-
(b) Industrial-Commercial-Institutional Steam Generating Units - 40
C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart Db, and Subpart De;
(c) Sulphuric Acid Plants - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart H;
(d) Petroleum Refineries - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart J;
(e) Primary Copper Smelters - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart P;
(f) Primary Zinc Smelters - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart Q;
(g) Primary Lead Smelters - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart R;
(h) Stationary Gas Turbines - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart GG;
(i) Onshore Natural Gas Processing - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart LLL;
(j) Municipal Waste Combustors - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart Ea, and
Subpart Eb; and
(k) Hospital/Medical/Infectious Waste Incinerators - 40 C.F.R. Part 60,
Subpart Ee.
Note
I/ Monitoring is to be understood as an overall activity, comprising
measuring of emissions, mass balancing, etc. It can be carried out
continuously or discontinuously.
Annex V
LIMIT VALUES FOR EMISSIONS OF NITROGEN OXIDES
FROM STATIONARY SOURCES
1. Section A applies to Parties other than Canada and the United States of
America, section B applies to Canada and section C applies to the United
States of America.
A. Parties other than Canada and the United States of America
2 . For the purpose of section A, limit value means the quantity of a gaseous
substance contained in the waste gases from an installation that is not to be
exceeded. Unless otherwise specified, it shall be calculated in terms of mass
of pollutant per volume of the waste gases (expressed as mg/m3) , assuming
standard conditions for temperature and pressure for dry gas (volume at
273.15 K, 101.3 kPa). With regard to the oxygen content of exhaust gas, the
values given in the tables below for each source category shall apply.
Dilution for the purpose of lowering concentrations of pollutants in waste
gases is not permitted. Limit values generally address NO together with N02,
commonly named NOX/ expressed as NO2. Start-up, shutdown and maintenance of
equipment are excluded.
3. Emissions shall be monitored 1/ in all cases. Compliance with limit
values shall be verified. The methods of verification can include continuous
or discontinuous measurements, type approval, or any other technically sound
method.
4. Sampling and analysis of pollutants, as well as reference measurement
methods to calibrate any measurement system, shall be carried out in
accordance with the standards laid down by the European Committee for
Standardization (CEN) or by the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) . While awaiting the development of CEN or ISO standards, national
standards shall apply.
5. Measurements of emissions should be carried out continuously when
emissions of NOx exceed 75 kg/h.
6. In the case of continuous measurements, except for existing combustion
plant covered in table 1, compliance with the emission standards is achieved
if the calculated daily mean values do not exceed the limit value and if no
hourly value exceeds the limit value by 100%.
7. In the case of continuous measurements for existing combustion plant
covered in table 1, compliance with the emission standards is achieved if
(a) none of the monthly mean values exceeds the emission limit values; and
(b) 95% of all the 48-hour mean values do not exceed 110% of the emission
limit values.
8. In the case of discontinuous measurements, as a minimum requirement,
compliance with the emission standards is achieved if the mean value based on
an appropriate number of measurements under representative conditions does not
exceed the value of the emission standard.
9. Boilers and process heaters with a rated thermal input exceeding 50 MWth:
 
Table 1. Limit values for NOV emissions released from boilers -I
a/ In particular, the limit values shall not apply to:
-	Plant in which the products of combustion are used for direct
heating, drying, or any other treatment of objects or materials, e.g.
reheating furnaces, furnaces for heat treatment;
-	Post-combustion plant, i.e. any technical apparatus designed to
purify the waste gases by combustion that is not operated as an independent
combustion plant;
-	Facilities for the regeneration of catalytic cracking catalysts;
-	Facilities for the conversion of hydrogen sulphide into sulphur;
-	Reactors used in the chemical industry;
-	Coke battery furnaces;
-	Cowpers;
-	Waste incinerators; and
-	Plant powered by diesel, petrol or gas engines or by combustion
turbines, irrespective of the fuel used.
b/ These values do not apply to boilers running less than 500 hours a
year. The O2 reference content is 6% for solid fuels and 3% for others.
10. Onshore combustion turbines with a rated thermal input exceeding 50MWch:
the NOx limit values expressed in mg/Nm3 (with an O2 content of 15%) are to be
applied to a single turbine. The limit values in table 2 apply only above 70%
load.
Table 2. Limit values for NOx emissions released from onshore combustion
Turbines
a/ Natural gas is naturally occurring methane with not more than 20%
(by volume) of inerts and other constituents.
b/ 75 mg/Nm3 if:
- Combustion turbine used in a combined heat and power system; or
- Combustion turbine driving compressor for public gas grid supply.
For combustion turbines not failing into either of the above categories, but
having an efficiency greater than 35%, determined at ISO base load conditions,
the limit value shall be 50*n/35 where n is the combustion turbine efficiency
expressed as a percentage (and determined at ISO base load conditions).
c/ This limit value applies only to combustion turbines firing light
and medium distillates.
d/ The limit values do not apply to combustion turbines running less
than 150 hours a year.
11. Cement production:
Table 3. Limit values for NOX emissions released from cement production -1
a/ Installations for the production of cement clinker in rotary kilns
with a capacity >500 Mg/day or in other furnaces with a capacity >50 Mg/day.
12. Stationary engines :
Table 4. Limit values for NOX emissions released from new stationary engines
a/ These values do not apply to engines running less than 500 hours a
year. The 02 reference content is 5%.
13. Production and processing of metals:
Table 5. Limit values for NOX emissions released from primary iron and
steel production
a/ Production and processing of metals: metal ore roasting or sintering
installations, installations for the production of pig iron or steel (primary
or secondary fusion) including continuous casting with a capacity exceeding
2.5 Mg/hour, installations for the processing of ferrous metals (hot rolling
mills > 20 Mg/hour of crude steel).
14. Nitric acid production:
Table 6. Limit values for NOX emissions released from nitric acid production
excluding acid concentration units
emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOX) from new
stationary sources in the following stationary source categories will be
determined on the basis of available information on control technology and
levels including limit values applied in other countries and the following
documents :
(a) Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). National
Emission Guidelines for Stationary Combustion Turbines. December 1992.
PN1072;
(b) Canada Gazette, Part I. Department of the Environment. Thermal
Power Generation Emissions - National Guidelines for New Stationary Sources.
May 15, 1993. pp. 1633-1638; and
(c) CME. National Emission Guidelines for Cement Kilns. March 1998.
PN1284.
C. United States of America
16. Limit values for controlling emissions of NOX from new stationary sources
in the following stationary source categories are specified in the following
documents :
(a) Coal-fired Utility Units - 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.)
Part 76;
(b) Electric Utility Steam Generating Units - 40 C.F.R. Part 60,
Subpart D, and Subpart Da;
(c) Industrial-Commercial-Institutional Steam Generating Units - 40
C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart Db;
(d) Nitric Acid Plants - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart G;
(e) Stationary Gas Turbines - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart GG;
(f) Municipal Waste Combustors - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart Ea, and
Subpart Eb; and
(g) Hospital/Medical/Infectious Waste Incinerators - 40 C.F.R. Part 60,
Subpart Ee.
Note
1/ Monitoring is to be understood as an overall activity, comprising
measuring of emissions, mass balancing, etc. It can be carried out
continuously or discontinuously.
Annex VI
LIMIT VALUES FOR EMISSIONS OF VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
FROM STATIONARY SOURCES
1. Section A applies to Parties other than Canada and the United States of
America, section B applies to Canada and section C applies to the United
States of America.
A. Parties other than Canada and the United States of America
2. This section of the present annex covers the stationary sources of nonmethane
volatile organic compound (NMVOC) emissions listed in paragraphs 8 to
21 below. Installations or parts of installations for research, development
and testing of new products and processes are not covered. Threshold values
are given in the sector-specific tables below. They generally refer to
solvent consumption or emission mass flow. Where one operator carries out
several activities falling under the same subheading at the same installation
on the same site, the solvent consumption or emission mass flow of such
activities are added together. If no threshold value is indicated, the given
limit value applies to all the installations concerned.
3. For the .purpose of section A of the present annex:
(a) "Storage and distribution of petrol" means the loading of trucks,
railway wagons, barges and seagoing ships at depots and mineral oil refinery
dispatch stations, excluding vehicle refuelling at service stations covered by
relevant documents on mobile sources;
(b) "Adhesive coating" means any process in which an adhesive is applied
to a surface, with the exception of adhesive coating and laminating associated
with printing processes and wood and plastic lamination;
(c) "Wood and plastic lamination" means any process to adhere together
wood and/or plastic to produce laminated products;
(d) "Coating processes" means the application of metal and plastic
surfaces to: passenger cars, truck cabins, trucks, buses or wooden surfaces
and covers any process in which a single or multiple application of a
continuous film of coating is laid onto:
(i) New vehicles defined (see below) as vehicles of category M1 and of
category N1 insofar as they are coated at the same installation as
Ml vehicles;
(ii) Truck cabins, defined as the housing for the driver, and all
integrated housing for the technical equipment of category N2 and
N3 vehicles;
(iii) Vans and trucks defined as category N1, N2 and N3 vehicles, but
excluding truck cabins,-
(iv) Buses defined as category M2 and M3 vehicles; and
(v) Other metallic and plastic surfaces including those of aeroplanes,
ships, trains, etc., wooden surfaces, textile, fabric, film and
paper surfaces.
This source category does not include the coating of substrates with metals by
electrophoretic or chemical spraying techniques. If the coating process
includes a step in which the same article is printed, that printing step is
considered part of the coating process. However, printing processes operated
as a separate activity are not included. In this definition:
-	M1 vehicles are those used for the carriage of passengers and
comprising not more than eight seats in addition to the driver's
seat ;
-	M2 vehicles are those used for the carriage of passengers and
comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver's seat,
and having a maximum mass not exceeding 5 Mg;
-	M3 vehicles are those used for the carriage of passengers and
comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver's seat,
and having a maximum mass exceeding 5 Mg;
-	N1 vehicles are those used for the carriage of goods and having a
maximum mass not exceeding 3.5 Mg;
-	N2 vehicles are those used for the carriage of goods and having a
maximum mass exceeding 3.5 Mg but not exceeding 12 Mg;
-	N3 vehicles are those used for the carriage of goods and having a
maximum mass exceeding 12 Mg.
(e) "Coil coating" means any processes where coiled steel, stainless
steel, coated steel, copper alloys or aluminium strip is coated with either a
film-forming or laminate coating in a continuous process;
(f) "Dry cleaning" means any industrial or commercial process using
VOCs in an installation to clean garments, furnishings and similar consumer
goods with the exception of the manual removal of stains and spots in the
textile and clothing industry;
(g) "Manufacturing of coatings, varnishes, inks and adhesives" means
the manufacture of coating preparations, varnishes, inks and adhesives, and of
intermediates as far as they are produced in the same installation by mixing
pigments, resins and adhesive materials with organic solvents or other
carriers. This category also includes dispersion, predispersion, realization
of a certain viscosity or colour and packing the final products in containers;
(h) "Printing" means any process of reproduction of text and/or images
in which, with the use .of an image carrier, ink is transferred onto a surface
and applies to the following subprocesses:
(i) Flexography: a printing process using an image carrier of rubber
or elastic photopolymers on which the printing inks are above the
non-printing areas, using liquid inks that dry through
evaporation;
(ii) Heat set web offset: a web-fed printing process using an image
carrier in which the printing and non-printing areas are in the
same plane, where web-fed means that the material to be printed is
fed to the machine from a reel as distinct from separate sheets.
The non-printing area is treated to attract water and thus reject
ink. The printing area is treated to receive and transmit ink to
the surface to be printed. Evaporation takes place in an oven
where hot air is used to heat the printed material;
(iii) Publication rotogravure: rotogravure used for printing paper for
magazines, brochures, catalogues or similar products, using
toluene-based inks;
(iv) Rotogravure: a printing process using a cylindrical image carrier
in which the printing area is below the non-printing area, using
liquid inks that dry through evaporation. The recesses are filled
with ink and the surplus is cleaned off the non-printing area
before the surface to be printed contacts the cylinder and lifts
the ink from the recesses;
(v) Rotary screen printing: a web-fed printing process in which the
ink is passed onto the surface to be printed by forcing it through
a porous image carrier, in which the printing area is open and the
non-printing area is sealed off, using liquid inks that dry only
through evaporation. Web-fed means that the material to be
printed is fed to the machine from a reel as distinct from
separate sheets;
(vi) Laminating associated to a printing process: the adhering of two
or more flexible materials to produce laminates; and
(vii) Varnishing: a process by which a varnish or an adhesive coating is
applied to a flexible material for the purpose of later sealing
the packaging material ;
(i) "Manufacturing of pharmaceutical products" means chemical
synthesis,, fermentation, extraction, formulation and finishing of
pharmaceutical products and, where carried out at the same site, the
manufacture of intermediate products;
(j) "Conversion of natural or synthetic rubber" means any process of
mixing, crushing, blending, calendering, extruding and vulcanization of
natural or synthetic rubber and additionally processes for the processing of
natural or synthetic rubber to derive an end product;
(k) "Surface cleaning" means any process except dry cleaning using
organic solvents to remove contamination from the surface of material,
including degreasing; a cleaning process consisting of more than one step
before or after any other processing step is considered as one
surface-cleaning process. The process refers to the cleaning of the surface
of products and not to the cleaning of process equipment;
(1) "Extraction of vegetable oil and animal fat and refining of
vegetable oil" means the extraction of vegetable oil from seeds and other
vegetable matter, the processing of dry residues to produce animal feed, and
the purification of fats and vegetable oils derived from seeds, vegetable
matter and/or animal matter;
(m) "Vehicle refinishing" means any industrial or commercial coating
activity and associated degreasing activities performing:
(i) The coating of road vehicles, or part of them, carried out as part
of vehicle repair, conservation or decoration outside
manufacturing installations, or
(ii) The original coating of road vehicles, or part of them, with
refinishing-type materials, where this is carried out away from
the original manufacturing line, or
(iii) The coating of trailers (including semi-trailers);
(n) "Impregnation of wooden surfaces" means any process impregnating
timber with preservative;
(o) "Standard conditions" means a temperature of 273.15 K and a
pressure of 101.3 kPa;
(p) "NMVOCs" comprise all organic compounds except methane which at
273.15 K show a vapour pressure of at least 0.01 kPa or which show a
comparable volatility under the given application conditions;
(q) "Waste gas" means the final gaseous discharge containing NMVOCs or
other pollutants from a stack or from emission abatement equipment into air.
The volumetric flow rates shall Joe expressed in m3/h at standard conditions;
(r) "Fugitive emission of NMVOCs" means any emission, not in waste
gases, of NMVOC into air, soil and water as well as, unless otherwise stated,
solvents contained in any product and includes uncaptured emissions of NMVOCs
released to the outside environment via windows, doors, vents and similar
openings. Fugitive limit values are calculated on the basis of a solvent
management plan (see appendix I to the present annex);
(s) "Total emission of NMVOCs" means the sum of fugitive emission of
NMVOCs and emission of NMVOCs in waste gases;
(t) "Input" means the quantity of organic solvents and their quantity in
preparations used when carrying out a process, including the solvents recycled
inside and outside the installation, and which are counted every time they are
used to carry out the activity;
(u) ."Limit value" means the maximum quantity of a gaseous substance
contained in the waste gases from an installation which is not to be exceeded
during normal operation. Unless otherwise specified, it shall be calculated
in terms of mass of pollutant per volume of the waste gases (expressed as mg
C/Nm3 unless specified otherwise), assuming standard conditions for
temperature and pressure for dry gas. For solvent-using installations, limit
values are given as mass unit per characteristic unit of the respective
activity. Gas volumes that are added to the waste gas for cooling or dilution
purposes shall not be considered when determining the mass concentration of
the pollutant in the waste gas. Limit values generally address all volatile
organic compounds except methane (no further distinction is made, e.g. in
terms of reactivity or toxicity);
(v) "Normal operation" means all periods of operation except start-up
and shutdown operations and maintenance of equipment;
(w) "Substances harmful to human health" are subdivided into two
categories :
(i) Halogenated VOCs that have possible risk of irreversible effects; or
(ii) Hazardous substances that are carcinogens, mutagens or toxic to
reproduction or that may cause cancer, may cause heritable genetic
damage, may cause cancer by inhalation, may impair fertility or may
cause harm to the unborn child.
4. The following requirements shall be satisfied:
(a) Emissions of NMVOCs shall be monitored I/ an<3 compliance with limit
values shall be verified. The methods of verification may include continuous
or discontinuous measurements, type approval, or any other technically sound
method; furthermore, they shall be economically viable;
(b) The concentrations of air pollutants in gas-carrying ducts shall be
measured in a representative way. Sampling and analysis of all pollutants, as
well as reference measurement methods to calibrate any measurement system,
shall be carried out according to the standards laid down by the European
Committee for Standardization (CEN) or by the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO). While awaiting the development of CEN or ISO
standards, national standards shall apply;
(c) If measurements of emissions of NMVOCs are required, they should be
carried out continuously if emissions of NMVOCs exceed 10 kg of total organic
carbon (TOC)/h in the exhaust duct downstream from an emission reduction
installation and the hours of operation exceed 200 hours a year. For all
other installations, discontinuous measurement is required as a minimum. For
the approval of compliance, own approaches may be used provided that they
result in equal stringency;
(d) In the case of continuous measurements, as a minimum requirement,
compliance with the emission standards is achieved if the daily mean does not
exceed the limit value during normal operation and no hourly average exceeds
the limit values by 150%. For the approval of compliance, own approaches may
be used provided that they result in equal stringency;
(e) In the case of discontinuous measurements, as a minimum requirement,
compliance with the emission standards is achieved if the mean value of all
readings does not exceed the limit value and no hourly mean exceeds the limit
value by 150%. For the approval of compliance, own approaches may be used
provided that they result in equal stringency;
(f) All appropriate precautions shall be taken to minimize emissions of
NMVOCs during start-up and shutdown, and in case of deviations from normal
operation; and
(g) Measurements are not required if end-of-pipe abatement equipment is
not needed to comply with the limit values below and it can be shown that
limit values are not exceeded.
5. The following limit values should be applied for waste gases, unless
stated otherwise below:
(a) 20 mg substance/m3 for discharges of halogenated volatile organic
compounds (which are assigned the risk phrase: possible risk of irreversible
effects) , where the mass flow of the sum of the considered compounds is
greater than or equal to 100 g/h; and
(b) 2 mg/m3 (expressed as the mass sum of individual compounds) for
discharges of volatile organic compounds (which are assigned the following
risk phrases: may cause cancer, heritable genetic damage, cancer by inhalation
or harm to the unborn child; may impair fertility) , where the mass flow of the
sum of the considered compounds is greater than or equal to 10 g/h.
6. For the source categories listed in paragraphs 9 to 21 below, the
following revisions are relevant:
(a) Instead of applying the limit values for installations set out
below, the operators of the respective installations may be allowed to use a
reduction scheme (see appendix II to the present annex). The purpose of a
reduction scheme is to give the operator the possibility to achieve by other
means emission reductions equivalent to those achieved if given limit values
were to be applied; and
(b) For fugitive emissions of NMVOCs, the fugitive emission values set
out below shall be applied as a limit value. However, where it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the competent authority that for an
individual installation this value is not technically and economically
feasible, the competent authority may exempt that installation provided that
significant risks to human health or the environment are not expected. For
each derogation, the operator must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
competent authority that the best available technique is used.
7. The limit values for VOC emissions for the source categories defined in
paragraph 3 shall be as specified in paragraphs 8 to 21 below.
8. Storage and distribution of petrol :
Table 1. Limit values for VOC emissions released from the storage and
distribution of petrol, excluding the loading of seagoing ships
Note; The vapour displaced by the filling of petrol storage tanks shall be
displaced either into other storage tanks or into abatement equipment meeting
the limit values in the table above.
9. Adhesive coating:
Table 2. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from adhesive coating
a/ If techniques are used which allow reuse of recovered solvent, the
limit value shall be 150 mg C/Nm3.
10. Wood and plastic lamination:
Table 3. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from wood and plastic
Lamination
11. Coating processes (metal and plastic surfaces in passenger cars, truck
cabins, trucks, buses, wooden surfaces):
Table 4. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from coating processes in
the car industry
a/ For a solvent consumption s 15 Mg a year (coating of cars), table 14
on car refinishing applies.
b/ The total limit values are expressed in terms of mass of solvent (g)
emitted in relation to the surface area of product (m2) . The surface area of
the product is defined as the surface area calculated from the total
electrophoretic coating area and the surface area of any parts that might be
added in successive phases of the coating process which are coated with the
same coatings. The surface of the electrophoretic coating area is calculated
using the formula: (2 x total weight of product shell): (average thickness of
metal sheet x density of metal sheet).
Table 5. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from coating processes in
various industrial sectors
a/ Limit value applies to coating applications and drying processes
operated under contained conditions.
b/ If contained coating conditions are not possible (boat construction,
aircraft coating, etc.), installations may be granted exemption from these
values. The reduction scheme of paragraph 6 (a) is then to be used, unless it
is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the competent authority that this
option is not technically and economically feasible. In this case, the
operator must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the competent authority that
the best available technique is used.
c/ The first value applies to drying processes, the second to coating
application processes.
d/ If, for textile coating, techniques are used which allow reuse of
recovered solvents, the limit value shall be 150 mg C/Nm3 for drying and
coating together.
12. Coil coating:
Table 6. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from coil coating

a/ If techniques are used which allow reuse of recovered solvent, the
limit value shall be 150 mg C/Nm3.
13. Dry cleaning:
Table 7. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from dry cleaning
a/ Limit value for total emissions of NMVOCs calculated as mass of
emitted solvent per mass of cleaned and dried product.
14. Manufacturing of coatings, varnishes, inks and adhesives:
Table 8. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from manufacturing of
coatings, varnishes, inks and adhesives
a/ A total limit value of 5% of solvent input may be applied instead of
using the waste gas concentration limit and the limit value for fugitive
emissions of NMVOCs.
b/ A total limit value of 3% of solvent input may be applied instead of
using the waste gas concentration limit and the limit value for fugitive
emissions of NMVOCs.
c/ The fugitive limit value does not include solvents sold as part of a
preparation in a sealed container.
15. Printing (flexography, heat set web offset, publication rotogravure
etc.):
Table 9. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from printing processes
a/ Solvent residue in finished products is not to be considered as part
of the fugitive emissions of NMVOCs.
16. Manufacturing of pharmaceutical products:
Table 10. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from manufacturing of
pharmaceutical products
a/ If techniques are used which allow reuse of recovered solvents, the
limit value shall be 150 mg C/Nm3.
b/ A total limit value of 5% of solvent input may be applied instead of
using the waste gas concentration limit and the limit value for fugitive
emissions of NMVOCs.
c/ A total limit value of 15% of solvent input may be applied instead
of using the waste gas concentration limit and the limit value for fugitive
emissions of NMVOCs.
d/ The fugitive limit value does not include solvents sold as part of a
coatings preparation in a sealed container.
17. Conversion of natural or synthetic rubber:
Table 11. Limit values for NMVOC emission released from conversion of natural
or synthetic rubber
a/ A total limit value of 25% of solvent input may be applied instead
of using the waste gas concentration limit and the limit value for fugitive
emissions of NMVOCs.
b/ If techniques are used which allow reuse of recovered solvent, the
limit value shall be 150 mg C/Nm3.
c_/ The fugitive limit does not include solvents sold as part of a
preparation in a sealed container.
18. Surface cleaning:
Table 12. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from surface cleaning
a/ Installations which demonstrate to the competent authority that the
average organic solvent content of all cleaning material used does not exceed
30% w/w are exempt from applying these values.
19. Vegetable oil and animal fat extraction and vegetable oil refining
processes :
Table 13. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from extraction of
vegetable and animal fat and refining of vegetable oil
a/ Limit values for total emissions of NMVOCs from installations
treating single batches of seeds or other vegetable material shall be set case
by case by the, competent authorities on the basis of the best available
technologies.
b/ The removal of gum from the oil.
20. Vehicle refinishing:
Table 14. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from vehicle refinishing
a/ Compliance with limit values to be proven by 15-minute average
measurements.
21. Impregnation of wooden surfaces:
Table 15. Limit values for NMVOC emissions released from impregnation of
wooden surfaces
a/ Does not apply to impregnation with creosote.
b/ A total limit value of 11 kg solvent/m3 of wood treated may be
applied instead of using the waste gas concentration limit and the limit value
for fugitive emissions of NMVOCs.
B. Canada
22. Limit values for controlling emissions of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) from new stationary sources in the following stationary source
categories will be determined on the basis of available information on control
technology and levels, including limit values applied in other countries, and
the following documents:
(a) Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME).
Environmental Code of Practice for the Reduction of Solvent Emissions from Dry
Cleaning Facilities. December 1992. PN1053;
(b) CCME. Environmental Guideline for the Control of Volatile Organic
Compounds Process Emissions from New Organic Chemical Operations. September
1993. PN1108;
(c) CCME. Environmental Code of Practice for the Measurement and
Control of Fugitive VOC Emissions from Equipment Leaks. October 1993.
PN1106;
(d) CCME. A Program to Reduce Volatile Organic Compound Emissions by
40 Percent from Adhesives and Sealants. March 1994. PN1116;
(e) CCME. A Plan to Reduce Volatile Organic Compound Emissions by
20 Percent from Consumer Surface Coatings. March 1994. PN1114;
(f) CCME. Environmental Guidelines for Controlling Emissions of
Volatile Organic Compounds from Aboveground Storage Tanks. June 1995.
PN1180;
(g) CCME. Environmental Code of Practice for Vapour Recovery during
Vehicle Refueling at Service Stations and Other Gasoline Dispersing
Facilities. (Stage II) April 1995. PN1184;
(h) CCME. Environmental Code of Practice for the Reduction of Solvent
Emissions from Commercial and Industrial Degreasing Facilities. June 1995.
PN1182;
(i) CCME. New Source Performance Standards and Guidelines for the
Reduction of Volatile Organic Compound Emissions from Canadian Automotive
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) Coating Facilities. August 1995.
PN1234;
(j) CCME. Environmental Guideline for the Reduction of Volatile Organic
Compound Emissions from the Plastics Processing Industry. July 1997. PN1276;
and
(k) CCME. National Standards for the Volatile Organic Compound Content
of Canadian Commercial/Industrial Surface Coating Products - Automotive
Refinishing. August 1997. PN1288.
C. United States of America
23 . Limit values for controlling emissions of VOCs from new stationary
sources in the following stationary source categories are specified in the
following documents :
(a) Storage Vessels for Petroleum Liquids - 40 Code of Federal
Regulations (C.F.R.) Part 60, Subpart K, and Subpart Ka;
(b) Storage Vessels for Volatile Organic Liquids - 40 C.F.R. Part 60,
Subpart Kb;
(c) Petroleum Refineries - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart J;
(d) Surface Coating of Metal Furniture - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart EE;
(e) Surface Coating for Automobile and Light Duty Trucks - 40 C.F.R.
Part 60, Subpart MM;
(f) Publication Rotogravure Printing - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart QQ;
(g) Pressure Sensitive Tape and Label Surface Coating Operations -
40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart RR;
(h) Large Appliance, Metal Coil and Beverage Can Surface Coating -
40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart SS, Subpart TT and Subpart WW;
(i) Bulk Gasoline Terminals - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart XX;
(j) Rubber Tire Manufacturing - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart BBB;
(k) Polymer Manufacturing - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart DDD;
(1) Flexible Vinyl and Urethane Coating and Printing - 40 C.F.R.
Part 60, Subpart FFF;
(m) Petroleum Refinery Equipment Leaks and Wastewater Systems -
40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart GGG and Subpart QQQ;
(n) Synthetic Fiber Production - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart HHH;
(o) Petroleum Dry Cleaners - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart J<<JJ;
(p) Onshore Natural Gas Processing Plants - 40 C.F.R. Part
60, Subpart KKK;
(q) SOCMI Equipment Leaks, Air Oxidation Units, Distillation Operations
and Reactor Processes - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart W, Subpart III, Subpart
NNN and Subpart RRR;
(r) Magnetic Tape Coating - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart SSS;
(s) Industrial Surface Coatings - 40 C.F.R. Part 60, Subpart TTT; and
(t) Polymeric Coatings of Supporting Substrates Facilities - 40 C.F.R.
Part 60, Subpart WV.
Note
3-/ Monitoring is to be understood as an overall activity, comprising
measuring of emissions, mass balancing, etc. It can be carried out
continuously or discontinuously.
Appendix I
SOLVENT MANAGEMENT PLAN
Introduction
1. This appendix to the annex on limit values for emissions of non-methane
volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs) from stationary sources provides guidance
on carrying out a solvent management plan. It identifies the principles to be
applied (para. 2), provides a framework for the mass balance (para. 3) and
provides an indication of the requirements for verification of compliance
(para. 4).
Principles
2. The solvent management plan serves the following purposes :
(a) Verification of compliance, as specified in the annex; and
(b) Identification of future reduction options.
Definitions
3 . The following definitions provide a framework for the mass balance
exercise:
(a) Inputs of organic solvents:
I1. The quantity of organic solvents or their quantity in preparations
purchased that are used as input into the process in the time frame over
which the mass balance is being calculated.
I2. The quantity of organic solvents or their quantity in preparations
recovered and reused as solvent input into the process. (The recycled
solvent is counted every time it is used to carry out the activity.)
(b) Outputs of organic solvents:
O1. Emission of NMVOCs in waste gases.
O2. Organic solvents lost in water, if appropriate taking into account
waste-water treatment when calculating O5.
O3. The quantity of organic solvents that remains as contamination or
residue in output of products from the process.
O4. Uncaptured emissions of organic solvents to air. This includes the
general ventilation of rooms, where air is released to the outside
environment via windows, doors, vents and similar openings.
O5. Organic solvents and/or organic compounds lost due to chemical or
physical reactions (including, for example, those that are destroyed,
e.g. by incineration or other waste-gas or waste-water treatments, or
captured, e.g. by adsorption, as long as they are not counted under O6,
O7 or O8).
O6. Organic solvents contained in collected waste.
O7. Organic solvents, or organic solvents contained in preparations,
that are sold or are intended to be sold as a commercially valuable
product.

08. Organic solvents contained in preparations recovered for reuse but
not as input into the process, as long as they are not counted under O7.
09. Organic solvents released in other ways.
Guidance on use of the solvent management plan for verification of compliance
4. The use of the solvent management plan will be determined by the
particular requirement which is to be verified, as follows:
(a) Verification of compliance with the reduction option mentioned in
paragraph 6 (a) of the annex, with a total limit value expressed in solvent
emissions per unit product, or as otherwise stated in the annex.
(i) For all activities using the reduction option mentioned in
paragraph 6 (a) of the annex, the solvent management plan
should be put into effect annually to determine consumption.
Consumption can be calculated by means of the following
equation:
C >> II - 08
A parallel exercise should also be undertaken to determine
solids used in coating in order to derive the annual
reference emission and the target emission each year;
(ii) For assessing compliance with a total limit value expressed
in solvent emissions per unit product or as otherwise stated
in the annex, the solvent management plan should be put into
effect annually to determine emission of NMVOCs. Emission of
NMVOCs can be calculated by means of the following equation:
E = F + O1
Where F is the fugitive emission of NMVOC as defined in
subparagraph (b) (i) below. The emission figure should be
divided by the relevant product parameter;
(b) Determination of fugitive emission of NMVOCs for comparison with
fugitive emission values in the annex:
(i) Methodology: The fugitive emission of NMVOC can be calculated
by means of the following equation:
F = I1 - O1 - O5 - O6 - O7 - O8
or
F = O2 + O3 + O4 + 09
This quantity can be determined by direct measurement of the
quantities. Alternatively, an equivalent calculation can be
made by other means, for instance by using the capture
efficiency of the process.
The fugitive emission value is expressed as a proportion of
the input, which can be calculated by means of the following
equation:
I = I1 + I2
(ii) Frequency: Fugitive emission of NMVOCs can be determined by a
short but comprehensive set of measurements. This need not
to be done again until the equipment is modified.
Appendix II
REDUCTION SCHEME
Principles
1. The purpose of the reduction scheme is to allow the operator the
possibility to achieve by other means emission reductions equivalent to those
achieved if the limit values were to be applied. To that end the operator may
use any reduction scheme specially designed for his installation, provided
that in the end an equivalent emission reduction is achieved. Parties shall
report on progress in achieving the same emission reduction, including
experience with the application of the reduction scheme.
Practice
2. If applying coatings, varnishes, adhesives or inks, the following scheme
can be used. Where it is inappropriate, the competent authority may allow an
operator to apply any alternative exemption scheme which it is satisfied
fulfils the principles outlined here. The design of the scheme takes into
account the following facts :
(a) Where substitutes containing little or no solvent are still under
development,, a time extension must be given to the operator to implement his
emission reduction plans;
(b) The reference point for emission reductions should correspond as
closely as possible to the emissions that would have resulted had no reduction
action been taken.
3. The following scheme shall operate for installations for which a constant
solid content of product can be assumed and used to define the reference point
for emission reductions:
(a) The operator shall forward an emission reduction plan which includes
in particular decreases in the average solvent content of the total input
and/or increased efficiency in the use of solids to achieve a reduction of the
total emissions from the installation to a given percentage of annual
reference emissions, termed the target emission. This must be done in the
following time frame:
(b) The annual reference emission is calculated as follows:
(i) The total mass of solids in the quantity of coating and/or
ink, varnish or adhesive consumed in a year is determined.
Solids are all materials in coatings, inks, varnishes and
adhesives that become solid once the water or the volatile
organic compounds are evaporated;
(ii) The annual reference emissions are calculated by multiplying
the mass determined as in subparagraph (i) by the appropriate
factor listed in the table below. The competent authorities
may adjust these factors for individual installations to
reflect documented increased efficiency in the use of solids.
(iii) The target emission is equal to the annual reference
emission multiplied by a percentage equal to:
(The fugitive emission value + 15), for installations in
the following sectors:
- Vehicle coating (solvent consumption < 15 Mg/year)
and vehicle refinishing;
- Metal, plastic, textile, fabric, film and paper
coating (solvent consumption between 5 and
15 Mg/year);
- Coating of wooden surfaces (solvent consumption
between 15 and 25 Mg/year).
(The fugitive emission value + 5) for all other
installations ;
(iv) Compliance is achieved if the actual solvent emission
determined from the solvent management plan is less than or
equal to the target emission.
Annex VII
TIMESCALES UNDER ARTICLE 3
1. The timescales for the application of the limit values referred to in
article 3, paragraphs 2 and 3/ shall be:
(a) For new stationary sources, one year after the date of entry into
force of the present Protocol for the Party in question/ and
(b) For existing stationary sources:
(i) In the case of a Party that is not a country with an
economy in transition, one year after the date of entry
into force of the present Protocol or 31 December 2007,
whichever is the later; and
(ii) In the case of a Party that is a country with an economy in
transition, eight years after the entry into force of the
present Protocol.
2. The timescales for the application of the limit values for fuels and new
mobile sources referred to in article 3, paragraph 5, and the limit values for
gas oil referred to in annex IV, table 2, shall be:
(i) In the case of a Party that is not a country with an
economy in transition, the date of entry into force of the
present Protocol or the dates associated with the measures
specified in annex VIII and with the limit values specified
in annex IV, table 2, whichever is the later; and
(ii) In the case of a Party that is a country with an economy in
transition, five years after the date of entry into force
of the present Protocol or five years after the dates
associated with the measures specified in annex VIII and
with the limit values in annex IV, table 2, whichever is
the later.
This timescale shall not apply to a Party to the present Protocol to the
extent that that Party is subject to a shorter timescale with regard to gas
oil under the Protocol on Further Reduction of Sulphur Emissions.
3. For the purpose of the present annex, "a country with an economy in
transition" means a Party that has made with its instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession a declaration that it wishes to be treated
as a country with an economy in transition for the purposes of paragraphs 1
and/or 2 of this annex.
Annex VIII
LIMIT VALUES FOR FUELS AND NEW MOBILE SOURCES
Introduction
1. Section A applies to Parties other than Canada and the United States of
America, section B applies to Canada and section C applies to the United
States of America.
2. The annex contains limit values for NOx, expressed as nitrogen dioxide
(N02) equivalents, and for hydrocarbons, most of which are volatile organic
compounds, as well as environmental specifications for marketed fuels for
vehicles.
3. The timescales for applying the limit values in this annex are laid down
in annex VII.
A. Parties other than Canada and the United States of America
Passenger cars and light-duty vehicles
4. Limit values for power-driven vehicles with at least four wheels and
used for the carriage of passengers (category M) and goods (category N) are
given in table 1.
Heavy-duty vehicles
5. Limit values for engines for heavy-duty vehicles are given in tables 2
and 3 depending on the applicable test procedures.
Motorcycles and mopeds
6 . Limit values for motorcycles and mopeds are given in table 6 and
table 7.
Non-road vehicles and machines
7. Limit values for agricultural and forestry tractors and other non-road
vehicle/machine engines are listed in tables 4 and 5. Stage I (table 4) is
based on ECE regulation 96, "Uniform provisions concerning the approval of
compression-ignition (C.I.) engines to be installed in agricultural and
forestry tractors with regard to the emissions of pollutants by the engine".
Fuel quality
8. Environmental quality specifications for petrol and diesel are given in
tables 8 to 11.
Annex IX
MEASURES FOR THE CONTROL OF EMISSIONS OF AMMONIA FROM AGRICULTURAL SOURCES
1. The Parties that are subject to obligations in article 3, paragraph 8
(a), shall take the measures set out in this annex.
2. Each Party shall take due account of the need to reduce losses from the
whole nitrogen cycle.
A. Advisory code of good agricultural practice
3. within one year from the date of entry into force of the present
Protocol for it, a Party shall establish, publish and disseminate an advisory
code of good agricultural practice to control ammonia emissions. The code
shall take into account the specific conditions within the territory of the
Party and shall include provisions on:
-	Nitrogen management, taking account of the whole nitrogen cycle;
-	Livestock feeding strategies;
-	Low-emission manure spreading techniques;
-	Low-emission manure storage systems;
-	Low-emission animal housing systems; and
-	Possibilities for limiting ammonia emissions from the use of
mineral fertilizers.
Parties should give a title to the code with a view to avoiding confusion with
other codes of guidance.
B. Urea and ammonium carbonate fertilizers
4. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the present
Protocol for it, a Party shall take such steps as are feasible to limit
ammonia emissions from the use of solid fertilizers based on urea.
5. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the present
Protocol for it, a Party shall prohibit the use of ammonium carbonate
fertilizers.
C. Manure application
6. Each Party shall ensure that low-emission slurry application techniques
(as listed in guidance document V adopted by the Executive Body at its
seventeenth session (decision 1999/1) and any amendments thereto) that have
been shown to reduce emissions by at least 30% compared to the reference
specified in that guidance document are used as far as the Party in question
considers them applicable, taking account of local soil and geomorphological
conditions, slurry type and farm structure. The timescales for the
application of these measures shall be: 31 December 2009 for Parties with
economies in transition and 31 December 2007 for other Parties. 1/
7. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the present
Protocol for it, a Party shall ensure that solid manure applied to land to be
ploughed shall be incorporated within at least 24 hours of spreading as far as
it considers this measure applicable, taking account of local soil and
geomorphological conditions and farm structure.
D. Manure storage
8. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the present
Protocol for it, a Party shall use for new slurry stores on large pig and
poultry farms of 2,000 fattening pigs or 750 sows or 40,000 poultry,
low-emission storage systems or techniques that have been shown to reduce
emissions by 40% or more compared to the reference (as listed in the guidance
document referred to in paragraph 6), or other systems or techniques with a
demonstrably equivalent efficiency. 2/
9. For existing slurry stores on large pig and poultry farms of 2,000
fattening pigs or 750 sows or 40,000 poultry, a Party shall achieve emission
reductions of 40% insofar as the Party considers the necessary techniques to
be technically and economically feasible. 2./ The timescales for the
application of these measures shall be: 31 December 2009 for Parties with
economies in transition and 31 December 2007 for all other Parties. 1/
E. Animal housing
10. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the present
Protocol for it, a Party shall use, for new animal housing on large pig and
poultry farms of 2,000 fattening pigs or 75O sows or 40,000 poultry, housing
systems which have been shown to reduce emissions by 20% or more compared to
the reference (as listed in the guidance document referred to in paragraph 6),
or other systems or techniques with a demonstrably equivalent efficiency. 2/
Applicability may be limited for animal welfare reasons, for instance in
straw-based systems for pigs and aviary and free-range systems for poultry.
Notes
1/ For the purpose of the present annex, "a country with an economy
in transition" means a Party that has made with its instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession a declaration that it wishes
to be treated as a country with an economy in transition for the purposes of
paragraphs 6 and/or 9 of this annex.
2/ Where a Party judges that other systems or techniques with a
demonstrably equivalent efficiency can be used for manure storage and animal
housing in order to comply with paragraphs 8 and 10, or where a Party judges
the reduction of emissions from manure storage required under paragraph 9 not
to be technically or economically feasible, documentation to this effect shall
be reported in accordance with article 7, paragraph 1 (a).
