amendments to the constitution of the european commission for the control of foot-and-mouth diseasesource: the council,having examined the amendments to the constitution, rules of procedure and financial regulations of the european commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease which the commission had adopted at its nineteenth session in april 1973.noting that these amendments, which were primarily intended to give effect to the commission's decision to introduce a biennial budget cycle corresponding to that of the organization, had been considered by the finance committee and recommended for approval by the council,1. approves the amendments to the constitution of the european commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease as adopted by the commission and reproduced in appendix g to this report,2. confirms the amendments to the rules of procedure and financial regulations as adopted by the commission and reproduced in appendix n to the report of the thirtieth session of the finance committee APPENDIX g: amendments to the constitution of the european commission for the control of foot-and-mouth diseasepresent text and proposed amendments [omitted words in square brackets; amended or added words or provisions are capitalized.] ARTICLE ivgeneral functionsthe following shall be the general functions of the commission:10. to consider and approve the report of the executive committee on the activities of the commission, the [annual] accounts for the past financial period and the budget and programme for the ensuing [year] biennium, for submission to the council of the organization through the director-general ARTICLE vi[organization] sessions4. the director-general of the organization in consultation with the chairman of the commission shall convene a regular session of the commission at least [once a year] every two years. special sessions may be convened by the director-general in consultation with the chairman of the commission or, if so requested by the commission in regular sessions or by at least one third of the members during intervals between regular sessions ARTICLE xexecutive committee1. an executive committee shall be established and shall be composed of the chairman [and] , two vice-chairmen of the commission and [three] five delegates of members selected by the commission at the end of its regular session. the chairman of the commission shall be the chairman of the executive committee.4. the executive committee shall meet at least [once] twice between any two successive regular sessions of the commission ARTICLE xifunctions of the executive committeethe executive committee shall:3. submit to the commission the draft programme and administrative budget, and the [annual] accounts for the past biennium;4. prepare the [annual] report [of] on the activities of the commission during the past biennium for approval by the commission and transmission to the director-general of the organization; ARTICLE xiiadministration2. the expenses of the commission shall be paid out of its administrative budget except those relating to such staff and facilities which can be made available by the organization. the expenses to be borne by the organization shall be determined and paid within the limits of [an annual] the biennial budget prepared by the director-general and approved by the conference of the organization in accordance with the [rules of procedure] general rules and the financial regulations of the organization ARTICLE xiiifinance1. each member of the commission undertakes to contribute annually its share of the administrative budget in accordance with a scale of contribution [to be adopted by a two-third majority of the membership of the commission. for the first five years after the constitution has come into force, these contributions shall be in accordance with the scale indicated in appendix i [fn: in view of its temporary character, the appendix i is not reproduced] . the budget for the administrative activities of the commission for the first five years shall be on the basis of u.s. $50 000 annually, subject to any modification which during this period might be made by constitutional amendment to appendix i. to this sum shall be added any contribution made by members in conformity with paragraph 2 below] .. this scale of contribution shall be adopted by the commission with a two-third majority of its members in accordance with the financial regulations of the commission.2. [contributions to be paid by members not listed in appendix i shall be determined by the commission. for this purpose the methods used for calculating the above-mentioned scale shall apply [fn: the scale of contributions as set out in appendix i was calculated on the basis of national income of each country as expressed in the scale of contributions to fao, the relative position of each country in regard to possible infection with foot-and-mouth disease and the number of livestock to be protected in each country] ] . contributions of states which acquire membership between two regular sessions of the commission shall be determined by the executive committee in accordance with the financial regulations of the commission; for this purpose such criteria as may be specified in the financial regulation shall apply. the determination made by the executive committee shall be subject to confirmation by the commission at its next regular session.3. annual contributions provided for under paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall be payable before the end of the first month of the [financial] year to which they apply.7. at the end of each financial [year] period, any uncommitted balance of the administrative budget shall be placed in a special account to be available for the purposes outlined in articles iv and v.
