EXCHANGE OF NOTES CONSTITUTING AN AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND
JAPAN CONCERNING SALMON FISHERIES
NOTE I.
The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador
Tokyo, 9 May 1967
Excellency,
[see note II]
Accept, etc.
Takeo MIKI
Minister for Foreign Affairs
His Excellency U. Alexis Johnson
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
of the United States of America
NOTE II.
The American Ambassador to the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs
NO. 762 Tokyo, May 9, 1967
Excellency :
I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency's note of
today's date, which reads as follows :
"With reference to the notes exchanged today between Your
Excellency and myself concerning certain fisheries off the coast of
the United States of America, I have the honour to confirm, on behalf
of the Government of Japan, the following understandings reached
between the representatives of the two Governments concerning salmon
fishing.
"With regard to the salmon fishing carried out in the waters
which are contiguous to the territorial sea of the United States of
America and extend to a limit of twelve nautical miles from the base
line from which the United States territorial sea is measured west of
the provisional lines specified in the International Convention for the
High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean, each Government will
pay due regard to the position maintained by the other with respect
to the interpretation and implementation of the said Convention.
"I have further the honour to propose that this note and Your
Excellency's reply confirming the above understandings on behalf
of the Government of the United States of America shall be regarded
as constituting an agreement between the two Governments."
I have further the honor to confirm .the above understandings on
behalf of the. Government of the United .States of America and to agree
that ypxir^xceilency's note and this reply shall be^ regarded as constituting
an agreement * between the two Governments. '-'.'/_-
I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to Your Excellency the
assurances of my highest consideration.
U. Alexis JOHNSON
His Excellency Takeo Miki
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Tokyo
