AFRICAN MIGRATORY LOCUST CONVENTION
The Governments of Belgium, the French Republic and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Desiring to reorganize on an international basis the centre established by
the Government-General of French West Africa for the supervision of the
outbreak area of the African migratory locust on the Niger in the French Sudan,
Desiring to undertake, on the same basis, investigations on the African
migratory locust, and to organize eventually the supervision and preventive
control in any other outbreak area of that locust which may be discovered in
African territory,
Considering that it is expendient to give effect by a Convention to the
recommendations and resolutions put forward by their respective experts at
the meetings at Tilembeya in June 1946,
Have agreed as follows :
Article I
(1) (a) Each of the Governments which have signed this Convention
(hereinafter referred to as the "Signatory Government") may invite the authori
ties of any territory in Africa for whose international relations it is responsible
to become a Participating Authority for the purposes of the present Convention
(hereinafter referred to as a "Participating Authority"). It will notify the
Government of the French Republic which is the depository of the present
Convention, of the names of any such territories the authorities of which are
participating in the present Convention.
(b) The Anglo-Egyptian Sudan may also become a Participating Authority
by notification to that effect given to the Government of the French Republic
hi such manner and form as may be agreed between the Government of Egypt
and the Government of the United Kingdom.
(2) The authorities of any other territory in Africa affected by the African
migratory locust may be invited jointly by the Signatory Governments to
become a Participating Authority by an invitation addressed through the
diplomatic channel to the Government responsible for the international rela
tions of the said territory. If the said Government accepts the invitation, it
shall accede to the present Convention so far as concerns the aforesaid territory
by means of a notification addressed to the Government of the French Republic
and the said Government shall become a party to the present Convention and
the appropriate authorities of the aforementioned territory shall become a
Participating Authority as from the date of receipt of that notification.
(3) The Government of the French Republic shall inform the Signatory
Governments and any Government which has acceded to the present Convention
(hereinafter together referred to as the "Contracting Governments") of each
notification received under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article and of the
date of its receipt.
Article II
(1) An International Administrative Council for the Supervision and
Preventive Control of the African Migratory Locust (hereinafter referred to as
the "Council") is hereby established consisting of representatives designated
by the Contracting Governments or the Participating Authorities, or both.
(2) The seat of Council shall be at Paris.
(3) The Council shall meet once each year in ordinary session at a place
to be decided at its previous meeting.
(4) An extraordinary session of the Council may be convened by the
Secretary-General at the demand of any one of the Contracting Governments.
(5) Each Government represented on the Council shall have on the
Council a number of votes proportionate to its contribution as established under
Article VI (2). The votes at the disposal of each Government may be either
accorded to a single representative or distributed amongst the members repre
senting its Participating Authorities.
(6) The Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
It shall nominate an Executive Committee and determine its composition
and competence.
(7) The Council shall elect a President from among its members. He shall
hold office for three years and may be re-elected.
(8) The Council shall at its annual meeting examine the Secretary-General's
report and accounts and adopt plans and estimates for operations in the coming
year.
(9) The Council shall have the right to invite the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations to appoint observers to attend the meetings
of the Council.
(10) The Council shall have the right to invite to attend its meetings in a
consultative capacity any persons whose presence is deemed useful. Such an
invitation shall in any case be addressed to representatives of the Office national
antiacridien fran ais and of the Anti-Locust Research Centre of London.
Article III
(1) The Council shall undertake research on the African migratory locust
and determine adequate methods for its control; for these purposes it may
employ such persons or organizations as it may choose.
(2) The Council shall exercise supervision and preventive control in
outbreak areas already recognized or which will be recognized; for this purpose
one or more International Services for the control of the African migratory
locust (hereinafter referred to as the "Services") shall be created under the
direction of the Council.
(3) At the request of any Participating Authority whose territory is
affected by the spreading beyond the outbreak areas of an invasion of the
African migratory locust, the Council shall assist in any measures that may
become necessary for the destruction of swarms at the earliest possible stage.
(4) The Council shall appoint the Director of each Service, with the prior
approval of the Contracting Government responsible for the international
relations of the territory where the Service is established.
(5) The prior approval of the Council shall be required for all appoint
ments of directing staff of the Services and of scientific personnel. The Council
shall establish the conditions of employment of the personnel of the Services
and shall at all times be entitled to review these conditions and, if they think
fit, to terminate the employment of any members of the Services.
(6) The functions of the Services shall be:
(a) permanent supervision of the African migratory locust in order to observe
and to record variations in the density and phase characters of locust
populations, breeding periods, migrations of solitary locusts, and forma
tion and migrations of incipient bands or swarms;
(b) destruction of all concentrations of locusts which threaten to develop into
gregarious bands and swarms;
(c) investigation of the conditions of life and of the habits of the African
migratory locust, in order to define the factors determining the multiplica
tion and phase transformations.
Article IV
(1) The Council shall have a Secretariat which shall consist of a Secretary-
General and such technical and clerical staff as may be required for the working
of the Council.
(2) The Secretary-General shall be appointed by the Council.
(3) The Secretary-General shall be responsible, under the direction of the
Council, for:
(a) the nomination, appointment and dismissal of the staff of the Secretariat;
(b) the organisation of research work and of the Services;
(c) the transmission by means of periodic reports to Contracting Governments
and Participating Authorities, to the Office national antiacridien fran ais
and to the Anti-Locust Research Centre in London of full information
on the progress of research and of the operations of the Services;
(d) the maintenance of permanent contact and co-operation with other
organizations concerned with the locust problem;
(e) the collection of the contributions of Contracting Governments;
(/) the maintenance of the accounts of the Council and the Secretariat, as
well as the centralisation and control of the expenditure and the accounts
referring to research and to the Services.
(4) The Secretary-General shall submit to the Council a report for the past
year as well as the programmes of work and estimates for the next year. He shall
submit annually to the Council duly verified accounts.
(5) Copies of the documents mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall
be communicated to the Contracting Governments and Participating Authori
ties not later than a month before the annual meeting of the Council.
(6) As soon as the report for the past year, referred to in paragraph (4)
of this article, has been considered by the Council, copies shall be sent to the
Secretary-General of the C.C.T.A.
Article V
(1) The Council shall have the right to nominate persons to inspect the
work of the Services wherever such work is being carried out.
(2) Each Participating Authority will have the right to make similar
inspections, after having informed the Secretary-General in writing. The
expenses in this connection shall be borne by the interest Authority.
Article VI
(1) Each Participating Authority shall bear the cost of the construction in
its territory of the buildings required for the Services.
(2) Each of the Participating Authorities shall contribute in money,
supplies or services to the initial expenses of establishing and equipping the
Services, other than the cost of buildings, and to the current expenses of the
Council, Secretariat, research, and Services, within the following total propor
tions for each Signatory Government: Belgium 20%, France 40%, the United
Kingdom 40%. Any accession to the present Convention by a new Government
shall involve a revision of the percentages stipulated in this paragraph, with a
view to a redistribution of the charges incumbent on each of the Contracting
Governments.
(3) Each Contracting Government shall be responsible for the allocation
of its contribution as between the Participating Authorities of the territories for
whose international relations it is responsible and for the payment of the
contributions due from each of the latter.
Article VII
(1) The Contracting Governments as well as the Participating Authorities
shall accord the same facilities as those accorded to their own nationals and
agents to any agent appointed by the Council to operate in their territories,
under the plans annually adopted by the Council or under the provisions of
Article V, and in particular, they shall accord all such facilities as are necessary
for the performance by the said agents of their official duties.
(2) The Participating Authorities shall, when necessary, give every
possible assistance requested by the Services for the destruction of incipient
swarms.
(3) The Participating Authorities shall bear the cost of their delega
tions' attendance at the Council.
Article VIII
(1) The present Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of
ratification shall be deposited in the Archives of the Government of the French
Republic.
(2) The present Convention shall enter into force on receipt by the Govern
ment of the French Republic of the instruments of ratification of the three
Signatory Governments and shall thereafter remain in force for a period of
ten years both in respect of those three Governments and of any other Govern
ment which later becomes a party to the present Convention under Article
1(2).
(3) At least one year before the expiration of the period stipulated in
paragraph (2) above, the Contracting Governments shall consult together in
order to decide whether the present Convention shall remain in force, and,
if so, whether any modifications are desirable.
(4) If the present Convention is continued in force in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph (3) of this article, then at any time after the expiration
of the period of ten years mentioned in paragraph (2) of this article:
(a) Any Contracting Government may denounce the present Convention by
written notification to the Government of the French Republic. Such
denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of receipt of the
notification by that Government.
(b) Any Contracting Government may give notice that the Authorities of any
territory for whose international relations it is responsible shall cease to
be a Participating Authority. Such notice shall be addressed to the Govern
ment of the French Republic and shall take effect one year after the date of
receipt thereof by that Government.
(c) The Anglo-Egyptian Sudan shall, if it has become a Participating Authority
by virtue of paragraph (1) (6) of article I of the present Convention, cease
to be such an authority at the expiration of one year from the date of
receipt by the Government of the French Republic of a notice to that effect
in such manner and form as may be agreed between the Government of
Egypt and the Government of the United Kingdom.
(5) The Government of the French Republic shall notify all Contracting
Governments of any denunciations or notices made under paragraph (4) of this
article.
(6) The present Convention shall be registered by the Government of the
French Republic with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned being duly authorized by their
respective Governments have signed the present Convention and have affixed
thereto their seals.
DONE at Paris this fiftheenth day of May 1952 in the French and English
languages, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be
deposited in the archives of the Government of the French Republic. The
Government of the French Republic shall transmit duly certified copies thereof
to the other Signatory Governments.

