PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY (1991)

Adopted at Madrid on 3 October 1991


PREAMBLE

      The States Parties to this Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty,
hereinafter referred to as the Parties,

      Convinced of the need to enhance the protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems;

      Convinced of the need to strengthen the Antarctic Treaty system
so as to ensure that Antarctic shall continue forever to be used
exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or
object of international discord;

      Bearing in mind the special legal and political status of
Antarctic and the special responsibility of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties to ensure that all activities in Antarctic are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the Antarctic Treaty;

      Recalling the designation of Antarctic as a Special Conservation
Area and other measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty system to
protect the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated
ecosystems;

      Acknowledging further the unique opportunities Antarctic offers
for scientific monitoring of and research on processes of global as
well as regional importance;

      Reaffirming the conservation principles of the Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources;

      Convinced that the development of a comprehensive regime for the
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated
ecosystems is in the interest of mankind as a whole;

      Desiring to supplement the Antarctic Treaty to this end;

      Have agreed as follows:


ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS

      For the purposes of this Protocol:

(a)   "The Antarctic Treaty" means the Antarctic Treaty done at
Washington
on 1 December 1959;

(b)   "Antarctic Treaty area" means the area to which the provisions
of the Antarctic Treaty apply in accordance with Article VI of that
Treaty;

(c)   "Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings" means the meetings
referred to in Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty;

(d)   "Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties" means the Contracting
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty entitled to appoint representatives to
participate in the meetings referred to in Article IX of that Treaty;


(e)  "Antarctic Treaty system" means the Antarctic Treaty, the
measures in effect under that Treaty, its associated separate
international instruments in force and the measures in effect under
those instruments;

(f)   "Arbitral Tribunal" means the Arbitral Tribunal established in
accordance with the Schedule to this Protocol, which forms an integral
part thereof;

(g)   "Committee" means the Committee for Environmental Protection
established in accordance with Article 11.


ARTICLE 2
OBJECTIVE AND DESIGNATION

      The Parties commit themselves to the comprehensive protection of
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and
hereby designate Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and
science. 


ARTICLE 3
ENVIRONMENTAL PRINCIPLES

1.    The protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems and the intrinsic value of Antarctica, including
its wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the
conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential to
understanding the global environment, shall be fundamental
considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the
Antarctic Treaty area.

2.    To this end:

(a)   activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and
conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment
and dependent and associated ecosystems;

(b)   activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and
conducted so as to avoid:

      (i)  adverse effects on climate or weather patterns;

      (ii) significant adverse effects on air or water quality;

      (iii) significant changes in the atmospheric, terrestrial
           (including aquatic), glacial or marine environments;

      (iv) detrimental changes in the distribution, abundance or
           productivity of species or populations of species of fauna 
           and flora;

      (v)  further jeopardy to endangered or threatened species or
           populations of such species; or

      (vi) degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of biological, 
          scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance;

(c)   activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and
conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior
assessments of, and informed judgments about, their possible impacts
on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems
and on the value of Antarctic for the conduct of scientific research;
such judgments shall take full account of:

      (i)  the scope of the activity, including its area, duration and
           intensity;

      (ii) the cumulative impacts of the activity, both by itself and 
           in combination with other activities in the Antarctic Treaty
           area;

      (iii) whether the activity will detrimentally affect any other
           activity in the Antarctic Treaty area;

      (iv) whether technology and procedures are available to provide 
           for environmentally safe operations;

      (v)  whether there exists the capacity to monitor key
           environmental parameters and ecosystem components so as to
           identify and provide early warning of any adverse effects
           of the activity and to provide for such modification of
           operating procedures as may be necessary in the light of the
           results of monitoring or increased knowledge of the
           Antarctic environment and dependent and associated
           ecosystems; and

      (vi) whether there exists the capacity to respond promptly and
           effectively to accidents, particularly those with potential
           environmental effects;

(d)   regular and effective monitoring shall take place to allow 
assessment of the impacts of ongoing activities, including the
verification of predicted impacts;

(e)   regular and effective monitoring shall take place to facilitate
early detection of the possible unforeseen effects of activities
carried on both within and outside the Antarctic Treaty area on the
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

3.    Activities shall be planned and conducted in the Antarctic Treaty
area so as to accord priority to scientific research and to preserve
the value of Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research,
including research essential to understanding the global environment. 

4.    Activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to
scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and
non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which
advance notice is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the
Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities,
shall:

(a)   take place in a manner consistent with the principles in this
Article; and

(b)   be modified, suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten
to result in impacts upon the Antarctic environment or dependent or
associated ecosystems inconsistent with those principles.


ARTICLE 4
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE OTHER COMPONENTS OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

1.    This Protocol shall supplement the Antarctic Treaty and shall
neither modify nor amend that Treaty.

2.    Nothing in this Protocol shall derogate from the rights and
obligations of the Parties to this Protocol under the other
international instruments in force within the Antarctic Treaty system.


ARTICLE 5
CONSISTENCY WITH THE OTHER COMPONENTS OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

      The Parties shall consult and co-operate with the Contracting
Parties to the other international instruments in force within the
Antarctic Treaty system and their respective institutions with a view
to ensuring the achievement of the objectives and principles of this
Protocol and avoiding any interference with the achievement of the
objectives and principles of those instruments or any inconsistency
between the implementation of those instruments and of this Protocol.

ARTICLE 6
CO-OPERATION

1.    The Parties shall co-operate in the planning and conduct of
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.  To this end, each Party shall
endeavour to:

(a)   promote co-operative programmes of scientific, technical and
educational value, concerning the protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems;

(b)   provide appropriate assistance to other Parties in the 
preparation of environmental impact assessments;

(c)   provide to other Parties upon request information relevant to any
potential environmental risk and assistance to minimize the effects of
accidents which may damage the Antarctic environment or dependent and
associated ecosystems; 

(d)   consult with other Parties with regard to the choice of sites for
prospective stations and other facilities so as to avoid the cumulative
impacts caused by their excessive concentration in any location;

(e)   where appropriate, undertake joint expeditions and share the use
of stations and other facilities; and

(f)   carry out such steps as may be agreed upon at Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings.

2.    Each Party undertakes, to the extent possible, to share
information that maybe helpful to other Parties in planning and
conducting their activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, with a view
to the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems. 

3.    The Parties shall co-operate with those Parties which may
exercise jurisdiction in areas adjacent to the Antarctic Treaty area
with a view to ensuring that activities in the Antarctic Treaty area
do not have adverse environmental impacts on those areas.


ARTICLE 7
PROHIBITION OF MINERAL RESOURCE ACTIVITIES

      Any activity relating to mineral resources, other than scientific
research, shall be prohibited.


ARTICLE 8
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

1.    Proposed activities referred to in paragraph 2 below shall be
subject to the procedures set out in Annex I for prior assessment of
the impacts of those activities on the Antarctic environment or on
dependent or associated ecosystems according to whether those
activities are identified as having:

(a)   less than a minor or transitory impact;

(b)   a minor or transitory impact; or

(c)   more than a minor or transitory impact.

2.    Each Party shall ensure that the assessment procedures set out
in Annex I are applied in the planning processes leading to decisions
about any activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant
to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental
and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which
advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic
Treaty, including associated logistic support activities.

3.    The assessment procedures set out in Annex I shall apply to any
change in an activity whether the change arises from an increase or
decrease in the intensity of an existing activity, from the addition
of an activity, the decommissioning of a facility, or otherwise. 

4.    Where activities are planned jointly by more than one Party, the
Parties involved shall nominate one of their number to co-ordinate the
implementation of the environmental impact assessment procedures set
out in Annex I.


ARTICLE 9
ANNEXES

1.    The Annexes to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.

2.    Annexes, additional to Annexes I-IV, may be adopted and become
effective in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.

3.    Amendments and modifications to Annexes may be adopted and become
effective in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty,
provided that any Annex may itself make provision for amendments and
modifications to become effective on an accelerated basis.

4.    Annexes and any amendments and modifications thereto which have
become effective in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 above shall,
unless an Annex itself provides otherwise in respect of the entry into
effect of any amendment or modification thereto, become effective for
a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty which is not an Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Party, or which was not an Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Party at the time of the adoption, when notice of approval
of that Contracting Party has been received by the Depositary.

5.    Annexes shall, except to the extent that an Annex provides
otherwise, be subject to the procedures for dispute settlement set out
in Articles 18 to 20.



ARTICLE 10
ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS

1.    Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall, drawing upon the
best scientific and technical advice available:

(a)   define, in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol, the
general policy for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems; and

(b)   adopt measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty for the
implementation of this Protocol.

2.    Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall review the work of
the Committee and shall draw fully upon its advice and recommendations
in carrying out the tasks referred to in paragraph 1 above, as well as
upon the advice of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research.


ARTICLE 11
COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

1.    There is hereby established the Committee for Environmental
Protection.

2.    Each Party shall be entitled to be a member of the Committee and
to appoint a representative who may be accompanied by experts and
advisers. 

3.    Observer status in the Committee shall be open to any Contracting
Party to the Antarctic Treaty which is not a Party to this Protocol.

4.    The Committee shall invite the President of the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research and the Chairman of the Scientific
Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources to
participate as observers at its sessions.  The Committee may also, with
the approval of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, invite such
other relevant scientific, environmental and technical organisations
which can contribute to its work to participate as observers at its
sessions.

5.    The Committee shall present a report on each of its sessions to
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  The report shall cover all
matters considered at the session and shall reflect the views
expressed. The report shall be circulated to the Parties and to
observers attending the session, and shall thereupon be made publicly
available.

6.    The Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure which shall be
subject to approval by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.


ARTICLE 12
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

1.    The functions of the Committee shall be to provide advice and
formulate recommendations to the Parties in connection with the
implementation of this Protocol, including the operation of its
Annexes, for consideration at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings,
and to perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.  In particular, it shall
provide advice on:


(a)   the effectiveness of measures taken pursuant to this Protocol;

(b)   the need to update, strengthen or otherwise improve such
measures;

(c)   the need for additional measures, including the need for
additional Annexes, where appropriate;

(d)   the application and implementation of the environmental impact 
assessment procedures set out in Article 8 and Annex I;

(e)   means of minimising or mitigating environmental impacts of
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;

(f)   procedures for situations requiring urgent action, including
response action in environmental emergencies;

(g)   the operation and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected
Area system;

(h)   inspection procedures, including formats for inspection reports
and checklists for the conduct of inspections;

(i)   the collection, archiving, exchange and evaluation of information
related to environmental protection;

(j)   the state of the Antarctic environment; and 

(k)   the need for scientific research, including environmental
monitoring, related to the implementation of this Protocol.

2.    In carrying out its functions, the Committee shall, as
appropriate, consult with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research, the Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources and other relevant scientific, environmental
and technical organizations.


ARTICLE 13
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PROTOCOL

1.    Each Party shall take appropriate measures within its competence,
including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions
and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance with this Protocol. 

2.    Each Party shall exert appropriate efforts, consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no one engages in any
activity contrary to this Protocol.

3.    Each Party shall notify all other Parties of the measures it
takes pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 above.

4.    Each Party shall draw the attention of all other Parties to any
activity which in its opinion affects the implementation of the
objectives and principles of this Protocol.

5.    The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall draw the
attention of any State which is not a Party to this Protocol to any
activity undertaken by that State, its agencies, instrumentalities,
natural or juridical persons, ships, aircraft or other means of
transport which affects the implementation of the objectives and
principles of this Protocol.



ARTICLE 14
INSPECTION

1.    In order to promote the protection of the Antarctic environment
and dependent and associated ecosystems, and to ensure compliance with
this Protocol, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties shall arrange,
individually or collectively, for inspections by observers to be made
in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

2.    Observers are:

(a)   observers designated by any Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party
who shall be nationals of that Party; and

(b)   any observers designated at Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings to carry out inspections under procedures to be established
by an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 

3.    Parties shall co-operate fully with observers undertaking
inspections, and shall ensure that during inspections, observers are
given access to all parts of stations, installations, equipment, ships
and aircraft open to inspection under Article VII (3) of the Antarctic
Treaty, as well as to all records maintained thereon which are called
for pursuant to this Protocol.

4.    Reports of inspections shall be sent to the Parties whose
stations, installations, equipment, ships or aircraft are covered by
the reports. After those Parties have been given the opportunity to
comment, the reports and any comments thereon shall be circulated to
all the Parties and to the Committee, considered at the next Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting, and thereafter made publicly available.


ARTICLE 15
EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTION

1.    In order to respond to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic
Treaty area, each Party agrees to:

(a)   provide for prompt and effective response action to such
emergencies which might arise in the performance of scientific research
programmes, tourism and all other governmental and nongovernmental
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is
required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including
associated logistic support activities; and

(b)   establish contingency plans for response to incidents with
potential adverse effects on the Antarctic environment or dependent and
associated ecosystems.

2.    To this end, the Parties shall:

(a)   co-operate in the formulation and implementation of such
contingency plans; and

(b)   establish procedures for immediate notification of, and
co-operative response to, environmental emergencies.

3.    In the implementation of this Article, the Parties shall draw
upon the advice of the appropriate international organisations.


ARTICLE 16
LIABILITY

      Consistent with the objectives of this Protocol for the
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems, the Parties undertake to elaborate rules and
procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities
taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by this Protocol.
Those rules and procedures shall be included in one or more Annexes to
be adopted in accordance with Article 9 (2).


ARTICLE 17
ANNUAL REPORT BY PARTIES

1.    Each Party shall report annually on the steps taken to implement
this Protocol.  Such reports shall include notifications made in
accordance with Article 13 (3), contingency plans established in
accordance with Article 15 and any other notifications and information
called for pursuant to this Protocol for which there is no other
provision concerning the circulation and exchange of information.

2.    Reports made in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall be
circulated to all Parties and to the Committee, considered at the next
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, and made publicly available.


ARTICLE 18
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

      If a dispute arises concerning the interpretation or application 
of this Protocol, the parties to the dispute shall, at the request of
any one of them, consult among themselves as soon as possible with a
view to having the dispute resolved by negotiation, inquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement or other peaceful means
to which the parties to the dispute agree.


ARTICLE 19
CHOICE OF DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE

1.    Each Party, when signing, ratifying, accepting, approving or
acceding to this Protocol, or at any time thereafter, may choose, by
written declaration, one or both of the following means for the
settlement of disputes concerning the interpretation or application of
Articles 7, 8 and 15 and, except to the extent that an Annex provides
otherwise, the provisions of any Annex and, insofar as it relates to
these Articles and provisions, Article 13:

(a)   the International Court of Justice;

(b)   the Arbitral Tribunal.

2.    A declaration made under paragraph 1 above shall not affect the
operation of Article 18 and Article 20 (2).

3.    A Party which has not made a declaration under paragraph 1 above
or in respect of which a declaration is no longer in force shall be
deemed to have accepted the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal.

4.    If the parties to a dispute have accepted the same means for the
settlement of a dispute, the dispute may be submitted only to that
procedure, unless the parties otherwise agree.


5.    If the parties to a dispute have not accepted the same means for
the settlement of a dispute, or if they have both accepted both means,
the dispute may be submitted only to the Arbitral Tribunal, unless the
parties otherwise agree.

6.    A declaration made under paragraph 1 above shall remain in force
until it expires in accordance with its terms or until three months
after written notice of revocation has been deposited with the
Depositary. 

7.    A new declaration, a notice of revocation or the expiry of a
declaration shall not in any way affect proceedings pending before the
International Court of Justice or the Arbitral Tribunal, unless the
parties to the dispute otherwise agree.

8.    Declarations and notices referred to in this Article shall be
deposited with the Depositary who shall transmit copies thereof to all
Parties.


ARTICLE 20
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE

1.    If the parties to a dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of Articles 7, 8 or 15 or, except to the extent that an
Annex provides otherwise, the provisions of any Annex or, insofar as
it relates to these Articles and provisions, Article 13, have not
agreed on a means for resolving it within 12 months of the request for
consultation pursuant to Article 18, the dispute shall be referred, at
the request of any party to the dispute, for settlement in accordance
with the procedure determined by Article 19 (4) and (5).

2.    The Arbitral Tribunal shall not be competent to decide or rule
upon any matter within the scope of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. 
In addition, nothing in this Protocol shall be interpreted as
conferring competence or jurisdiction on the International Court of
Justice or any other tribunal established for the purpose of settling
disputes between Parties to decide or otherwise rule upon any matter
within the scope of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty.


ARTICLE 21
SIGNATURE

      This Protocol shall be open for signature at Madrid on the 4th
of October 1991 and thereafter at Washington until the 3rd of October
1992 by any State which is a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.


ARTICLE 22
RATIFICATION, ACCEPTANCE, APPROVAL OR ACCESSION

1.    This Protocol is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval
by signatory States.

2.    After the 3rd of October 1992 this Protocol shall be open for
accession by any State which is a Contracting Party to the Antarctic
Treaty.

3.    Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
shall be deposited with the Government of the United States of America,
hereby designated as the Depositary.


4.    After the date on which this Protocol has entered into force, the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties shall not act upon a notification
regarding the entitlement of a Contracting Party to the Antarctic
Treaty to appoint representatives to participate in Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings in accordance with Article IX (2) of the
Antarctic Treaty unless that Contracting Party has first ratified,
accepted, approved or acceded to this Protocol.


ARTICLE 23
ENTRY INTO FORCE

1.    This Protocol shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
following the date of deposit of instruments of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession by all States which are Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties at the date on which this Protocol is
adopted.

2.    For each Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty which,
subsequent to the date of entry into force of this Protocol, deposits
an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, this
Protocol shall enter into force on the thirtieth day following such
deposit.


ARTICLE 24
RESERVATIONS

      Reservations to this Protocol shall not be permitted.


ARTICLE 25
MODIFICATION OR AMENDMENT

1.    Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 9, this Protocol
may be modified or amended at any time in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article XII (1) (a) and (b) of the Antarctic
Treaty.

2.    If, after the expiration of 50 years from the date of entry into
force of this Protocol, any of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties so requests by a communication addressed to the Depositary, a
conference shall be held as soon as practicable to review the operation
of this Protocol.

3.    A modification or amendment proposed at any Review Conference
called pursuant to paragraph 2 above shall be adopted by a majority of
the Parties, including 3/4 of the States which are Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties at the time of adoption of this Protocol.

4.    A modification or amendment adopted pursuant to paragraph 3 above
shall enter into force upon ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession by 3/4 of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties,
including ratification, acceptance, approval or accession by all States
which are Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties at the time of adoption
of this Protocol.

5. (a)     With respect to Article 7, the prohibition on Antarctic
mineral resource activities contained therein shall continue unless
there is in force a binding legal regime on Antarctic mineral resource
activities that includes an agreed means for determining whether, and,
if so, under which conditions, any such activities would be acceptable.

This regime shall fully safeguard the interests of all States referred
to in Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty and apply the principles
thereof.  Therefore, if a modification or amendment to Article 7 is
proposed at a Review Conference referred to in paragraph 2 above, it
shall include such a binding legal regime.

(b)   If any such modification or amendment has not entered into force
within 3 years of the date of its adoption, any Party may at any time
thereafter notify to the Depositary of its withdrawal from this
Protocol, and such withdrawal shall take effect 2 years after receipt
of the notification by the Depositary.


ARTICLE 26
NOTIFICATIONS BY THE DEPOSITARY

      The Depositary shall notify all Contracting Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty of the following:

(a)   signatures of this Protocol and the deposit of instruments of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession;

(b)   the date of entry into force of this Protocol and any additional
Annex thereto;

(c)   the date of entry into force of any amendment or modification to
this Protocol;

(d)   the deposit of declarations and notices pursuant to Article 19; 

and

(e)   any notification received pursuant to Article 25 (5) (b).


ARTICLE 27
AUTHENTIC TEXTS AND REGISTRATION WITH THE UNITED NATIONS

1.    This Protocol, done in the English, French, Russian and Spanish
languages, each version being equally authentic, shall be deposited in
the archives of the Government of the United States of America, which
shall transmit duly certified copies thereof to all Contracting Parties
to the Antarctic Treaty.

2.    This Protocol shall be registered by the Depositary pursuant to
Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.



SCHEDULE TO THE PROTOCOL
ARBITRATION

Article 1

1.    The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted and shall function in
accordance with the Protocol, including this Schedule.

2.    The Secretary referred to in this Schedule is the Secretary
General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.


Article 2


1.    Each Party shall be entitled to designate up to three
Arbitrators, at least one of whom shall be designated within three
months of the entry into force of the Protocol for that Party.  Each
Arbitrator shall be experienced in Antarctic affairs, have thorough
knowledge of international law and enjoy the highest reputation for
fairness, competence and integrity.  The names of the persons so
designated shall constitute the list of Arbitrators.  Each Party shall
at all times maintain the name of at least one Arbitrator on the list.

2.    Subject to paragraph 3 below, an Arbitrator designated by a Party
shall remain on the list for a period of five years and shall be
eligible for redesignation by that Party for additional five year
periods.

3.    A Party which designated an Arbitrator may withdraw the name of
that Arbitrator from the list.  If an Arbitrator dies or if a Party for
any reason withdraws from the list the name of an Arbitrator designated
by it, the Party which designated the Arbitrator in question shall
notify the Secretary promptly.An Arbitrator whose name is withdrawn
from the list shall continue to serve on any Arbitral Tribunal to which
that Arbitrator has been appointed until the completion of proceedings
before the Arbitral Tribunal.

4.    The Secretary shall ensure that an up-to-date list is maintained
of the Arbitrators designated pursuant to this Article.


Article 3

1.    The Arbitral Tribunal shall be composed of three Arbitrators who
shall be appointed as follows:

(a)   The party to the dispute commencing the proceedings shall appoint
one Arbitrator, who may be its national, from the list referred to in
Article 2. This appointment shall be included in the notification
referred to in Article 4.

(b)   Within 40 days of the receipt of that notification, the other
party to the dispute shall appoint the second Arbitrator, who may be
its national, from the list referred to in Article 2.

(c)   Within 60 days of the appointment of the second Arbitrator, the
parties to the dispute shall appoint by agreement the third Arbitrator
from the list referred to in Article 2. The third Arbitrator shall not
be either a national of a party to the dispute, or a person designated
for the list referred to in Article 2 by a party to the dispute, or of
the same nationality as either of the first two Arbitrators.  The third
Arbitrator shall be the Chairperson of the Arbitral Tribunal.

(d)   If the second Arbitrator has not been appointed within the 
prescribed period, or if the parties to the dispute have not reached
agreement within the prescribed period on the appointment of the third
Arbitrator, the Arbitrator or Arbitrators shall be appointed, at the
request of any party to the dispute and within 30 days of the receipt
of such request, by the President of the International Court of Justice
from the list referred to in Article 2 and subject to the conditions
prescribed in subparagraphs (b) and (c) above. In performing the
functions accorded him or her in this  subparagraph, the President of
the Court shall consult the parties to the dispute.

(e)   If the President of the International Court of Justice is unable
to perform the functions accorded him or her in subparagraph (d) above 
or is a national of a party to the dispute, the functions shall be 
performed by the Vice-President of the Court, except that if the 
Vice-President is unable to perform the functions or is a national of
a party to the dispute the functions shall be performed by the next
most senior member of the Court who is available and is not a national
of a party to the dispute.

2.    Any vacancy shall be filled in the manner prescribed for the
initial appointment.

3.    In any dispute involving more than two Parties, those Parties
having the same interest shall appoint one Arbitrator by agreement
within the period specified in paragraph 1 (b) above.


Article 4

      The party to the dispute commencing proceedings shall so notify
the other party or parties to the dispute and the Secretary in writing. 
Such notification shall include a statement of the claim and the
grounds on which it is based.  The notification shall be transmitted
by the Secretary to all Parties.


Article 5

1.    Unless the parties to the dispute agree otherwise, arbitration
shall take place at The Hague, where the records of the Arbitral
Tribunal shall be kept. The Arbitral Tribunal shall adopt its own rules
of procedure. Such rules shall ensure that each party to the dispute
has a full opportunity to be heard and to present its case and shall
also ensure that the proceedings are conducted expeditiously.

2.    The Arbitral Tribunal may hear and decide counterclaims arising
out of the dispute.

Article 6

1.    The Arbitral Tribunal, where it considers that prima facie it has
jurisdiction under the Protocol, may:

(a)   at the request of any party to a dispute, indicate such
provisional measures as it considers necessary to preserve the
respective rights  of the parties to the dispute;

(b)   prescribe any provisional measures which it considers appropriate
under the circumstances to prevent serious harm to the Antarctic 
environment or dependent or associated ecosystems.

2.    The parties to the dispute shall comply promptly with any
provisional measures prescribed under paragraph 1 (b) above pending an
award under Article 10.

3.    Notwithstanding the time period in Article 20 of the Protocol,
a party to a dispute may at any time, by notification to the other
party or parties to the dispute and to the Secretary in accordance with
Article 4, request that the Arbitral Tribunal be constituted as a
matter of exceptional urgency to indicate or prescribe emergency
provisional measures in accordance with this Article.  In such case,
the Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted as soon as possible in
accordance with Article 3, except that the time periods in Article 3
(1) (b), (c) and (d) shall be reduced to 14 days in each case.  The
Arbitral Tribunal shall decide upon the request for emergency
provisional measures within two months of the appointment of its
Chairperson.

4.    Following a decision by the Arbitral Tribunal upon a request for
emergency provisional measures in accordance with paragraph 3 above,
settlement of the dispute shall proceed in accordance with Articles 18,
19 and 20 of the Protocol.


Article 7

      Any Party which believes it has a legal interest, whether general
or individual,which may be substantially affected by the award of an
Arbitral Tribunal, may,unless the Arbitral Tribunal decides otherwise,
intervene in the proceedings.


Article 8

      The parties to the dispute shall facilitate the work of the
Arbitral Tribunal and, in particular, in accordance with their law and
using all means at their disposal, shall provide it with all relevant
documents and information, and enable it, when necessary, to call
witnesses or experts and receive their evidence.


Article 9

      If one of the parties to the dispute does not appear before the
Arbitral Tribunal or fails to defend its case, any other party to the
dispute may request the Arbitral Tribunal to continue the proceedings
and make its award.


Article 10

1.    The Arbitral Tribunal shall, on the basis of the provisions of
the Protocol and other applicable rules and principles of international
law that are not incompatible with such provisions, decide such
disputes as are submitted to it.

2.    The Arbitral Tribunal may decide, ex aequo et bono, a dispute
submitted to it, if the parties to the dispute so agree.


Article 11

1.    Before making its award, the Arbitral Tribunal shall satisfy
itself that it has competence in respect of the dispute and that the
claim or counterclaim is well founded in fact and law.

2.    The award shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons for the
decision and shall be communicated to the Secretary who shall transmit
it to all Parties.

3.    The award shall be final and binding on the parties to the
dispute and on any Party which intervened in the proceedings and shall
be complied with without delay.  The Arbitral Tribunal shall interpret
the award at the request of a party to the dispute or of any
intervening Party.

4.    The award shall have no binding force except in respect of that
particular case.


5.    Unless the Arbitral Tribunal decides otherwise, the expenses of
the Arbitral Tribunal, including the remuneration of the Arbitrators,
shall be borne by the parties to the dispute in equal shares.


Article 12

      All decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal, including those referred
to in Articles 5, 6 and 11, shall be made by a majority of the
Arbitrators who may not abstain from voting.


Article 13

      This Schedule may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in
accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless the
measure specifies otherwise,the amendment or modification shall be
deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year
after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which
it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it
wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the
measure. 
 
2.    Any amendment or modification of this Schedule which becomes
effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become
effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been
received by the Depositary.



ANNEX I TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC
TREATY

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT 

ARTICLE 1
PRELIMINARY STAGE

1.    The environmental impacts of proposed activities referred to in
Article 8 of the Protocol shall, before their commencement, be
considered in accordance with appropriate national procedures.

2.    If an activity is determined as having less than a minor or
transitory impact, the activity may proceed forthwith.


ARTICLE 2
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

1.    Unless it has been determined that an activity will have less
than a minor or transitory impact, or unless a Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation is being prepared in accordance with Article
3, an Initial Environmental Evaluation shall be prepared.  It shall
contain sufficient detail to assess whether a proposed activity may
have more than a minor or transitory impact and shall include:

(a)   a description of the proposed activity, including its purpose,
location, duration, and intensity; and

(b)   consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity and any
impacts that the activity may have, including consideration of
cumulative impacts in the light of existing and known planned
activities.

2.    If an Initial Environmental Evaluation indicates that a proposed
activity is likely to have no more than a minor or transitory impact,
the activity may proceed, provided that appropriate procedures, which
may include monitoring, are put in place to assess and verify the
impact of the activity.


ARTICLE 3
COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

1.    If an Initial Environmental Evaluation indicates or if it is
otherwise determined that a proposed activity is likely to have more
than a minor or transitory impact, a Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation shall be prepared.

2.    A Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation shall include:

(a)   a description of the proposed activity including its purpose,
location, duration and intensity, and possible alternatives to the 
activity, including the alternative of not proceeding, and the
consequences of those alternatives;

(b)   a description of the initial environmental reference state with
which predicted changes are to be compared and a prediction of the
future environmental reference state in the absence of the proposed
activity;

(c)   a description of the methods and data used to forecast the
impacts of the proposed activity;

(d)   estimation of the nature, extent, duration, and intensity of the 
likely direct impacts of the proposed activity;

(e)   consideration of possible indirect or second order impacts of the
proposed activity;

(f)   consideration of cumulative impacts of the proposed activity in
the light of existing activities and other known planned activities;

(g)   identification of measures, including monitoring programmes, that
could be taken to minimise or mitigate impacts of the proposed activity
and to detect unforeseen impacts and that could provide early warning
of any adverse effects of the activity as well as to deal promptly and
effectively with accidents;

(h)   identification of unavoidable impacts of the proposed activity;

(i)   consideration of the effects of the proposed activity on the
conduct of scientific research and on other existing uses and values;

(j)   an identification of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties
encountered in compiling the information required under this paragraph;

(k)   a non-technical summary of the information provided under this
paragraph; 

and 

(l)   the name and address of the person or organization which prepared
the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation and the address to which
comments thereon should be directed.

3.    The draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation shall be made
publicly available and shall be circulated to all Parties, which shall
also make it publicly available, for comment.  A period of 90 days
shall be allowed for the receipt of comments.

4.    The draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation shall be
forwarded to the Committee at the same time as it is circulated to the
Parties, and at least 120 days before the next Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, for consideration as appropriate.

5.    No final decision shall be taken to proceed with the proposed
activity in the Antarctic Treaty area unless there has been an
opportunity for consideration of the draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on the advice
of the Committee, provided that no decision to proceed with a proposed
activity shall be delayed through the operation of this paragraph for
longer than 15 months from the date of circulation of the draft
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation.

6.    A final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation shall address and
shall include or summarise comments received on the draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation.  The final Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation, notice of any decisions relating thereto, and any
evaluation of the significance of the predicted impacts in relation to
the advantages of the proposed activity, shall be circulated to all
Parties, which shall also make them publicly available, at least 60
days before the commencement of the proposed activity in the Antarctic
Treaty area. 


ARTICLE 4 
DECISIONS TO BE BASED ON COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATIONS

      Any decision on whether a proposed activity, to which Article 3
applies, should proceed, and, if so, whether in its original or in a
modified form, shall be based on the Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation as well as other relevant considerations.


ARTICLE 5
MONITORING

1.    Procedures shall be put in place, including appropriate
monitoring of key environmental indicators, to assess and verify the
impact of any activity that proceeds following the completion of a
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. 

2.    The procedures referred to in paragraph 1 above and in Article
2 (2) shall be designed to provide a regular and verifiable record of
the impacts of the activity in order, inter alia, to:

(a)   enable assessments to be made of the extent to which such impacts
are consistent with the Protocol; and

(b)   provide information useful for minimising or mitigating impacts, 
and, where appropriate, information on the need for suspension, 
cancellation or modification of the activity.


ARTICLE 6
CIRCULATION OF INFORMATION


1.    The following information shall be circulated to the Parties,
forwarded to the Committee and made publicly available:

(a)   a description of the procedures referred to in Article 1;

(b)   an annual list of any Initial Environmental Evaluations prepared
in accordance with Article 2 and any decisions taken in consequence
thereof;

(c)   significant information obtained, and any action taken in 
consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with
Articles 2 (2) and 5; and

(d)   information referred to in Article 3 (6).

2.    Any Initial Environmental Evaluation prepared in accordance with
Article 2 shall be made available on request.


ARTICLE 7
CASES OF EMERGENCY

1.    This Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to the
safety of human life or of ships, aircraft or equipment and facilities
of high value, or the protection of the environment, which require an
activity to be undertaken without completion of the procedures set out
in this Annex.

2.    Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency, which
would otherwise have required preparation of a Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation, shall be circulated immediately to all
Parties and to the Committee and a full explanation of the activities
carried out shall be provided within 90 days of those activities.


ARTICLE 8
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1.    This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in
accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless the
measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be
deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year
after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which
it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties notifies the Depositary, within that period, that it wishes an
extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2.    Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes
effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become
effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been
received by the Depositary.



ANNEX II TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC
TREATY

CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FAUNA AND FLORA

Article 1
DEFINITIONS

      For the purposes of this Annex:

(a)   "native mammal" means any member of any species belonging to the 
Class Mammalia, indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty area or occurring
there seasonally through natural migrations;

(b)   "native bird" means any member, at any stage of its life cycle
(including eggs), of any species of the Class Aves indigenous to the
Antarctic Treaty area or occurring there seasonally through natural
migrations;

(c)   "native plant" means any terrestrial or freshwater vegetation, 
including bryophytes, lichens, fungi and algae, at any stage of its
life cycle (including seeds, and other propagules), indigenous to the
Antarctic Treaty area;

(d)   "native invertebrate" means any terrestrial or freshwater
invertebrate, at any stage of its life cycle, indigenous to the 
Antarctic Treaty area;

(e)   "appropriate authority" means any person or agency authorized by
a Party to issue permits under this Annex;

(f)   "permit" means a formal permission in writing issued by an
appropriate authority; 

(g)   "take" or "taking" means to kill, injure, capture, handle or 
molest, a native mammal or bird, or to remove or damage such 
quantities of native plants that their local distribution or abundance
would be significantly affected;

(h)   "harmful interference" means:

      (i)  flying or landing helicopters or other aircraft in a manner
          that disturbs concentrations of birds and seals;

      (ii) using vehicles or vessels, including hovercraft and small
           boats, in a manner that disturbs concentrations of birds and 
           seals;

      (iii) using explosives or firearms in a manner that disturbs
            concentrations of birds and seals;

      (iv) wilfully disturbing breeding or moulting birds or
           concentrations of birds and seals by persons on foot;

      (v)  significantly damaging concentrations of native terrestrial 
           plants by landing aircraft, driving vehicles, or walking on 
           them, or by other means; and

      (vi) any activity that results in the significant adverse
           modification of habitats of any species or population of
           native mammal, bird, plant or invertebrate.

(i)   "International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling" means
the Convention done at Washington on 2 December 1946.


ARTICLE 2
CASES OF EMERGENCY

1.    This Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to the
safety of human life or of ships, aircraft, or equipment and facilities
of high value, or the protection of the environment.

2.    Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be
circulated immediately to all Parties and to the Committee.


Article 3
PROTECTION OF NATIVE FAUNA AND FLORA

1.    Taking or harmful interference shall be prohibited, except in
accordance with a permit.

2.    Such permits shall specify the authorized activity, including
when, where and by whom it is to be conducted and shall be issued only
in the following circumstances:

(a)   to provide specimens for scientific study or scientific
information;

(b)   to provide specimens for museums, herbaria, zoological and
botanical gardens, or other educational or cultural institutions or
uses; and 

(c)   to provide for unavoidable consequences of scientific activities 
not otherwise authorized under sub-paragraphs (a) or (b) above, or of
the construction and operation of scientific support facilities.

3.    The issue of such permits shall be limited so as to ensure that:

(a)   no more native mammals, birds, or plants are taken than are
strictly necessary to meet the purposes set forth in paragraph 2 above;

(b)   only small numbers of native mammals or birds are killed and in
no case more native mammals or birds are killed from local populations 
than can, in combination with other permitted takings, normally be 
replaced by natural reproduction in the following season; and  

(c)   the diversity of species, as well as the habitats essential to 
their existence, and the balance of the ecological systems existing 
within the Antarctic Treaty area are maintained.

4.    Any species of native mammals, birds and plants listed in
Appendix A to this Annex shall be designated "Specially Protected
  Species", and shall be accorded special protection by the Parties.

5.    A permit shall not be issued to take a Specially Protected
Species unless the taking:

(a)   is for a compelling scientific purpose;

(b)   will not jeopardize the survival or recovery of that species or 
local population; and

(c)   uses non-lethal techniques where appropriate.

6.    All taking of native mammals and birds shall be done in the
manner that involves the least degree of pain and suffering
practicable.


Article 4
INTRODUCTION OF NON-NATIVE SPECIES, PARASITES AND DISEASES

1.    No species of animal or plant not native to the Antarctic Treaty 
area shall be introduced onto land or ice shelves, or into water in the
Antarctic Treaty area except in accordance with a permit.

2.    Dogs shall not be introduced onto land or ice shelves and dogs
currently in those areas shall be removed by April 1, 1994.

3.    Permits under paragraph 1 above shall be issued to allow the
importation only of the animals and plants listed in Appendix B to this
Annex and shall specify the species, numbers and, if appropriate, age
and sex and precautions to be taken to prevent escape or contact with
native fauna and flora.

4.    Any plant or animal for which a permit has been issued in
accordance with paragraphs 1 and 3 above, shall, prior to expiration
of the permit, be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or be disposed
of by incineration or equally effective means that eliminates risk to
native fauna or flora.  The permit shall specify this obligation.  Any
other plant or animal introduced into the Antarctic Treaty area not
native to that area, including any progeny, shall be removed or
disposed of, by incineration or by equally effective means, so as to
be rendered sterile, unless it is determined that they pose no risk to
native flora or fauna. 

5.    Nothing in this Article shall apply to the importation of food
into the Antarctic Treaty area provided that no live animals are
imported for this purpose and all plants and animal parts and products
are kept under carefully controlled conditions and disposed of in
accordance with Annex III to the Protocol and Appendix C to this Annex.

6.    Each Party shall require that precautions, including those listed
in Appendix C to this Annex, be taken to prevent the introduction of
micro-organisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts, fungi) not
present in the native fauna and flora.


Article 5
INFORMATION

      Each Party shall prepare and make available information setting
forth, in particular, prohibited activities and providing lists of
Specially Protected Species and relevant Protected Areas to all those
persons present in or intending to enter the Antarctic Treaty area with
a view to ensuring that such persons understand and observe the
provisions of this Annex.


ARTICLE 6
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.    The Parties shall make arrangements for:

(a)   collecting and exchanging records (including records of permits) 
and statistics concerning the numbers or quantities of each species of
native mammal, bird or plant taken annually in the Antarctic Treaty
area;

(b)   obtaining and exchanging information as to the status of native
mammals, birds, plants, and invertebrates in the Antarctic Treaty area,
and the extent to which any species or population needs protection;

(c)   establishing a common form in which this information shall be
submitted by Parties in accordance with paragraph 2 below.


2.    Each Party shall inform the other Parties as well as the
Committee before the end of November of each year of any step taken
pursuant to paragraph 1 above and of the number and nature of permits
issued under this Annex in the preceding period of 1st July to 30th
June.


ARTICLE 7
RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER AGREEMENTS OUTSIDE THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

      Nothing in this Annex shall derogate from the rights and
obligations of Parties under the International Convention for the
Regulation of Whaling.


ARTICLE 8
REVIEW

      The Parties shall keep under continuing review measures for the
conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, taking into account any
recommendations from the Committee.


ARTICLE 9
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1.    This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in
accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless the
measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be
deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year
after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which
it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it
wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the
measure. 

2.    Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes
effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become
effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been
received by the Depositary.



APPENDICES TO THE ANNEX

APPENDIX A:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED SPECIES

      All species of the genus Arctocephalus, Fur Seals. Ommatophoca
rossii, Ross Seal.


APPENDIX B:
IMPORTATION OF ANIMALS AND PLANTS

      The following animals and plants may be imported into the
Antarctic Treaty area in accordance with permits issued under Article
4 of this Annex:

(a)   domestic plants; and

(b)   laboratory animals and plants including viruses, bacteria, yeasts
and fungi.


APPENDIX C:
PRECAUTIONS TO PREVENT INTRODUCTION OF MICRO-ORGANISMS

1.    Poultry.  No live poultry or other living birds shall be brought
into the Antarctic Treaty area.  Before dressed poultry is packaged for
shipment to the Antarctic Treaty area, it shall be inspected for
evidence of disease, such as Newcastle's Disease, tuberculosis, and
yeast infection.  Any poultry or parts not consumed shall be removed
from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposed of by incineration or
equivalent means that eliminates risks to native flora and fauna.

2.    The importation of non-sterile soil shall be avoided to the
maximum extent practicable.

NNEX III TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
WASTE DISPOSAL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
1. This Annex shall apply to activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area
pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and nongovernmental
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required
under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support
activities.
2. The amount of wastes produced or disposed of in the Antarctic Treaty area shall
be reduced as far as practicable so as to minimise impact on the Antarctic environment
and to minimise interference with the natural values of Antarctica, with scientific
research and with other uses of Antarctica which are consistent with the Antarctic Treaty.
3. Waste storage, disposal and removal from the Antarctic Treaty area, as well as
recycling and source reduction, shall be essential considerations in the planning and
conduct of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.
4. Wastes removed from the Antarctic Treaty area shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, be returned to the country from which the activities generating the waste
were organized or to any other country in which arrangements have been made for the
disposal of such wastes in accordance with relevant international agreements.
5. Past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of
Antarctic activities shall be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of
such sites. This obligation shall not be interpreted as requiring:
(a) the removal of any structure designated as a historic site or monument; or
(b) the removal of any structure or waste material in circumstances where the
removal by any practical option would result in greater adverse environmental
impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location.
ARTICLE 2
WASTE DISPOSAL BY REMOVAL FROM THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA
1. The following wastes, if generated after entry into force of this Annex, shall be
removed from the Antarctic Treaty area by the generator of such wastes:
(a) radio-active materials;
(b) electrical batteries;
(c) fuel, both liquid and solid;
(d) wastes containing harmful levels of heavy metals or acutely toxic or harmful
persistent compounds;
(e) poly-vinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethane foam, polystyrene foam, rubber and
lubricating oils, treated timbers and other products which contain additives that
could produce harmful emissions if incinerated;
(f) all other plastic wastes, except low density polyethylene containers (such as
bags for storing wastes), provided that such containers shall be incinerated in
accordance with Article 3 (1);
(g) fuel drums; and
(h) other solid, non-combustible wastes;
provided that the obligation to remove drums and solid non-combustible wastes
contained in subparagraphs (g) and (h) above shall not apply in circumstances where the
removal of such wastes by any practical option would result in greater adverse
environmental impact than leaving them in their existing locations.
2. Liquid wastes which are not covered by paragraph 1 above and sewage and
domestic liquid wastes, shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be removed from the
Antarctic Treaty area by the generator of such wastes.
3. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area by the
generator of such wastes, unless incinerated, autoclaved or otherwise treated to be made
sterile:
(a) residues of carcasses of imported animals;
(b) laboratory culture of micro-organisms and plant pathogens; and
(c) introduced avian products.
ARTICLE 3
WASTE DISPOSAL BY INCINERATION
1. Subject to paragraph 2 below, combustible wastes, other than those referred to in
Article 2 (1), which are not removed from the Antarctic Treaty area shall be burnt in
incinerators which to the maximum extent practicable reduce harmful emissions. Any
emission standards and equipment guidelines which may be recommended by, inter alia,
the Committee and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research shall be taken into
account. The solid residue of such incineration shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty area.
2. All open burning of wastes shall be phased out as soon as practicable, but no later
than the end of the 1998/1999 season. Pending the completion of such phase-out, when it
is necessary to dispose of wastes by open burning, allowance shall be made for the wind
direction and speed and the type of wastes to be burnt to limit particulate deposition and
to avoid such deposition over areas of special biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or
wilderness significance including, in particular, areas accorded protection under the
Antarctic Treaty.
ARTICLE 4
OTHER WASTE DISPOSAL ON LAND
1. Wastes not removed or disposed of in accordance with Articles 2 and 3 shall not
be disposed of onto ice-free areas or into fresh water systems.
2. Sewage, domestic liquid wastes and other liquid wastes not removed from the
Antarctic Treaty area in accordance with Article 2, shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, not be disposed of onto sea ice, ice shelves or the grounded ice-sheet,
provided that such wastes which are generated by stations located inland on ice shelves or
on the grounded ice-sheet may be disposed of in deep ice pits where such disposal is the
only practicable option. Such pits shall not be located on known ice-flow lines which
terminate at ice-free areas or in areas of high ablation.
3. Wastes generated at field camps shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be
removed by the generator of such wastes to supporting stations or ships for disposal in
accordance with this Annex.
ARTICLE 5
DISPOSAL OF WASTE IN THE SEA
1. Sewage and domestic liquid wastes may be discharged directly into the sea,
taking into account the assimilative capacity of the receiving marine environment and
provided that:
(a) such discharge is located, wherever practicable, where conditions exist for
initial dilution and rapid dispersal; and
(b) large quantities of such wastes (generated in a station where the average weekly
occupancy over the austral summer is approximately 30 individuals or more)
shall be treated at least by maceration.
2. The by-product of sewage treatment by the Rotary Biological Contacter process
or similar processes may be disposed of into the sea provided that such disposal does not
adversely affect the local environment, and provided also that any such disposal at sea
shall be in accordance with Annex IV to the Protocol.
ARTICLE 6
STORAGE OF WASTE
All wastes to be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, or otherwise disposed of, shall
be stored in such a way as to prevent their dispersal into the environment.
ARTICLE 7
PROHIBITED PRODUCTS
No polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), non-sterile soil, polystyrene beads, chips or similar
forms of packaging, or pesticides (other than those required for scientific, medical or
hygiene purposes) shall be introduced onto land or ice shelves or into water in the
Antarctic Treaty area.
ARTICLE 8
WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANNING
1. Each Party which itself conducts activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall, in
respect of those activities, establish a waste disposal classification system as a basis for
recording wastes and to facilitate studies aimed at evaluating the environmental impacts
of scientific activity and associated logistic support. To that end, wastes produced shall
be classified as:
(a) sewage and domestic liquid wastes (Group 1);
(b) other liquid wastes and chemicals, including fuels and lubricants (Group 2);
(c) solids to be combusted (Group 3);
(d) other solid wastes (Group 4); and
(e) radioactive material (Group 5).
2. In order to reduce further the impact of waste on the Antarctic environment, each
such Party shall prepare and annually review and update its waste management plans
(including waste reduction, storage and disposal), specifying for each fixed site, for field
camps generally, and for each ship (other than small boats that are part of the operations
of fixed sites or of ships and taking into account existing management plans for ships):
(a) programmes for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned work
sites;
(b) current and planned waste management arrangements, including final disposal;
(c) current and planned arrangements for analysing the environmental effects of
waste and waste management; and
(d) other efforts to minimise any environmental effects of wastes and waste
management.
3. Each such Party shall, as far as is practicable, also prepare an inventory of
locations of past activities (such as traverses, field depots, field bases, crashed aircraft)
before the information is lost, so that such locations can be taken into account in planning
future scientific programmes (such as snow chemistry, pollutants in lichens or ice core
drilling).
ARTICLE 9
CIRCULATION AND REVIEW OF WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS
1. The waste management plans prepared in accordance with Article 8, reports on
their implementation, and the inventories referred to in Article 8 (3), shall be included in
the annual exchanges of information in accordance with Articles III and VII of the
Antarctic Treaty and related Recommendations under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
2. Each Party shall send copies of its waste management plans, and reports on their
implementation and review, to the Committee.
3. The Committee may review waste management plans and reports thereon and
may offer comments, including suggestions for minimising impacts and modifications
and improvement to the plans, for the consideration of the Parties.
4. The Parties may exchange information and provide advice on, inter alia, available
low waste technologies, reconversion of existing installations, special requirements for
effluents, and appropriate disposal and discharge methods.
ARTICLE 10
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
Each Party shall:
(a) designate a waste management official to develop and monitor waste
management plans; in the field, this responsibility shall be delegated to an
appropriate person at each site;
(b) ensure that members of its expeditions receive training designed to limit the
impact of its operations on the Antarctic environment and to inform them of
requirements of this Annex; and
(c) discourage the use of poly-vinyl chloride (PVC) products and ensure that its
expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty are advised of any PVC products they may
introduce into that area in order that these products may be removed
subsequently in accordance with this Annex.
ARTICLE 11
REVIEW
This Annex shall be subject to regular review in order to ensure that it is updated to
reflect improvement in waste disposal technology and procedures and to ensure thereby
maximum protection of the Antarctic environment.
ARTICLE 12
CASES OF EMERGENCY
1. This Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to the safety of human
life or of ships, aircraft or equipment and facilities of high value or the protection of the
environment.
2. Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be circulated
immediately to all Parties and to the Committee.
ARTICLE 13
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION
1. This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance
with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the
amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become
effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which
it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies
the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it
is unable to approve the amendment.
2. Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in
accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party
when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.


ANNEX IV TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
PREVENTION OF MARINE POLLUTION
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Annex:
(a) "discharge" means any release howsoever caused from a ship and includes any
escape, disposal, spilling, leaking, pumping, emitting or emptying;
(b) "garbage" means all kinds of victual, domestic and operational waste excluding
fresh fish and parts thereof, generated during the normal operation of the ship,
except those substances which are covered by Articles 3 and 4;
(c) "MARPOL 73/78" means the International Convention for the Prevention of
Pollution from Ships, 1973, as amended by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto
and by any other amendment in force thereafter;
(d) "noxious liquid substance" means any noxious liquid substance as defined in
Annex II of MARPOL 73/78;
(e) "oil" means petroleum in any form including crude oil, fuel oil, sludge, oil
refuse and refined oil products (other than petrochemicals which are subject to
the provisions of Article 4);
(f) "oily mixture" means a mixture with any oil content; and
(g) "ship" means a vessel of any type whatsoever operating in the marine
environment and includes hydrofoil boats, air-cushion vehicles, submersibles,
floating craft and fixed or floating platforms.
ARTICLE 2
APPLICATION
This Annex applies, with respect to each Party, to ships entitled to fly its flag and to any
other ship engaged in or supporting its Antarctic operations, while operating in the
Antarctic Treaty area.
ARTICLE 3
DISCHARGE OF OIL
1. Any discharge into the sea of oil or oily mixture shall be prohibited, except in
cases permitted under Annex I of MARPOL 73/78. While operating in the Antarctic
Treaty area, ships shall retain on board all sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing waters and
other oily residues and mixtures which may not be discharged into the sea. Ships shall
discharge these residues only outside the Antarctic Treaty area, at reception facilities or
as otherwise permitted under Annex I of MARPOL 73/78.
2. This Article shall not apply to:
(a) the discharge into the sea of oil or oily mixture resulting from damage to a ship
or its equipment:
(i) provided that all reasonable precautions have been taken after the
occurrence of the damage or discovery of the discharge for the purpose of
preventing or minimising the discharge; and
(ii) except if the owner or the Master acted either with intent to cause damage,
or recklessly and with the knowledge that damage would probably result;
or
(b) the discharge into the sea of substances containing oil which are being used for
the purpose of combating specific pollution incidents in order to minimise the
damage from pollution.
ARTICLE 4
DISCHARGE OF NOXIOUS LIQUID SUBSTANCES
The discharge into the sea of any noxious liquid substance, and any other chemical or
other substances, in quantities or concentrations that are harmful to the marine
environment, shall be prohibited.
ARTICLE 5
DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE
1. The disposal into the sea of all plastics, including but not limited to synthetic
ropes, synthetic fishing nets, and plastic garbage bags, shall be prohibited.
2. The disposal into the sea of all other garbage, including paper products, rags,
glass, metal, bottles, crockery, incineration ash, dunnage, lining and packing materials,
shall be prohibited.
3. The disposal into the sea of food wastes may be permitted when they have been
passed through a comminuter or grinder, provided that such disposal shall, except in
cases permitted under Annex V of MARPOL 73/78, be made as far as practicable from
land and ice shelves but in any case not less than 12 nautical miles from the nearest land
or ice shelf. Such comminuted or ground food wastes shall be capable of passing through
a screen with openings no greater than 25 millimeters.
4. When a substance or material covered by this article is mixed with other such
substance or material for discharge or disposal, having different disposal or discharge
requirements, the most stringent disposal or discharge requirements shall apply.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall not apply to:
(a) the escape of garbage resulting from damage to a ship or its equipment provided
all reasonable precautions have been taken, before and after the occurrence of
the damage, for the purpose of preventing or minimising the escape; or
(b) the accidental loss of synthetic fishing nets, provided all reasonable precautions
have been taken to prevent such loss.
6. The Parties shall, where appropriate, require the use of garbage record books.
ARTICLE 6
DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE
1. Except where it would unduly impair Antarctic operations:
(a) each Party shall eliminate all discharge into the sea of untreated sewage
("sewage" being defined in Annex IV of MARPOL 73/78) within 12 nautical
miles of land or ice shelves;
(b) beyond such distance, sewage stored in a holding tank shall not be discharged
instantaneously but at a moderate rate and, where practicable, while the ship is
en route at a speed of no less than 4 knots.
This paragraph does not apply to ships certified to carry not more than 10 persons.
2. The Parties shall, where appropriate, require the use of sewage record books.
ARTICLE 7
CASES OF EMERGENCY
1. Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating
to the safety of a ship and those on board or saving life at sea.
2. Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be circulated
immediately to all Parties and to the Committee.
ARTICLE 8
EFFECT ON DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED ECOSYSTEMS
In implementing the provisions of this Annex, due consideration shall be given to the
need to avoid detrimental effects on dependent and associated ecosystems, outside the
Antarctic Treaty area.
ARTICLE 9
SHIP RETENTION CAPACITY AND RECEPTION FACILITIES
1. Each Party shall undertake to ensure that all ships entitled to fly its flag and any
other ship engaged in or supporting its Antarctic operations, before entering the Antarctic
Treaty area, are fitted with a tank or tanks of sufficient capacity on board for the retention
of all sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing water and other oily residues and mixtures, and
have sufficient capacity on board for the retention of garbage, while operating in the
Antarctic Treaty area and have concluded arrangements to discharge such oily residues
and garbage at a reception facility after leaving that area. Ships shall also have sufficient
capacity on board for the retention of noxious liquid substances.
2. Each Party at whose ports ships depart en route to or arrive from the Antarctic
Treaty area undertakes to ensure that as soon as practicable adequate facilities are
provided for the reception of all sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing water, other oily
residues and mixtures, and garbage from ships, without causing undue delay, and
according to the needs of the ships using them.
3. Parties operating ships which depart to or arrive from the Antarctic Treaty area at
ports of other Parties shall consult with those Parties with a view to ensuring that the
establishment of port reception facilities does not place an inequitable burden on Parties
adjacent to the Antarctic Treaty area.
ARTICLE 10
DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION,MANNING AND EQUIPMENT OF SHIPS
In the design, construction, manning and equipment of ships engaged in or supporting
Antarctic operations, each Party shall take into account the objectives of this Annex.
ARTICLE 11
SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY
1. This Annex shall not apply to any warship, naval auxiliary or other ship owned or
operated by a State and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial
service. However, each Party shall ensure by the adoption of appropriate measures not
impairing the operations or operational capabilities of such ships owned or operated by it,
that such ships act in a manner consistent, so far as is reasonable and practicable, with
this Annex.
2. In applying paragraph 1 above, each Party shall take into account the importance
of protecting the Antarctic environment.
3. Each Party shall inform the other Parties of how it implements this provision.
4. The dispute settlement procedure set out in Articles 18 to 20 of the Protocol shall
not apply to this Article.
ARTICLE 12
PREVENTIVE MEASURES AND EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
1. In order to respond more effectively to marine pollution emergencies or the threat
thereof in the Antarctic Treaty area, the Parties, in accordance with Article 15 of the
Protocol, shall develop contingency plans for marine pollution response in the Antarctic
Treaty area, including contingency plans for ships (other than small boats that are part of
the operations of fixed sites or of ships) operating in the Antarctic Treaty area,
particularly ships carrying oil as cargo, and for oil spills, originating from coastal
installations, which enter into the marine environment. To this end they shall:
(a) co-operate in the formulation and implementation of such plans; and
(b) draw on the advice of the Committee, the International Maritime Organization
and other international organizations.
2. The Parties shall also establish procedures for cooperative response to pollution
emergencies and shall take appropriate response actions in accordance with such
procedures.
ARTICLE 13
REVIEW
The Parties shall keep under continuous review the provisions of this Annex and other
measures to prevent, reduce and respond to pollution of the Antarctic marine
environment, including any amendments and new regulations adopted under MARPOL
73/78, with a view to achieving the objectives of this Annex.
ARTICLE 14
RELATIONSHIP WITH MARPOL 73/78
With respect to those Parties which are also Parties to MARPOL 73/78, nothing in this
Annex shall derogate from the specific rights and obligations thereunder.
ARTICLE 15
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION
1. This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance
with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the
amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become
effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which
it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies
the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it
is unable to approve the measure.
2. Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in
accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party
when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.
