AGREEMENT BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ CONCERNING THE USE OF
FRONTIER WATERCOURSES
The Imperial Government of Iran and the Government of the Republic of Iraq,
Guided by the spirit of the Algiers Agreement of 6 March 1975,3
Desiring to strengthen the ties of friendship and neighbourly relations between their
respective countries,
And with a view to ensuring the optimum use of contiguous and successive
watercourses in the best interests of both States,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the watercourses listed
below:
A. contiguous watercourses which follow the frontier line between the two countries;
B. successive watercourses which intersect the frontier line between the two countries.
Article 2. The two Contracting Parties have agreed that:
(a) The waters of the Bn va S ta, Q raht and Gangir Rivers shall be divided into
two parts equally between the two countries. This division shall be made at appropriate
places, upon which the two Parties shall agree.
(b) The waters of the Alvend, Kanj n Cham, T b (Mehmeh) and Duver j Rivers
shall be divided between the two countries on the basis of the reports of the 1914
Commission on the Delimitation of the Iranian-Ottoman frontier and in accordance with
custom.
(c) The flow of contiguous and successive watercourses not listed in paragraphs (a)
and (b) above shall be divided between the two countries in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement.
Article 3. The two Contracting Parties shall establish a permanent joint technical
commission composed of an equal number of experts from both States to conduct
technical studies and to supervise matters relating to contiguous and successive
watercourses. The studies shall deal with such issues as the preparation of joint projects
and the establishment of any hydrometric installations and stations that the two Parties
may deem useful or the improvement of existing installations and stations.
Article 4. The Commission referred to in article 3 of this Agreement shall study
possible ways of improving the use of contiguous and successive watercourses and, to this
end, it shall indicate, within one hydrological year from the date of signature of this
Agreement, what proportion of the flow of the watercourses referred to in article 2,
paragraph (b), of this Agreement shall be allotted to each Contracting Party.
It shall also indicate, within two hydrological years from the date of signature of this
Agreement, the most appropriate procedures for making optimum use of the flow of the
watercourses referred to in article 2, paragraph (c), above.
Article 5. The two Contracting Parties undertake to assure the normal flow of the
water available in contiguous and successive watercourses in accordance with the terms of
division set forth in this Agreement.
Each Contracting Party undertakes to refrain from using the contiguous and
successive watercourses for purposes that are contrary to the provisions of this Agreement
or detrimental to the interests of the other Contracting Party.
Article 6. Any disputes which may arise concerning the interpretation or applica
tion of this Agreement shall be settled by the two Contracting Parties in accordance with
the procedure described in article 6 of the Treaty concerning the State frontier and
neighbourly relations between Iran and Iraq, signed on 13 June 1975' at Baghdad.
Article 7. This Agreement shall be ratified by each of the Contracting Parties, in
accordance with its internal legislation and shall enter into force on the date of the
exchange of instruments of ratification.
DONE at Baghdad, on 26 December 1975.
For the Imperial Government
of Iran: 
[Signed]
ABBAS-ALI KHALATBARY 
For the Government of the Republic
of Iraq
[Signed]
SAADOUN HAMADI
