PROTOCOL TO THE 1979 CONVENTION ON LONG-RANGE TRANSBOUNDARY
AIR POLLUTION ON FURTHER REDUCTION OF SULPHUR EMISSIONS
The Parties,
Detennined to implement the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution,
Concerned that emissions of sulphur and other air pollutants continue to be transported
across international boundaries and, in exposed parts of Europe and North America, are
causing widespread damage to natural resources of vital enviromnental and economic importance,
such as forests, soils and waters, and to materials, including historic monmnents,
and, under certain circumstances, have hannful effects on human health,
Resolved to take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimize emissions
of air pollutants and mitigate their adverse effects,
Convinced that where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full
scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing such measures, taking into
account that such precautionary measures to deal with emissions of air pollutants should be
cost-effective,
Mindful that measures to control emissions of sulphur and other air pollutants would
also contribute to the protection of the sensitive Arctic enviromnent
Considering that the predominant sources of air pollution contributing to the acidification
of the enviromnent are the combustion of fossil fuels for energy production, and the
main technological processes in various industrial sectors, as well as transport, which lead
to emissions of sulphur, nitrogen oxides, and other pollutants,
Conscious of the need for a cost-effective regional approach to combating air pollution
that takes account of the variations in effects and abatement costs between countries,
Desiring to take further and more effective action to control and reduce sulphur emissions,
Cognizant that any sulphur control policy, however cost-effective it may be at the regional
level, will result in a relatively heavy economic burden on countries with economies
that are in transition to a market economy,
Bearing in mind that measures taken to reduce sulphur emissions should not constitute
a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on international
competition and trade,
Taking into consideration existing scientific and teclmical data on emissions, atmospheric
processes and effects on the enviromnent of sulphur oxides, as well as on abatement
costs,
Aware that in addition to emissions of sulphur, emissions of nitrogen oxides and of
ammonia are also causing acidification of the enviromnent,
Noting that under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
adopted in New York on 9 May 1992, there is agreement to establish national policies and
take corresponding measures to combat climate change, which can be expected to lead to
reductions of sulphur einissions,
Affinning the need to ensure enviromnentally sound and sustainable development,
Recognizing the need to continue scientific and teclmical cooperation to elaborate further
the approach based on critical loads and critical levels, including efforts to assess several
air pollutants and various effects on the enviromnent materials and human health,
Underlining that scientific and teclmical knowledge is developing and that it will be
necessary to take such developments into account when reviewing the adequacy of the obligations
entered into under the present Protocol and deciding on further action,
Acknowledging the Protocol on the Reduction of Sulphur Emissions or Their Transboundary
Fluxes by at least 30 per cent, adopted in Helsinki on 8 July 1985, and the measures
already taken by many countries which have had the effect of reducing sulphur
einissions,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. Definitions
For the purposes of the present ProtocoL
1. "Convention" means the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution,
adopted in Geneva on 13 November 1979:
2. "EMEP" means the Cooperative Programme for Monitoring and Evaluation of the
Long-range Transmission of Air Pollutants in Europe:
3. "Executive Body" means the Executive Body for the Convention constituted under
article 10, paragraph L of the Convention:
4. "Commission" means the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe:
5. "Parties" means, unless the context otherwise requires, the Parties to the present Protocol:
6. "Geographical scope of EMEP" means the area defined in article L paragraph 4, of
the Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution on Longtenn
Financing of the Cooperative Programme for Monitoring and Evaluation of the Longrange
Trans1nission of Air Pollutants in Europe (EMEP), adopted in Geneva on 28 September
1984;
7. "SOMA" means a sulphur oxides management area designated in annex III under
the conditions laid down in article 2, paragraph 3:
8. "Critical load" means a quantitative estimate of an exposure to one or more pollutants
below which significant hannful effects on specified sensitive elements of the environment
do not occur, according to present knowledge;
9. "Critical levels" means the concentration of pollutants in the atmosphere above
which direct adverse effects on receptors, such as human beings, plants, ecosystems or materials,
may occur, according to present knowledge;
10. "Critical sulphur deposition" means a quantitative estimate of the exposure to oxidized
sulphur compounds, taking into account the effects of base cation uptake and base
cation deposition, below which significant hannful effects on specified sensitive elements
of the enviromnent do not occur, according to present knowledge:
11. "Emission" means the discharge of substances into the atmosphere:
12. "Sulphur emissions" means all emissions of sulphur compounds expressed as kilotonnes
of sulphur dioxide (kt SO 2) to the atmosphere originating from anthropogenic
sources excluding from ships in international traffic outside territorial waters:
13. "Fuel" means any solid, liquid or gaseous combustible material with the exception
of domestic refuse and toxic or dangerous waste;
14. "Stationary combustion source" means any technical apparatus or group of technical
apparatus that is co-located on a common site and is or could be discharging waste gases
through a common stack, in which fuels are oxidized in order to use the heat generated;
15."Major new stationary combustion source" means any stationary combustion
source the construction or substantial modification of which is authorized after 31 December
1995 and the thermal input of which, when operating at rated capacity, is at least 50
MW th. It is a matter for the competent national authorities to decide whether a modification
is substantial or not taking into account such factors as the enviromnental benefits of the
modification:
16. "Major existing stationary combustion source" means any existing stationary combustion
source the thermal input of which, when operating at rated capacity, is at least 50
MW th,
17. "Gas oil" means any petroleum product within HS 2710, or any petroleum product
which, by reason of its distillation limits, falls within the category of middle distillates intended
for use as fuel and of which at least 85% by volmne, including distillation losses,
distils at 3500 C:
18. "Emission limit value" means the pennissible concentration of sulphur compounds
expressed as sulphur dioxide in the waste gases from a stationary combustion source expressed
in tenns of mass per volume of the waste gases expressed in mg S02/Nm3 assuming
an oxygen content by volume in the waste gas of 3% in the case of liquid and gaseous
fuels and 6% in the case of solid fuels:
19. "Emission limitation" means the pennissible total quantity of sulphur compounds
expressed as sulphur dioxide discharged from a combustion source or group of combustion
sources located either on a common site or within a defined geographical area, expressed
in kilotonnes per year:
20. "Desulphurization rate" means the ratio of the quantity of sulphur which is separated
at the combustion source site over a given period to the quantity of sulphur contained
in the fuel which is introduced into the combustion source facilities and which is used over
the same period:
21. "Sulphur budget" means a matrix of calculated contributions to the deposition of
oxidized sulphur compounds in receiving areas, originating from the emissions from specified
areas.
Article 2. Basic obligations
1. The Parties shall control and reduce their sulphur emissions in order to protect human
health and the enviromnent from adverse effects, in particular acidifying effects, and
to ensure, as far as possible, without entailing excessive costs, that depositions of oxidized
sulphur compounds in the long tenn do not exceed critical loads for sulphur given, in annex
L as critical sulphur depositions, in accordance with present scientific knowledge.
2. As a first step, the Parties shall, as a minimum, reduce and maintain their annual sulphur
emissions in accordance with the timing and levels specified in annex II.
3. In addition, any Party:
(a) Whose total land area is greater than 2 million square kilometres;
(b) Which has committed itself under paragraph 2 above to a national sulphur emission
ceiling no greater than the lesser of its 1990 emissions or its obligation in the 1985 Helsinki
Protocol on the Reduction of Sulphur Emissions or Their Transboundary Fluxes by at least
30 per cent as indicated in annex II;
(c) Whose annual sulphur emissions that contribute to acidification in areas under the
jurisdiction of one or more other Parties originate only from within areas under its jurisdiction
that are listed as SOMAs in annex III and has presented docmnentation to this effect
and
(d) Which has specified upon signature of, or accession to, the present Protocol its intention
to act in accordance with this paragraph,
shall, as a 1ninimum, reduce and maintain its annual sulphur emissions in the area so
listed in accordance with the timing and levels specified in annex II.
4. Furthemore, the Parties shall make use of the most effective measures for the reduction
of sulphur emissions, appropriate in their particular circumstances, for new and existing
sources, which include, inter alia:
Measures to increase energy efficiency:
Measures to increase the use of renewable energy:
Measures to reduce the sulphur content of particular fuels and to encourage the use of
fuel with a low sulphur content including the combined use of high-sulphur with low-sulphur
or sulphur-free fuel:
Measures to apply best available control technologies not entailing excessive cost using
the guidance in annex IV.
5. Each Party, except those Parties subject to the United States/Canada Air Quality
Agreement of 1991, shall as a minimum:
(a) Apply emission limit values at least as stringent as those specified in annex V to all
major new stationary combustion sources:
(b) No later than 1 July 2004 apply, as far as possible without entailing excessive costs,
emission limit values at least as stringent as those specified in annex V to those major existing
stationary combustion sources the thennal input of which is above 500 MWth taking
into account the remaining lifetime of a plant calculated from the date of entry into force
of the present Protocol, or apply equivalent emission lilnitations or other appropriate provisions,
provided that these achieve the sulphur einission ceilings specified in annex II and,
subsequently, further approach the critical loads as given in annex I: and no later than 1 July
2004 apply emission limit values or emission limitations to those major existing stationary
combustion sources the thennal input of which is between 50 and 500 MWth using annex
V as guidance:
(c) No later than two years after the date of entry into force of the present Protocol apply
national standards for the sulphur content of gas oil at least as stringent as those specified
in annex V. In cases where the supply of gas oil cannot otherwise be ensured, a State
may extend the time period given in this subparagraph to a period of up to ten years. In this
case it shall specify, in a declaration to be deposited together with the instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession, its intention to extend the time period.
6. The Parties may, in addition, apply economic instruments to encourage the adoption
of cost-effective approaches to the reduction of sulphur emissions.
7. The Parties to this Protocol may, at a session of the Executive Body, in accordance
with rules and conditions which the Executive Body shall elaborate and adopt, decide
whether two or more Parties may jointly implement the obligations set out in annex II.
These rules and conditions shall ensure the fulfilment of the obligations set out in paragraph
2 above and also promote the achievement of the enviromnental objectives set out in paragraph
1 above.
8. The Parties shall, subject to the outcome of the first review provided for under article
8 and no later than one year after the completion of that review, commence negotiations on
further obligations to reduce einissions.
Article 3 Exchange of technologv
1. The Parties shall, consistent with their national laws, regulations and practices, facilitate
the exchange of technologies and teclmiques, including those that increase energy
efficiency, the use of renewable energy and the processing of low-sulphur fuels, to reduce
sulphur emissions, particularly through the promotion of:
(a) The commercial exchange of available technology:
(b) Direct industrial contacts and cooperation, including joint ventures:
(c) The exchange of infonnation and experience:
(d) The provision ofteclmical assistance.
2. In promoting the activities specified in paragraph 1 above, the Parties shall create
favourable conditions by facilitating contacts and cooperation among appropriate organizations
and individuals in the private and public sectors that are capable of providing technology,
design and engineering services, equipment or finance.
3. The Parties shall, no later than six months after the date of entry into force of the
present Protocol, commence consideration of procedures to create more favourable conditions
for the exchange of technology to reduce sulphur emissions.
Article 4. National strategies, policies, programmes, measures and information
1. Each Party shall, in order to implement its obligations under article 2:
(a) Adopt national strategies, policies and progranunes, no later than six months after
the present Protocol enters into force for it and
(b) Take and apply national measures
to control and reduce its sulphur emissions.
2. Each Party shall collect and maintain infonnation on:
(a) Actual levels of sulphur emissions, and of ambient concentrations and depositions
of oxidized sulphur and other acidifying compounds, taking into account, for those Parties
within the geographical scope of EMEP, the work plan of EMEP: and
(b) The effects of depositions of oxidized sulphur and other acidifying compounds.
Article 5. Reporting
1. Each Party shall report, through the Executive Secretary of the Commission, to the
Executive Body, on a periodic basis as detennined by the Executive Body, information on:
(a) The implementation of national strategies, policies, progranunes and measures referred
to in article 4, paragraph 1:
(b) The levels of national annual sulphur emissions, in accordance with guidelines
adopted by the Executive Body, containing einission data for all relevant source categories:
and
(c) The implementation of other obligations that it has entered into under the present
Protocol,
in conformity with a decision regarding format and content to be adopted by the Parties
at a session of the Executive Body. The terms of this decision shall be reviewed as necessary
to identify any additional elements regarding the fonnat and/or content of the information
that are to be included in the reports.
2. Each Party within the geographical scope of EMEP shall report, through the Executive
Secretary of the Commission, to EMEP, on a periodic basis to be detennined by the
Steering Body of EMEP and approved by the Parties at a session of the Executive Body,
information on the levels of sulphur emissions with temporal and spatial resolution as specified
by the Steering Body ofEMEP.
3. In good time before each annual session of the Executive Body, EMEP shall provide
infonnation on:
(a) Ambient concentrations and deposition of oxidized sulphur compounds; and
(b) Calculations of sulphur budgets.
Parties in areas outside the geographical scope of EMEP shall make available similar
infonnation if requested to do so by the Executive Body.
4. The Executive Body shall, in accordance with article 10, paragraph 2 (b ), of the Convention,
arrange for the preparation of information on the effects of depositions of oxidized
sulphur and other acidifying compounds.
5. The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, arrange for the preparation, at
regular intervals, of revised information on calculated and internationally optimized allocations
of emission reductions for the States within the geographical scope of EMEP, with
integrated assessment models, with a view to reducing further, for the purposes of article
2, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol, the difference between actual depositions of oxidized
sulphur compounds and critical load values.
Article 6. Research, development and monitoring
The Parties shall encourage research, development, monitoring and cooperation related
to:
(a) The international hannonization of methods for the establishment of critical loads
and critical levels and the elaboration of procedures for such hannonization:
(b) The improvement of monitoring teclmiques and systems and of the modelling of
transport, concentrations and deposition of sulphur compounds:
(c) Strategies for the further reduction of sulphur emissions based on critical loads and
critical levels as well as on teclmical developments, and the improvement of integrated assessment
modelling to calculate internationally optimized allocations of emission reductions
taking into account an equitable distribution of abatement costs:
(d) The understanding of the wider effects of sulphur emissions on hmnan health, the
enviromnent, in particular acidification, and materials, including historic and cultural monuments,
taking into account the relationship between sulphur oxides, nitrogen oxides, ammonia,
volatile organic compounds and tropospheric ozone;
(e) Emission abatement technologies, and technologies and techniques to enhance energy
efficiency, energy conservation and the use of renewable energy;
(f) The economic evaluation of benefits for the enviromnent and hmnan health resulting
from the reduction of sulphur emissions.
Article 7. Compliance
1. An Implementation Committee is hereby established to review the implementation
of the present Protocol and compliance by the Parties with their obligations. It shall report
to the Parties at sessions of the Executive Body and may make such recommendations to
them as it considers appropriate.
2. Upon consideration of a report, and any reconunendations, of the Implementation
Conunittee, the Parties, taking into account the circumstances of a matter and in accordance
with Convention practice, may decide upon and call for action to bring about full compliance 
with the present Protocol including measures to assist a Party's compliance with the
Protocol, and to further the objectives of the Protocol.
3. The Parties shall, at the first session of the Executive Body after the entry into force
of the present Protocol adopt a decision that sets out the structure and functions of the Implementation
Committee as well as procedures for its review of compliance.
4. The application of the compliance procedure shall be without prejudice to the provisions
of article 9 of the present Protocol.
Article 8. Reviews by the Parties at sessions of the Executive Body
1. The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, pursuant to article 10, paragraph
2 (a), of the Convention, review the infonnation supplied by the Parties and EMEP,
the data on the effects of depositions of sulphur and other acidifying compounds and the
reports of the Implementation Committee referred to in article 7, paragraph L of the present
Protocol.
2. (a) The Parties shall, at sessions of the Executive Body, keep under review the obligations
set out in the present Protocol including:
(i) Their obligations in relation to their calculated and internationally optimized allocations
of einission reductions referred to in article 5, paragraph 5; and
(ii) The adequacy of the obligations and the progress made towards the achievement
of the objectives of the present Protocol:
(b) Reviews shall take into account the best available scientific information on acidification,
including assessments of critical loads, technological developments, changing
economic conditions and the fulfilment of the obligations on eimission levels;
(c) In the context of such reviews, any Party whose obligations on sulphur emission
ceilings under annex II hereto do not conform to the calculated and internationally optimized 
allocations of emission reductions for that Party, required to reduce the difference
between depositions of sulphur in 1990 and critical sulphur depositions within the geographical
scope of EMEP by at least 60%, shall make every effort to undertake revised obligations;
(d) The procedures, methods and timing for such reviews shall be specified by the Parties
at a session of the Executive Body. The first such review shall be completed in 1997.
Article 9. Settlement of disputes
1. In the event of a dispute between any two or more Parties concerning the interpretation
or application of the present Protocol, the Parties concerned shall seek a settlement
of the dispute through negotiation or any other peaceful means of their own choice. The
parties to the dispute shall inform the Executive Body of their dispute.
2. When ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the present Protocol or at any
time thereafter, a Party which is not a regional economic integration organization may declare
in a written instrument submitted to the Depositary that in respect of any dispute concerning
the interpretation or application of the Protocol, it recognizes one or both of the
following means of dispute settlement as compulsory ipso facto and without agreement in
relation to any Party accepting the same obligation:
(a) Submission of the dispute to the International Court of Justice;
(b) Arbitration in accordance with procedures to be adopted by the Parties at a session
of the Executive Body as soon as practicable, in an annex on arbitration.
A Party which is a regional economic integration organization may make a declaration
with like effect in relation to arbitration in accordance with the procedures referred to in
subparagraph (b) above.
3. A declaration made under paragraph 2 above shall remain in force until it expires in
accordance with its terms or until three months after written notice of its revocation has
been deposited with the Depositary.
4. A new declaration, a notice of revocation or the expiry of a declaration shall not in
any way affect proceedings pending before the International Court of Justice or the arbitral
tribunaL unless the parties to the dispute agree otherwise.
5. Except in a case where the parties to a dispute have accepted the same means of dispute
settlement under paragraph 2, if after twelve months following notification by one Party
to another that a dispute exists between them, the Parties concerned have not been able
to settle their dispute through the means mentioned in paragraph 1 above, the dispute shall
be submitted, at the request of any of the parties to the dispute, to conciliation.
6. For the purpose of paragraph 5, a conciliation commission shall be created. The
commission shall be composed of an equal number of members appointed by each party
concerned or, where parties in conciliation share the same interest by the group sharing that
interest and a chairman chosen jointly by the members so appointed. The commission shall
render a recommendatory award, which the parties shall consider in good faith.
Article 10. Annexes
The annexes to the present Protocol shall form an integral part of the Protocol. Annexes
I and IV are recommendatory in character.
Article 11. Amendments and adjustments
1. Any Party may propose amendments to the present Protocol. Any Party to the Convention
may propose an adjustment to annex II to the present Protocol to add to it its name,
together with emission levels, sulphur emission ceilings and percentage emission reductions.
2. Such proposed amendments and adjustments shall be submitted in writing to the Executive
Secretary of the Cmmnission, who shall communicate them to all Parties. The Parties
shall discuss the proposed amendments and adjustments at the next session of the
Executive Body, provided that those proposals have been circulated by the Executive Secretary
to the Parties at least ninety days in advance.
3. Amendments to the present Protocol and to its annexes II, III and V shall be adopted
by consensus of the Parties present at a session of the Executive Body, and shall enter into
force for the Parties which have accepted them on the ninetieth day after the date on which
two thirds of the Parties have deposited with the Depositary their instruments of acceptance
thereof. Amendments shall enter into force for any other Party on the ninetieth day after the
date on which that Party has deposited its instrument of acceptance thereof.
4. Amendments to the annexes to the present Protocol, other than to the annexes referred
to in paragraph 3 above, shall be adopted by consensus of the Parties present at a session
of the Executive Body. On the expiry of ninety days from the date of its
communication by the Executive Secretary of the Commission, an amendment to any such
annex shall become effective for those Parties which have not submitted to the Depositary
a notification in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 below, provided that at least
sixteen Parties have not submitted such a notification.
5. Any Party that is unable to approve an amendment to an annex, other than to an annex
referred to in paragraph 3 above, shall so notify the Depositary in writing within ninety
days from the date of the conununication of its adoption. The Depositary shall without delay
notify all Parties of any such notification received. A Party may at any time substitute
an acceptance for its previous notification and, upon deposit of an instrument of acceptance
with the Depositary, the amendment to such an annex shall become effective for that Party.
6. Adjustments to annex II shall be adopted by consensus of the Parties present at a session
of the Executive Body and shall become effective for all Parties to the present Protocol
on the ninetieth day following the date on which the Executive Secretary of the Commission
notifies those Parties in writing of the adoption of the adjustment.
Article 12 Signature
1. The present Protocol shall be open for signature at Oslo on 14 June 1994, then at
United Nations Headquarters in New York until 12 December 1994 by States members of
the Conunission as well as States having consultative status with the Conunission, pursuant
to paragraph 8 of Econ01nic and Social Council resolution 36 (IV) of 28 March 194 7, and
by regional economic integration organizations, constituted by sovereign States members
of the Com1nission, which have competence in respect of the negotiation, conclusion and
application of international agreements in matters covered by the Protocol, provided that
the States and organizations concerned are Parties to the Convention and are listed in annex
II.
2. In matters within their competence, such regional economic integration organizations
shall, on their own behalf, exercise the rights and fulfil the responsibilities which the
present Protocol attributes to their member States. In such cases, the member States of these
organizations shall not be entitled to exercise such rights individually.
Article 13 Ratification, acceptance, approval and accession
1. The present Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by Signatories.
2. The present Protocol shall be open for accession as from 12 December 1994 by the
States and organizations that meet the requirements of article 12, paragraph 1.
Article 14. Depositary
The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who will perform the functions of Depositary.
Article 15. Entry into force
1. The present Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day following the date on
which the sixteenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession has been
deposited with the Depositary.
2. For each State and organization referred to in article 12, paragraph L which ratifies,
accepts or approves the present Protocol or accedes thereto after the deposit of the sixteenth
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the Protocol shall enter into
force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit by such Party of its instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
Article 16. Withdrawal
At any time after five years from the date on which the present Protocol has come into
force with respect to a Party, that Party may withdraw from it by giving written notification
to the Depositary. Any such withdrawal shall take effect on the ninetieth day following the
date of its receipt by the Depositary, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification
of the withdrawal.
Article 17. Authentic texts
The original of the present Protocol, of which the English, French and Russian texts
are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have signed the
present Protocol.
Done at Oslo, this fourteenth day of June one thousand nine hundred and ninety-four.



Annex I
CRITICAL SULPHUR DEPOSITION
(5-percentile in centigrams of sulphur per square metre per year)
Annex II
SULPHUR EMISSION CEILINGS AND PERCENTAGE EMISSION REDUCTIONS
The sulphur emission ceilings listed in the table below give the
obligations referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of article 2 of the present
Protocol. The 1980 and 1990 emission levels and the percentage emission
reductions listed are given for information purposes only.
ANNEX III
DESIGNATION OF SULPHUR OXIDES MANAGEMENT AREAS (SOMAs)
The following SOMA is listed for the purposes of the present Protocol:
South-east Canada SOMA
This is an area of 1 million km2 which includes all the territory of the provinces of
Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, all the territory of the province of
Quebec south of a straight line between Havre-St. Pierre on the north coast of the Gulf of
Saint Lawrence and the point where the Quebec-Ontario boundary intersects the James Bay
coastline, and all the territory of the province of Ontario south of a straight line between the
point where the Ontario-Quebec boundary intersects the James Bay coastline and Nipigon
River near the north shore of Lake Superior.
ANNEX IV
CONTROL TECHNOLOGIES FOR SULPHUR EMISSIONS FROM STATIONARY SOURCES
I. Introduction
1. The aim of this annex is to provide guidance for identifying sulphur control options
and technologies for giving effect to the obligations of the present Protocol.
2. The annex is based on infonnation on general options for the reduction of sulphur
emissions and in particular on emission control technology performance and costs contained
in official documentation of the Executive Body and its subsidiary bodies.
3. Unless otherwise indicated, the reduction measures listed are considered, on the basis
of operational experience of several years in most cases, to be the most well-established
and economically feasible best available technologies. However, the continuously expanding
experience of low-emission measures and technologies at new plants as well as of the
retrofitting of existing plants will necessitate regular review of this annex.
4. Although the annex lists a number of measures and technologies spanning a wide
range of costs and efficiencies, it cannot be considered as an exhaustive statement of control
options. Moreover, the choice of control measures and technologies for any particular
case will depend on a number of factors, including current legislation and regulatory provisions
and, in particular, control technology requirements, primary energy patterns, industrial
infrastructure, economic circumstances and specific in-plant conditions.
5. The annex mainly addresses the control of oxidized sulphur eiuissions considered as
the sum of sulphur dioxide (S02) and sulphur trioxide (S03), expressed as S02. The share
of sulphur emitted as either sulphur oxides or other sulphur compounds from non-combustion
processes and other sources is small compared to sulphur eiuissions from combustion.
6. When measures or technologies are planned for sulphur sources emitting other components,
in particular nitrogen oxides (NOx), particulates, heavy metals and volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), it is worthwhile to consider them in conjunction with pollutantspecific
control options in order to maxi1uize the overall abatement effect and minimize the
impact on the enviromnent and, especially to avoid the transfer of air pollution problems to
other media (such as waste water and solid waste).
II. Afajor stationary sources for sulphur emissions
7. Fossil fuel combustion processes are the main source of anthropogenic sulphur
eiuissions from stationary sources. In addition, some non-combustion processes may contribute
considerably to the emissions. The major stationary source categories, based on
EMEP/CORINAIR'90, include:
(i) Public power, cogeneration and district heating plants:
(a) Boilers;
(b) Stationary combustion turbines and internal combustion engines:
(ii) Commercial, institutional and residential combustion plants:
(a) Commercial boilers;
(b) Domestic heaters;
Volume 2030, A-21623
(iii) Industrial combustion plants and processes with combustion:
(a) Boilers and process heaters:
(b) Processes, e.g. metallurgical operations such as roasting and sintering, coke oven
plants, processing oftitanimn dioxide (Ti02), etc.:
(c) Pulp production;
(iv) Non-combustion processes, e.g. sulphuric acid production, specific organic synthesis
processes, treatment of metallic surfaces;
(v) Extraction, processing and distribution of fossil fuels:
(vi) Waste treatment and disposal, e.g. thennal treatment of municipal and industrial
waste.
8. Overall data (1990) for the ECE region indicate that about 88% of total sulphur
einissions originate from all combustion processes (20% from industrial combustion), 5%
from production processes and 7% from oil refineries. The power plant sector in many
countries is the major single contributor to sulphur emissions. In some countries, the industrial
sector (including refineries) is also an important S02 emitter. Although emissions
from refineries in the ECE region are relatively small, their impact on sulphur emissions
from other sources is large due to the sulphur in the oil products. Typically 60% of the sulphur
intake present in the crudes remains in the products, 30% is recovered as elemental
sulphur and 10% is emitted from refinery stacks.
Ill. General options for reduction of sulphur emissions from combustion
9. General options for reduction of sulphur emissions are:
(i) Energy management measures:*
*Options (i) (a) and (b) are integrated in the energy structure and policy of a Party. Implementation
status, efficiency and costs per sector are not considered here.
(a) Energy saving
The rational use of energy (improved energy efficiency/process operation, cogeneration
and/or demand-side management) usually results in a reduction in sulphur emissions.
(b) Energy 1nix
In general, sulphur einissions can be reduced by increasing the proportion of non-combustion
energy sources (i.e. hydro, nuclear, wind, etc.) to the energy mix. However, further
enviromnental impacts have to be considered.
(ii) Technological options:
(a) Fuel switching
The S02 emissions during combustion are directly related to the sulphur content of the
fuel used.
Fuel switching (e.g. from high- to low-sulphur coals and/or liquid fuels, or from coal
to gas) leads to lower sulphur emissions, but there may be certain restrictions, such as the
availability of low-sulphur fuels and the adaptability of existing combustion systems to different
fuels. In many ECE countries, some coal or oil combustion plants are being replaced
by gas-fired combustion plants. Dual-fuel plants may facilitate fuel switching.
(b) Fuel cleaning
Cleaning of natural gas is state-of-the-art technology and widely applied, for operational
reasons.
Cleaning of process gas (acid refinery gas, coke oven gas, biogas, etc.) is also state-ofthe-
art technology.
Desulphurization of liquid fuels (light and middle fractions) is state-of-the-art technology.
Desulphurization of heavy fractions is technically feasible: nevertheless, the crude
properties should be kept in mind. Desulphurization of atmospheric residue (bottom products
from atmospheric crude distillation units) for the production of low-sulphur fuel oil is
not, however, conunonly practised; processing low-sulphur crude is usually preferable. Hydro-
cracking and full conversion technology have matured and combine high sulphur retention
with improved yield of light products. The number of full conversion refineries is
as yet limited. Such refineries typically recover 80 to 90% of the sulphur intake and convert
all residues into light products or other marketable products. For this type of refinery, energy
consmnption and investment costs are increased. Typical sulphur content for refinery
products is given in table 1 below.
Table 1
Sulphur content from refinery products
(S content%)
Typical present values
Current technologies to clean hard coal can remove approximately 50% of the inorganic
sulphur (depending on coal properties) but none of the organic sulphur. More effective
technologies are being developed which, however, involve higher specific investment and
costs. Thus the efficiency of sulphur removal by coal cleaning is limited compared to flue
gas desulphurization.
There may be a country-specific optimization potential for the best combination of fuel
cleaning and flue gas cleaning.
(c) Advanced combustion technologies
These combustion technologies with improved thennal efficiency and reduced sulphur
einissions include: fluidized-bed combustion (FBC): bubbling (BFBC), circulating (CFBC)
and pressurized (PFBC); integrated gasification combined-cycle (IGCC); and combined-
cycle gas turbines (CCGT).
Stationary combustion turbines can be integrated into combustion systems in existing
conventional power plants which can increase overall efficiency by 5 to 7%, leading, for
example, to a significant reduction in S02 einissions. However, major alterations to the existing
furnace system become necessary.
Fluidized-bed combustion is a combustion technology for burning hard coal and
brown coaL but it can also bum other solid fuels such as petrolemn coke and low-grade fuels
such as waste, peat and wood. Elnissions can additionally be reduced by integrated combustion
control in the system due to the addition of lime/limestone to the bed material. The
total installed capacity of FBC has reached approximately 30,000 MWth (250 to 350
plants), including 8,000 MWth in the capacity range of greater than 50 MWth. By-products
from this process may cause problems with respect to use and/or disposal, and further development
is required.
The IGCC process includes coal gasification and combined-cycle power generation in
a gas and steam turbine. The gasified coal is burnt in the combustion chamber of the gas
turbine. Sulphur emission control is achieved by the use of state-of-the-art teclmology for
raw gas cleaning facilities upstream of the gas turbine. The technology also exists for heavy
oil residues and bitumen emulsions. The installed capacity is presently about LOOO MW el
(5 plants) .
Combined-cycle gas-turbine power stations using natural gas as fuel with an energy efficiency
of approximately 48 to 52% are currently being planned.
(d) Process and combustion modifications
Combustion modifications comparable to the measures used for NOx einission control
do not exist as during combustion the organically and/or inorganically bound sulphur is almost
completely oxidized (a certain percentage depending on the fuel properties and combustion
technology is retained in the ash).
In this annex dry additive processes for conventional boilers are considered as process
modifications due to the injection of an agent into the combustion unit. However, experience
has shown that when applying these processes, thennal capacity is lowered, the Ca/S
ratio is high and sulphur removal low. Problems with the further utilization of the by-product
have to be considered, so that this solution should usually be applied as an intennediate
measure and for smaller units (table 2).
Table 2
Emissions of sulphur oxides obtained from the application of technological
options to fossil-fueled boilers
(e) Flue gas desulphurization (FGD) processes
These processes aim at removing already formed sulphur oxides, and are also referred
to as secondary measures. The state-of-the-art technologies for flue gas treatment processes
are all based on the removal of sulphur by wet dry or semi-dry and catalytic chemical processes.
To achieve the most efficient programme for sulphur emission reductions beyond the
energy management measures listed in (i) above a combination of technological options
identified in (ii) above should be considered.
In some cases options for reducing sulphur emissions may also result in the reduction
of emissions of C02, NOx, and other pollutants.
In public power, co generation and district heating plants, flue gas treatment processes
used include: lime/limestone wet scrubbing (LWS): spray dry absorption (SDA): Wellman
Lord process (WL): ammonia scrubbing (AS): and combined NOx/SOx removal processes
(activated carbon process (AC) and combined catalytic NOx/SOx removal).
In the power generation sector, L WS and SD A cover 85% and 10%, respectively, of
the installed FGD capacity.
Several new flue gas desulphurization processes, such as electron beam dry scrubbing
(EBDS) and Mark 13A have not yet passed the pilot stage.
Table 2 above shows the efficiency of the above-mentioned secondary measures based
on the practical eAlJerience gathered from a large number of implemented plants. The implemented
capacity as well as the capacity range are also mentioned. Despite comparable
characteristics for several sulphur abatement technologies, local or plant-specific influences
may lead to the exclusion of a given technology.
Table 2 also includes the usual investment cost ranges for the sulphur abatement technologies
listed in sections (ii) (c), (d) and (e). However, when applying these technologies
to individual cases it should be noted that investment costs of emission reduction measures
will depend amongst other things on the particular technologies used, the required control
systems, the plant size, the extent of the required reduction and the time-scale of planned
maintenance cycles. The table thus gives only a broad range of investment costs. Investment
costs for retrofit generally exceed those for new plants.
IV Control techniques for other sectors
10. The control teclmiques listed in section 9 (ii) (a) to (e) are valid not only in the power
plant sector but also in various other sectors of industry. Several years of operational experience
have been acquired, in most cases in the power plant sector.
11. The application of sulphur abatement technologies in the industrial sector merely
depends on the process's specific limitations in the relevant sectors. Important contributors
to sulphur emissions and corresponding reduction measures are presented in table 3 below.
12. In the sectors listed in table 3, process-integrated measures, including raw material
changes (if necessary combined with sector-specific flue gas treatment), can be used to
achieve the most effective reduction of sulphur emissions.
13. Reported examples are the following:
(a) In new kraft pulp mills, sulphur emission of less than 1 kg of sulphur per tonne of
pulp AD (air dried) can be achieved: 
(b) In sulphite pulp mills, 1 to 1. 5 kg of sulphur per tonne of pulp AD can be achieved:
(c) In the case of roasting of sulphides, removal efficiencies of 80 to 99% for 10,000
to 200,000 m3/h units have been reported (depending on the process):
(d) For one iron ore sintering plant an FGD unit of 320,000 m3/h capacity achieves a
clean gas value below 100 mg SOx/Nm3 at 6% 02:
(e) Coke ovens are achieving less than 400 mg SOx/Nm3 at 6% 02:
(f) Sulphuric acid plants achieve a conversion rate larger than 99%;
(g) Advanced Claus plant achieves sulphur recovery of more than 99%.
V By-products and side-effects
14. As efforts to reduce sulphur emissions from stationary sources are increased in the
countries of the ECE region, the quantities of by-products will also increase.
15. Options which would lead to usable by-products should be selected. Furthermore,
options that lead to increased thennal efficiency and minimize the waste disposal issue
whenever possible should be selected. Although most by-products are usable or recyclable
products such as gypsum, anunonia salts, sulphuric acid or sulphur, factors such as market
conditions and quality standards need to be taken into account. Further utilization of FBC
and SDA by-products have to be improved and investigated, as disposal sites and disposal
criteria limit disposal in several countries.
16. The following side-effects will not prevent the implementation of any technology
or method but should be considered when several sulphur abatement options are possible:
(a) Energy requirements of the gas treatment processes;
(b) Corrosion attack due to the formation of sulphuric acid by the reaction of sulphur
oxides with water vapour; (c) Increased use of water and waste water treatment:
(d) Reagent requirements;
(e) Solid waste disposal.
VI. Monitoring and reporting
17. The measures taken to carry out national strategies and policies for the abatement
of air pollution include: legislation and regulatory provisions. economic incentives and disincentives:
as well as technological requirements (best available technology).
18. In general, standards are set per emission source. according to plant size. operating
mode. combustion technology. fuel type and whether it is a new or existing plant. An alternative
approach also used is to set a target for the reduction of total sulphur emissions from
a group of sources and to allow a choice of where to take action to reach this target (the
bubble concept).
19. Efforts to limit the sulphur emissions to the levels set out in the national framework
legislation have to be controlled by a permanent monitoring and reporting system and reported
to the supervising authorities.
20. Several monitoring systems. using both continuous and discontinuous measurement
methods, are available. However. quality requirements vary. Measurements are to be
carried out by qualified institutes using measuring and monitoring systems. To this end, a
certification system can provide the best assurance.
21. In the framework of modem automated monitoring systems and process control
equipment reporting does not create a problem. The collection of data for further use is a
state-of-the-art technique: however, data to be reported to competent authorities differ from
case to case. To obtain better comparability. data sets and prescribing regulations should be
harmonized. Hannonization is also desirable for quality assurance of measuring and monitoring
systems. This should be taken into account when comparing data.
22. To avoid discrepancies and inconsistencies. key issues and parameters. including
the following. must be well defined:
(a) Definition of standards expressed as ppmv. mg/Nm3, g/GJ. kg/h or kg/tonne of
product. Most of these units need to be calculated and need specification in tenns of gas
temperature, humidity, pressure, oxygen content or heat input value:
(b) Definition of the period over which standards are to be averaged, expressed as
hours months or a year:
(c) Definition of failure times and corresponding emergency regulations regarding bypass
of monitoring systems or shut-down of the installation:
(d) Definition of methods for back-filling of data missed or lost as a result of equipment
failure:
(e) Definition of the parameter set to be measured. Depending on the type of industrial
process, the necessary infonnation may differ. This also involves the location of the measurement
point within the system.
23. Quality control of measurements has to be ensured.
Annex V

