amendments to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean, seattle, 1962source: the marine mammal commission compendium, ultilateral / fisheries, volume(s) 1-3; pages 1196-1197, primary source citation: 14 ust 953, tias 5385international north pacific fisheries commission established by convention between canada, japan and the united states for the conservation of the fisheries resources of the north pacific oceanoffices: 6640 northwest marine drive vancouver 8, b. c. phone castle 4-0722 cable address: 'northcom'secretariat: roy i. jackson executive director hiroshi kasahara assistant directorjune 24, 1963. the honourable dean rusk, secretary of state, washington 25, d.c.dear sir:on november 17, 1962, at its ninth annual meeting, at seattle, the international north pacific fisheries commission determined that the herring stocks off the west coast of the queen charlotte islands and that the halibut stock of the eastern bering sea no longer meet the conditions of article iv of the convention and adopted recommendations for the removal of such stocks of herring and halibut from the annex to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean. it was subsequently noted that some ambiguity might arise from the language of the recommendation with respect to herring. therefore, the commission on january 25, 1963 formally amended that recommendation.the commission, having transmitted the recommendations to the contracting parties for their consideration, has now received notifications of acceptance of the recommendation relating to halibut and the recommendation, as amended, relating to herring, as follows: from japan on february 26, 1963, from the united states of america on march 23, 1963, and from canada on may 8, 1963. in accordance with the provisions of article vii, paragraph 1, of the convention, sections (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 of the annex are considered amended from may 8, 1963 to read in the english language as follows:' (a) halibut (hippoglossus stenolepis)the convention area off the coast of canada and the united states of america, exclusive of the bering sea, in which commercial fishing for halibut is being or can be prosecuted. halibut referred to herein shall be those originating along the coast of north america.' (b) herring (clupea pallasii)the convention area off the coast of canada in which commercial fishing for herring of canadian origin is being or can be prosecuted, exclusive of the waters of the high seas north of 51°56° north latitude and west of the queen charlotte islands and west of a line drawn between langara point on langara island, queen charlotte islands, and cape muzon on dall island in southeast alaska.'copies are attached to this letter of the amended section (a) in the japanese language, which i transmitted with my letter of december 6, 1962, and of the amended section (b) in the japanese language, which i transmitted with my letter of january 25, 1963. with assurances of our highest esteem,yours very truly,international north pacific fisheries commissionroy i. jackson, executive director, att.
