AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS AND THE GOVERN
MENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA CON
CERNING FISHING IN AREAS OF THE BARENTS SEA
ADJACENT TO THE COAST OF THE USSR
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
Government of the People's Republic of Bulgaria,
Proceeding from the friendly relations existing between the two countries,
Bearing in mind the questions discussed at the third United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea concerning the rights of coastal States with
respect to fishing off their coasts,
Confirming their readiness to continue to co-operate in matters concerning
international relations in the field of fisheries,
Considering that the People's Republic of Bulgaria wishes to continue to fish
in areas of the Barents Sea adjacent to the coast of the USSR,
Guided by the desire to establish procedures and conditions for fishing by the
People's Republic of Bulgaria in the sea areas adjacent to the coast of the Soviet
Union extending to a breadth of 200 nautical miles,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I. In the areas of the Barents Sea adjacent to the coast of the USSR
specified by the Resolution adopted by the Council of Ministers of the USSR on
17 May 1977, vessels of the People's Republic of Bulgaria may, subject to the
conditions prescribed in this Agreement, fish for the fishers resources over which
the USSR exercises sovereign rights, as established in the Decree adopted by the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR on 10 December 1976 and entitled "Provisional
  measures for the preservation of living resources and the regulation of fishing in
  the sea areas adjacent to the coast of the USSR".
Article 2. The Soviet Party shall notify the Bulgarian Party in good time of
the fishing quotas for the sea areas referred to in article 1 of this Agreement and
also of the areas in which Bulgarian fishing is permitted.
Article 3. The competent Soviet authorities shall issue to fishing vessels of
the People's Republic of Bulgaria permits to fish in the areas referred to in
article 1 of this Agreement, without which no fishing shall be allowed. Fishing
shall be carried on in accordance with the rules established by the Ministry of
Fisheries of the USSR, which shall also determine the conditions for the issue of
fishing permits.
Article 4. The Government of the People's Republic of Bulgaria shall
ensure strict compliance by fishing vessels of the People's Republic of Bulgaria
with the procedures and conditions of fishing which are provided for in this
Agreement and also with the decisions and rules adopted in the USSR for the
conservation of fishery resources and the regulation of fishing.
The Government of the People's Republic of Bulgaria shall ensure that
appropriate officials appointed by the competent Soviet authorities are able freely
to board and conduct inspections on board any fishing vessel of the People's
Republic of Bulgaria engaged in fishing in the areas referred to in article 1 of this
Agreement.
In the event of any violations by fishing vessels of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria of the procedures and conditions prescribed for the conduct of fishing
activities, the competent Soviet authorities shall take such appropriate action
against the fishing vessels of the People's Republic of Bulgaria as is provided for
by the law of the USSR.
Article 5. Each Contracting Party shall appoint its representatives, who
shall meet at least once a year, to agree on measures for the implementation of
this Agreement.
Article 6. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as prejudicing the
positions or views of the two Contracting Parties on questions concerning the law
of the sea which are under consideration by the third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea.
Article 7. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of notification
of its approval by the competent authorities of the two countries and remain in
force for a period of five years, and shall subsequently be renewed for successive
five-year periods unless either Contracting Party terminates it earlier by giving
notice of such termination in writing at least six months before the expiry of the
current five-year term.
This Agreement may be reviewed by the Contracting Parties after the
adoption, in the light of the proceedings of the third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea, of other Soviet legislative provisions establishing
regulations governing the sea areas referred to in article 1 of this Agreement.
DONE at Moscow on 3 October 1978, in duplicate in the Russian and
Bulgarian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:
Y. Bystrov
For the Government of the People's Republic of Bulgaria:
E. Marinova

