protocol to the international convention for the northwest atlantic fisheries relating to paymentssource: great britain parliament. papers, 1976, cmnd. 6604.the governments parties to the international convention for the northwest, atlantic fisheries signed at washington under date of february 8, 1949, which convention, as amended, is hereinafter referred to as the convention, agree as follows : ARTICLE iparagraph 3 of article. xi of the convention is amended to read as follows:"3. the commission shall calculate the payments due from each contracting government under the annual administrative budget according to the following formula :(a) 15 percent of the administrative budget shall be deducted and the amount divided equally among the contracting governments;(b) the remainder shall be divided into such number of equal shares as corresponds to the total number of panel memberships;(c) the payment due from any contracting government shall be. its share of the 15 percent deduction plus the number of shares equal to the number of panels in which that government participates." ARTICLE ii1. this protocol shall take effect for all contracting governments one hundred and twenty days following the date on the notification by the government of the united states of america, the depositary government, of receipt, of written notification of approval by three-fourths of all contracting governments unless any other contracting government, notifies the depositary government that it objects to the protocol, within ninety days of the date on the notification by the depositary government of such receipt, in which case the protocol shall not take effect for any contracting government.2. any contracting government which has objected to this protocol may at any time withdraw that objection. if all objections are with-drawn, this protocol shall take effect for all contracting governments one hundred and twenty days following the' date on the notification by the depositary government of receipt of the last withdrawal.3. any government becoming a party to the convention after june 16, 1973 shall be deemed to have approved this protocol, ARTICLE iii1. the depositary government shall promptly notify all contracting governments of receipt of notifications of approval of the present protocol, the receipt of notifications of objection or withdrawal of objections, and the entry into force of this protocol.2. the original of this protocol shall be deposited with the depositary government, which government shall communicate certified copies thereof to all the governments signatory or adhering to the convention.dated at washington this eighth day of april, 1975, in the english language.
