CONVENTION BETWEEN
FINLAND AND RUSSIA
WITH REGARD TO FISHING
AND SEALING ON LAKE LADOGA,
SIGNED AT HELSINGFORS,
OCTOBER 28, 1922.

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
FINLAND and THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC have
decided, in pursuance of Article 21 of the
Treaty of Peace, signed at Dorpat on October
14, 1920, to conclude an Agreement regarding
the conditions and regulations entitling nationals
of either of the Contracting States to
carry on fishing and sealing in the parts of
Lake Ladoga belonging to the other State
and also regarding the measures to be taken
for the conservation of the fisheries of that
Lake; they have delegated the task of drawing
up and signing the above Convention to
the Mixed Finnish-Russian Central Committee
and have for that purpose appointed as their
plenipotentiary representatives:

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FINNISH REPUBLIC:
A. AHONEN,
P. J. HYNNINEN,
A. E. ALFTHAN,
V. HUPLI.
Y. W. PUHAKKA,

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIALIST
FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC:
S. M. FRANKFURT,
A. M. SMIRNOFF,
A. M. IGNATJEFF,
N. P. KOLTSHANOVSKI,
who, after having exchanged their full powers,
which were found in good and due form, have
agreed as follows:

Article 1.
Finland shall grant to Russian nationals and
to Russian organisations and associations the
right, on the terms laid down in the present
Convention, to carry on fishing and sealing in
the part of Lake Ladoga belonging to Finland
and situated between the frontier-line of the
two countries and a straight line running from
Cape Polvana on the western shore of Lake
Ladoga through the northern point of Mantsinsaari
to the village of Uusikyla in the parish
of Salmis on the eastern shore of the Lake.

Russia, for her part, shall grant to Finnish
nationals and Finnish organisations and associations
the right, on the terms laid down in
the present Convention, to carry on fishing and
sealing in the part of Lake Ladoga belonging
to Russia and situated between the frontier-line
of the two countries and a straight line running
from Cape Morja on the western shore of Lake
Ladoga to the mouth of the River Aunus on
the eastern shore of the Lake.

Note.- The boundaries of the above-mentioned
fishing area are shown as Nos. 1619 and 1620
on the Russian chart attached as an annex to
the present Convention. If there is any discrepancy
between the text and the charts, the text
shall be taken as authentic.

Article 2.
Nationals, organisations and associations of
one Contracting State shall be entitled to carry
on fishing and sealing in the waters referred
to in the preceding article of the other State
from May i until November 15; they may
employ all the methods and appliances which
the nationals of the latter country are allowed
to use, and shall enjoy the same rights and
privileges as nationals of the said country.

Article 3.
In the waters referred to in Article 1 belonging
to one of the Contracting States, nationals
of the other State shall, when carrying on
fishing or sealing, have the right to land only
at the spots designated for that purpose by
the frontier authorities of the State in question.
Such landing-places shall in any case be
fixed on the Finnish coast at Sortanlaks, in
the districts of Taipaleenjoki and Mantsinsaari,
and on the Russian coast at the mouths of the
Rivers Miikkulais, Vitele and Tuulos.

Fishermen and sealers belonging to the other
Contracting State shall be entitled to beach
their vessels and bag-nets at these landingplaces
and carry out necessary repairs. They
may also unload their catch there, at any
time, salt it and keep it there until their departure.

Article 4.
Nationals, organisations and associations of
one Contracting State, when navigating in the
waters of the other and when engaged in fishing
or sealing, shall observe the laws and regulations
of that country and the orders issued by its
authorities. They shall further comply with the
following provisions:

 1. Any person belonging to one Contracting
State shall, when engaged in fishing
in the waters of the other, have in
his possession the following documents
issued by the authorities in his own country:
(a) An identity certificate, the form of
which will be agreed upon later ;
(b) A permit entitling him to fish in
the waters of the other Contracting
State, such permit to contain the
holder's name, occupation and full
address, together with the date when
the authorisation was issued; and
(c) A schedule of the articles in the
vessel, certified by the frontier
authority at the nearest point on
the frontier. No articles may be
kept in the vessel other than the
equipment necessary for fishing or
sealing, fish-baskets, salting-barrels
and the necessary quantities of foodsupplies
and clothing.

A list of the permits issued, certified by
the frontier authorities in the home country,
shall be supplied to the head of the competent
frontier supervisory service in the
other country every year, fifteen days before
the fishing season begins.

 2. Every fishing vessel shall bear on
the lower part of her hull on the starboard
side, in large figures (not less than twelve
centimetres long), the number of the permit
referred to in paragraph I, together with
the name of the port of registry in Finnish
and Russian.

 3. Fishermen and sealers of each
State shall have their names placed on
the register of the competent frontier supervisory
authority of the other State, at
least once a year, before they proceed to
fish in the territory of the latter State.
The frontier authorities of each Contracting
State shall communicate to each
other, in good time, a list of these supervisory
authorities.

 4. Fishing and sealing may not be
carried on by nationals of one State in the
waters of the other at night-time (from sunset
to sunrise) within sight of land, except in
special circumstances; in such cases, fishingvessels
must either put out beyond sight
of land at night, or pass the night in the
territorial waters of their own State, or
else put in at one of the landing-places
referred to in Article 3.

 5. Persons on board fishing-vessels
shall, if required to do so by the competent
authority of the country in which the
vessel is situated, produce their papers for
inspection and show the articles contained
in the vessel. If any smuggled goods or
any articles other than those referred to in
paragraph i are found, such articles shall
be confiscated and the facts shall be noted
on the permit of the person concerned.

 6. If a fishing-vessel belonging to one
State goes outside the area of the other
State referred to in Article i (except in the
cases referred to in Article 5 of the present
Convention), the fact shall also be noted
on the permit of the person concerned. If
there is reason to believe that the bounds
of the fishing area were crossed intentionally,
the vessel may be detained and
the persons on board may be proceeded
against in the ordinary way.
 7. Persons committing breaches of
the present Convention, other than those
referred to in paragraph 6 above, may not
be arrested by the authorities in the other
Contracting State: the matter shall merely
be noted on the permit of the fisherman
concerned, who will be answerable for his
offence before the courts of his own
country and in accordance with its laws.
This provision shall not apply, however,
to fishermen who are guilty of offences of
a general nature.
 8. Persons whose permits have been
so endorsed three times (under the terms
of paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of the present
article) shall forfeit their right to fish for
the rest of the fishing season in the waters
of the other Contracting State, either on
their own or on another vessel.

Article 5.
It shall not be regarded as a breach of the
present Convention for fishing-vessels of either
Contracting Party to enter the territorial waters
or land on the coast of the other Contracting
Party owing to stress of weather, fog, ice, or
other perils of the sea (relache forcee).

Article 6.
Nationals, organisations and associations of
either Contracting State shall, when fishing or
sealing in the territorial waters of the other
Contracting State or when landing in that
State, be exempt from import and export duties
on the outward journey in respect of the vessel
and the fishing equipment referred to in Article
4, paragraph I, of the present Convention
(baskets, barrels, food-supplies and clothing)
and on the return journey in respect of the
articles they carry and their catch.

Note. - The above exemption shall not apply
when the articles detailed above, or the catch,
are being taken home or conveyed in order to
be sold in the other Contracting State.

Article 7.
In all matters not referred to in the present
Convention, the nationals of either Contracting
State, when in the territory of the other State
in the course of their fishing or sealing, shall
be subject to the same laws and regulations
as those in force for other foreigners.

Article 8.
In view of the fact that the fisheries of Lake
Ladoga can only be fully protected by the adoption
of joint and simultaneous measures by
Finland and Russia, the Contracting States
undertake, in order that simultaneous measures
may be adopted in the future, to negotiate
regarding such proposals as may be made by
either Contracting State for the regulation of
fishing and sealing, and the protection of the
fisheries, in Lake Ladoga.

It has been agreed, in particular, that the
Contracting States shall commence negotiations
in the immediate future for an agreement
with a view to maintaining and increasing the
supplies of salmon, vendace and char in Lake
Ladoga, and that the two Contracting States
shall, amongst other measures for the same
purpose, set up similar breeding establishments
to propagate these fish in the lake.

Article 9.
The present Convention shall be ratified and
the instruments of ratification shall be exchanged
at Moscow as soon as possible.

Article 10.
The present Convention shall remain in force
for ten years from the date of the exchange of
ratifications and shall be renewed for a further
period of ten years unless denounced by either
of the Contracting States not less than one
year before the expiration of a ten-yearly
period.

Article 11.
The present Convention is done in duplicate,
in the Finnish, Swedish and Russian languages,
and all texts shall be equally authentic.
In witness whereof the above-mentioned
plenipotentiary representatives of both Contracting
States have signed the present Convention,
and thereto affixed their seals.

HELSINGFORS, October 28, 1922.
