EXCHANGE OF NOTES CONSTITUTING AN AGREEMENT1 BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND CANADA RELATING TO A
SEISMOGRAPHIC STATION NEAR KLUANE LAKE, YUKON
TERRITORY
NOTE I.
The American Embassy to the Canadian Department of External Affairs
No. 50
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its compliments to the
Department of External Affairs and has the honor to refer to the mutual interest of our two
governments and scientific communities in achieving a better understanding of the seismic
and tectonic processes as well as earthquake prediction in the active seismic belt which
roughly parallels the western coast of our two countries.
Authorities of the United States Geological Survey (USGS) of the Department of the
Interior have been in communication with officials of the Seismology Division of the
Department of Energy, Mines & Resources for a number of years. Last May, officials of
the USGS contacted officials of the Seismology Division (principally, Dr. Kenneth
Whitham, who was then head of that Division and has since moved to the position of
Director of the Earth Sciences Branch of the Department of Energy, Mines & Resources)
concerning the desirability of improving the scientific and technological capability to
locate small (Richter magnitude 3 and less) earthquakes in the Yakutat region between
139 and 142 west longitude. At that time, officials of the Seismology Division indicated
that they had a continuing interest in this problem but that they unfortunately felt that their
priorities precluded their installing a seismological station in the area.
The USGS operates a network of 32 seismological stations extending from Katmai
National Monument on the Alaskan Peninsula to Yakutat in southeast Alaska. Subsequent
to the discussions referred to in the preceding paragraph, the USGS found that it was
possible for them to fund an additional station which could be utilized on the small
earthquake location problem. Recent discussions with officials of the Earth Sciences
Branch of the Department of Energy, Mines & Resources have reaffirmed their continuing
interest in the small earthquake problem in the Yakutat area.
An important element in these seismic studies is a thorough investigation of current
earthquake activity in coastal Alaska between 139 and 142 west longitude. This area,
unlike adjacent coastal areas in southeast and south-central Alaska, has not experienced a
major earthquake in this century. The area is referred to as a seismic gap, a temporary hole
in the otherwise continuous distribution of major earthquake zones that have ruptured in
this century. This seismic gap has been identified as a likely site for the next major
(Richter magnitude greater than 7.0) earthquake in coastal Alaska and the Aleutian
Islands. For this reason, the USGS is particularly interested in defining the current state of
seismicity in this area and in conducting possible experiments to look for premonitory
earthquake phenomena.
The existing distribution of seismographic stations in south-central Alaska is
inadequate to locate earthquakes smaller than about Richter magnitude 4.0 in the eastern
part of the seismic gap. A seismograph operating in the Kluane Lake region in the Yukon
Territory would greatly strengthen the geometry of the existing seismic network with
respect to shocks in the Yakutat region at the eastern end of the gap.
Accordingly, the Embassy has the honor to request the approval of the Government of
Canada for the USGS to install, operate and maintain a short-period seismograph station
near Kluane Lake in the Yukon Territory for a 15-month period beginning in June 1974
and extending through September 1975. Details are as follows:
(1) The specific station site would be selected by field personnel of the USGS after a field
examination of the Kluane Lake area.
(2) The station would consist of a vertical short-period seismometer with a natural
frequency of 1.0 second, an electronic amplifier, a helical dram recorder (Geotech
Helicorder, Kinemetrics VR-1 or equivalent visual recorder), a crystal-regulated
chronometer and a radio time-standard receiver.
(3) The station would be constructed in a manner which would make it possible to add
one short-period horizontal component to the station later if that should become
programmatically desirable.
(4) The instruments would be installed and maintained by USGS personnel. The records
would be changed and the daily station maintenance would be undertaken by a
Canadian resident of Kluane Lake with compensation from the USGS under
arrangements worked out directly between the USGS project chief and the Canadian
resident.
(5) Original records would be mailed to the USGS biweekly for analysis.
(6) Copies of the records and pertinent calibration data would be forwarded to the Earth
Physics Branch of the Department of Energy, Mines & Resources in Ottawa for
retention approximately four to six weeks after being recorded.
Officials of the Department of Energy, Mines & Resources would be fully informed
of the results obtained from the study and would be welcome to participate as intimately in
the work as their funding and interests permit.
The Embassy of the United States of America renews to the Department of External
Affairs the assurances of its highest consideration.
Ottawa, April 2, 1974.
The Embassy of the United States of America
NOTE II.
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
MINIST RE DES AFFAIRES EXT RIEURES
CANADA
ECS No. 707
The Department of External Affairs presents its compliments to the Embassy of the
United States of America and has the honour to refer to the Embassy's Note No. 50 of
April 2, 1974, requesting approval for the United States Geological Survey to install,
operate and maintain a short-period seismograph station near Kluane Lake in the Yukon
Territory from June 1974 to September 1975.
The Department of External Affairs confirms that the details in Note No. 50
regarding the construction, installation and maintenance of the station and equipment and
access to data are acceptable to the Canadian authorities concerned. With regard to
selection of a site, the field team should be apprised of the location of the boundaries of
Kluane National Park and if a site cannot be found outside the Park permission to locate
and install the station on Park lands should be sought from the Park Superintendent,
Kluane National Park, at Haines Junction, Yukon Territory.
The Department of External Affairs avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the
Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its highest consideration.
Ottawa, May 9, 1974.

EXTENSION OF THE AGREEMENT OF 2 APRIL AND 9 MAY 1974' BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND CANADA RELATING TO A SEISMOGRAPHIC STATION NEAR
KLUANE LAKE, YUKON TERRITORY
By an agreement in the form of an exchange of notes dated at Ottawa on 15 July and
13 August 1975, which came into force on 13 August 1975 by the exchange of the said
notes, the above-mentioned Agreement was extended until 30 September 1976.
