INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION CONCERNING THE
EXPORT AND IMPORT OF ANIMAL PRODUCTS (OTHER THAN
MEAT, MEAT PREPARATIONS, FRESH ANIMAL PRODUCTS,
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS). SIGNED AT GENEVA, FEBRUARY
20TH, 1935.
THE FEDERAL PRESIDENT OF AUSTRIA; His MAJESTY TifE KING OF THE BELGIANS; His
MAJESTY THE KING OF THE BULGARIANS; THE PRESIDENT OF THE SPANISH REPUBLIC; THE
PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC; His MAJESTY THE KING OF THE HELLENES; His
MAJESTY THE KING OF ITALY; THE PRESIDENT OF THE LATVIAN REPUBLIC; HER MAJESTY
THE QUEEN OF THE NETIIERLANDS ; THE PRESIDENT OF TItE REPUBLIC OF POLAND; HIS MAJESTY
TIlE KING OF ROUMANIA; THE Swiss FEDERAL COUNCIL; THE PRESIDENT OF THE CZECHOSLOVAK
REPUBLIC; THE PRESIDENT OF THE TURKISH REPUBLIC; THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
Being desirous of affording the traffic in animal products (other than meat, meat preparations,
fresh animal products, milk and milk products) the fullest measure of freedom compatible with
the requirements of veterinary inspection and public health;
Have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
THE FEDERAL PRESIDENT OF AUSTRIA:
M. Emerich PFL0GL, Permanent Representative accredited to the League of Nations,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary.
His MAJESTY THE KING OF THE BELGIANS:
M. Paul VAN ZEELAND, Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign Affairs and External Trade.
His MAJESTY THE KING OF THE BULGARIANS:
M. Nicolas ANTONOFF, Permanent Delegate accredited to the League of Nations, Minister
Plenipotentiary.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE SPANISH REPUBLIC :
M. Julio L6PEZ OLIVAN, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Swiss
Federal Council.
TIIE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCii REPUBLIC:
Dr. V. DROUIN, Head of the Veterinary Service at the Ministry of Agriculture.
His MAJESTY THE KING OF THE HELLENES :
M. Raoul BIBICA-ROSETTI, Permanent Delegate accredited to the League of Nations,
Minister Plenipotentiary.
His MAJESTY TIlE KING OF ITALY :
Professor C. BISANTI, Veterinary Inspector-General at the Ministry of the Interior.
TIlE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA :
M. Jules FELDMANS, Permanent Delegate accredited to the League of Nations, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Swiss Federal Council.
HER MAJESTY TIIE QUEEN OF TIE NETHERLANDS :
Ridder C. VAN RAPPARD, Permanent Delegate accredited to the League of Nations, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Swiss Federal Council.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND:
M. Titus KOMARNICKI, Permanent Delegate accredited to the League of Nations, Minister
Plenipotentiary.
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF ROUMANIA:
M. Constantin ANTONIADE, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the
League of Nations.
TIE Swiss FEDERAL COUNCIL:
Dr. G. FLijCKIGER, Director of the Federal Veterinary Office.
THE PRESIDENT OF TIlE CZECHOSLOVAK REPUBLIC :
M. Rodolphe K0NZL-JIZERSK'', Permanent Delegate accredited to the League of Nations,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Swiss Federal Council.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE TURKISH REPUBLIC:
M. Cemal H0SNU TARAY, Permanent Delegate accredited to the League of Nations,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Swiss Federal Council.
THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS:
M. Vladimir POTEMKINE, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the President
of the French Republic.
Who, having commilnicated their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon
the following provisions :
Article i.
The High Contracting Parties undertake to admit to free traffic such animal products (other
than meat, meat preparations, fresh animal products, milk and milk products) as come from
countries which have ratified the International Convention I for the Campaign against Contagious
Diseases of Animals and as are hereinafter specified :
(a) Hides, dried or salted skins and dried, salted or limed hides for glue
(b) Horns, hoofs, claws, tusks, teeth either dried or having been subjected to a
process of scalding, and without particles of soft matter adhering thereto ;
(c) Bones, dried or boiled, likewise without particles of soft matter adhering
thereto, and bone-meal sterilised by steam under pressure ;
(d) Dried crude wool, woollen waste, wool from tanneries, dried hair of the various
animals (bristles, horsehair) in a crude state, dried feathers of every kind, provided
that all such products are packed in sacks or covers ;
(e) Dried or salted guts, dried stomachs and bladders, packed in barrels or boxes,
or made up in bales ;
(/) All products enumerated in the five previous paragraphs, provided that they
have undergone any other treatment recognised as adequate, from the point of view
of veterinary prophylaxis, by the High Contracting Parties concerned.
Nevertheless, as regards cattle plague, swine fever, foot-and-mouth disease, sheep-pox and
anthrax, the High Contracting Parties shall be entitled to make their traffic conditional upon the
application of the provisions hereinafter indicated.
Annex to Article i.
For the purposes of the present Article, the terms "dried" and "salted" are exclusively
applied to substances completely dried or completely saturated with salt.
Article 2.
Should cattle plague appear in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, the other
High Contracting Parties shall have the right, as long as the danger of infection lasts, to prohibit
the import of parts of animals and animal products which might convey infection.
Article 3.
If anthrax takes a malignant form or appears in numerous scattered centres, or if swine fever,
foot-and-mouth disease or sheep-pox take a malignant or epidemic form in the territory of one
of the High Contracting Parties, the other Parties may require that the animal products mentioned
in Article i shall be accompanied, in order to be admitted on import, by a certificate of origin
and freedom from contamination enabling the products to be identified in conformity with the
specimen attached to the present Convention.
This certificate must be signed or countersigned by a Government veterinary official or by
a veterinary surgeon duly authorised by the State to do so. It may only be issued if the origin
and soundness of the products can be certified by veterinary inspection.
When anthrax or sheep-pox are prevalent in the country of origin, the High Contracting
Parties may require that the animal products mentioned in Article i, which may carry infection,
be imported direct to establishments specially authorised for this purpose. The High Contracting
Parties shall be entitled to lay down special provisions for the transport of the products to those
establishments and their industrial use.
It shall be clearly understood that the measures described above must not be adopted in
regard to countries in which anthrax is prevalent in a sporadic form.
Article 4.
In addition to the certificate of origin and freedom from contamination mentioned in the
previous Article, attestations may, in the case of a recrudescence of anthrax in the country of
origin, be required on the importation of hides, skins, wool, hair bristles, bones and bone-meal.
Such attestations shall indicate that these animal products have been subjected, under the responsibility
of the exporting State and by methods recognised by the High Contracting Parties concerned
to be of proved effectiveness, either to disinfection or to examination with a view to ascertaining
the presence of disease. Special agreements regarding bones and bone-meal shall be necessary
if treatment affording adequate guarantees that all anthrax germs have been destroyed appears
to be impracticable.
The attestations issued must state very accurately the methods of disinfection or examination
employed. They should also indicate the measures taken to prevent, after disinfection, re-infection
during transport.
As regards completely salted skins and hides coming from public slaughter-houses under
permanent veterinary supervision, it will be sufficient to produce the certificates of origin and
reedom from contamination mentioned in Article 3.
Article 5.
When, as a result of the traffic in animals or animal products, an infectious disease (other
than rabies, dourine, contagious peri-pneumonia of cattle and glanders), notification of which
in the health bulletin is obligatory under the International Convention for the Campaign against
Contagious Diseases of Animals of to-day's date, has been introduced from the territory of one
of the High Contracting Parties into the territory of one of the other Parties, the latter shall have
the right, so long as the danger lasts, to prohibit the import of raw material of animal origin which
might convey infection.
The High Contracting Parties shall have the same right in the event jf one of the diseases
mentioned in the preceding paragraph being prevalent in the territory of one of them.
Trade in industrially scoured wool shall be exempt from this provision.
Article 6.
In the case of goods covered by a collective sanitary attestation, the veterinary sanitary
authorities of the ports, stations and warehouses may issue valid partial attestations to the same
effect to accompany re-shipments forming parts of a consignment.
It shall be open to the High Contracting Parties to require a certified copy of the collective
sanitary attestation to be attached to the partial attestations.
Article 7.
Should the certificates of origin and freedom from contamination or the attestations provided
for above not satisfy the requirements laid down in the preceding Articles and thus not afford
adequate guarantees, importing countries are authorised to refuse consignments at the frontier
station, or to require either disinfection on import or examination with a view to ascertaining
the presence of disease.
Article 8.
If one of the High Contracting Parties discovers that irregularities have occurred, on importation,
in the issue of the necessary certificates or attestations, it may prohibit thr, importation of
the products enumerated in Article i, but it shall at the same time inform the High Contracting
Party or Parties concerned - country of origin, of provenance or of transit - in order that they
may adopt measures and impose penalties to punish such abuses and prevent their recurrence.
If the complainant High Contracting Party considers that the measures adopted by the country
or countries concerned do not afford the guarantees that it considers necessary, it may continue
to prohibit the importation of the products enumerated in Article i, originating in or coming from
the countries in question. It must nevertheless be prepared to take into consideration the proposals
of the other High Contracting Party or Parties intended to allow of the resumption of this trade
and to enter into negotiations with them on this subject.
Article 9.
Nothing in the present Convention shall affect the provisions of any other Convention, Treaty
or Agreement concluded or to be concluded between any of the High Contracting Parties, under
which more favourable treatment than that laid down in the present Convention for the export
or import of the animal products enumerated in Article i is or may in the future be granted for
the export or import of the said products of a High Contracting Party.
FINAL PROVISIONS.
Article io (Settlement of Disputes).
I. If there should arise between the High Contracting Parties a dispute of any kind relating
to the interpretation or application of the present Convention and if such dispute cannot be
satisfactorily settled by diplomacy, it shall be settled in accordance with any applicable agreements
in force between the Parties providing for the settlement of international disputes.
2. In case there is no such agreement in force between the Parties, the dispute shall be referred
to arbitration or judicial settlement. In the absence of agreement on the choice of another tribunal,
the dispute shall, at the request of any one of the Parties, be referred to the Permanent Court of
International Justice if all the Parties to the dispute are Parties to the ProtocolI of December 16th,
192o, relating to the Statute of that Court and, if any of the Parties to the dispute is not a Party
to the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, to an arbitral tribunal constituted in accordance with
the Hague Conventions of October 18th, 1907, for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes.
Article ii (Languages and Date).
The present Convention, of which the English and French texts are both authoritative, shall
bear this day's date.
Article 12 (Signature and Ratification).
1. The present Convention may be signed until February 15th, 1936, on behalf of any Member
of the League of Nations or any non-member State to which the Council of the League of Nations
shall have communicated a copy of the present Convention for the purpose.
2. The present Convention shall be ratified. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the League of Nations.
3. The ratification shall not take effect unless the High Contracting Party is already bound
by the International Convention for the Campaign against Contagious Diseases of Animals by
a ratification or a definitive accessioll and his obligation under the same has already entered into
force.
4. The Secretary-General of the League of Nations shall notify the deposit of the instruments
of ratification to all Members of the League of Nations and to the non-member States referred
to in paragraph z of the present Article, at the same time stating whether the condition specified
in paragraph 3 is fulfilled.
Article 13 (Accession).
i. On and after February i6th, 1936, any Member of the League of Nations and any nonmember
State to which the Council of the League of Nations shall have communicated a copy
of the present Convention may adhere to it.
2. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the League
of Nations.
3. Accessions shall not take effect unless the High Contracting Party is already bound by
the International Convention for the Campaign against Contagious Diseases of Animals by a
ratification or a definitive accession and his obligation under the same has already entered into
force.
4. The Secretary-General of the League of Nations shall notify the deposit of the instruments
of accession to afl Members of the League of Nations and to the non.member States referred to
in paragraph i of the present Article, at the same time stating whether the condition specified in
paragraph 3 is fulfilled.
Article 14 (Entry into Force).
i. The Secretary-General of the League of Nations will draw up a proces-verbal when five
ratifications or accessions, complying with the condition laid down in paragraph 3 of Article 12
and in paragraph 3 of Article 13, have been received.
2. A certified true copy of this procis-verbal shall be transmitted by the Secretary-General
of the League of Nations to all the Members of the League of Nations and to all non-member States
mentioned in Article 12.
Article 15.
i. The present Convention shall be registered by the Secretary-General of the League of
Nations ninety days after the date of the procis-verbal mentioned in Article r4. It will come into
force on that date.
2. In respect of each Member or non-member State on whose behalf any instrument of
ratification or accession is subsequently deposited, the Convention shall come into force ninety
days after the date of the deposit of such instrument.
Article i6 (Duration and Denunciation).
i. The duration of the present Convention shall be for two years from its entry into force.
2. It shall remain in force for a further period of four years, and subsequently in respect
of such Contracting Parties as have not denounced it at least six months before the expiry of the
period.
General of the League of Nations.
4. The present Convention shall cease to be in force as regards any High Contracting Party
when, as a result of denunciation of the International Convention for the Campaign against
Contagious Diseases of Animals, the High Contracting Party has ceased, such denunciation having
duly taken effect, to be a party to that Convention.
5. The Secretary-General of the League of Nations shall inform all Members of the League
of Nations and non-member States referred to in pararaph i of Article 12 of all notices of denunciation
of the present Convention or of the International Convention for the Campaign against
Contagious Diseases of Animals, denunciation of the latter being counted as denunciation of the
present Convention.
Article 17 (Application to Colonies, Protectorates, etc.).
i. In the absence of a contrary declaration by one of the High Contracting Parties at the
time of signature, ratification or accession, the provisions of the present Convention shall not
apply to colonies, protectorates, overseas territones, territories under its suzerainty or territories
in respect of which a mandate has been entrusted to it.
2. Nevertheless, the High Contracting Parties reserve the right to sign the Convention or
to accede thereto, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 12 and 13, for their colonies,
protectorates, overseas territories, territories under their suzerainty or territories in respect of
which a mandate has been confided to them.
3. They further reserve the right to denounce the Convention separately, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 16.
4. The present Convention shall not be applicable to colonies, protectorates, overseas territories,
territories under the suzerainty of a High Contracting Party or territories in respect of which
a mandate has been confided to it, if the International Convention for the Campaign against
Contagious Diseases of Animals is not in force, or has ceased to be in force in so far as the said
High Contracting Party is concerned, in the above-mentioned countries.
Article 18 (Revision).
x. Conferences for the revision of the present Convention my be called with a view to making
such changes therein as experience may have shown to be useful.
2. A conference for the revision of the present Convention shall be called by the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations whenever so requested by not less than five of the High Contracting
Parties.
The latter shall indicate succinctly the changes they propose and the reasons for such changes.
3. In default of the unanimous consent of the High Contracting Parties, no demand for
the calling of a conference for the revision of the present Convention within less than two years
from the entry into force of the Convention or four years from the end of a previous conference
for its revision shall be admissible.
4. The Secretary-General of the League of Nations shall prepare the work of conferences
for the revision of the present Convention with the co-operation of the International Office for
Contagious Diseases of Animals.
In faith whereof the above-mentioned
Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention.
Done at Geneva the twentieth day of
February, one thousand nine hundred and
thirty-five, in a single copy, which shall be
kept in the archives of the Secretariat of the
League of Nations and of which a certified true
copy shall be delivered to all the Members of
the League and to the non-member States
referred to in Article 12.
ANNEX.
SPECIMEN CERTIFICATE OF ORIGIN AND FREEDOM FROM CONTAMINATION.
I, the undersigned [name and qualification of the Government veterinary officer of the State of
provenance], certify that the animal products hereinunder described
(weight]
(nature of goods]
marked as under
consigned from [place of consignment]
by (name and address of consignor]
to (name and address of consignee]
in transport by [form of transport and, if transport is by water, name of vessel],
come from a district in which no anthrax, swine fever, foot-and-mouth disease or sheep-pox are prevalent
in malignant or epidemic form, and comply with the conditions in respect of freedom from contamination
laid down in Article t of the International Convention of ............................................................
D one a t ........................................................................................................................
on [date in full].
(Signature of veterinary surgeon, stating qualifications.]
[Official stamp or seal.]
