CONVENTION 
                                   ON THE PROTECTION OF THE BLACK SEA FROM POLLUTION 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties, 
                       Determined to work towards the achievement of 
                    progress in the protection of the marine environment of the Black Sea and the preservation of 
                    its living resources, 
                     
                       Bearing in mind the important economic and social importance and healing 
                    properties of the marine environment of the Black Sea, 
                     
                       Convinced that the natural riches and conditions for 
                    rest on the Black Sea can be preserved primarily by joint efforts 
                    Black Sea countries, 
                     
                       Bearing in mind the generally accepted rules and provisions of international law, 
                     
                       Taking into account the principles, customs and rules of the general 
                    international law governing the protection and preservation of the maritime 
                    the environment, as well as the preservation of its living resources, 
                     
                       Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Convention on Prevention 
                    marine pollution by discharges of waste and other materials from 1972 
                    year, as amended;  International Convention on Prevention 
                    pollution from ships of 1973 as amended by the Protocol of 1978 
                    year, as amended;  Convention on the Control of Transboundary 
                    the movement of hazardous wastes and their disposal in 1989;  and 
                    International Convention on Emergency Preparedness 
                    oil pollution, control, and cooperation of 1990, 
                     
                       Recognizing the importance of the principles adopted by the Meeting on 
                    security and co-operation in Europe, 
                     
                       Bearing in mind their interest in conservation, development, and 
                    development of bioproduction potential of the Black Sea, 
                     
                       considering that the Black Sea coast is large 
                    an international resort area where the Black Sea countries 
                    invested heavily in health care and tourism development, 
                     
                       taking into account the special hydrological and ecological conditions of Chernoy 
                    the sea and the increased sensitivity of its flora and fauna to changes 
                    temperature and composition of sea water, 
                     
                       Noting that pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea is occurring 
                    also from land-based sources elsewhere in Europe, 
                    mainly through rivers, 
                     
                       Reaffirming its readiness to cooperate in the preservation of 
                    the marine environment of the Black Sea and the protection of its living resources from 
                    Pollution 
                     
                       Noting the need for cooperation in the field of science, technology and technology; 
                    technologies for achieving the objectives of this Convention, 
                     
                       Noting that existing international arrangements do not 
                    cover all aspects of pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea, 
                    originating from third countries, 
                     
                       Conscious of the need for close cooperation with 
                    relevant international organizations on the basis of 
                    a coherent regional approach for protection and improvement 
                    marine environment of the Black Sea, 
                     
                       Have agreed as follows: 
                     
                     
                                                 Article I
                     
                                             SCOPE 
                     
                       1. This Convention shall apply to the Black Sea proper. 
                    the southern limit formed for the purposes of this Convention by the line, 
                    connecting Cape Kelagra and Cape Dalyan. 
                     
                       2. For the purposes of this Convention, the reference to the Black Sea includes 
                    the territorial sea and the exclusive economic zone of each 
                    of the Contracting Party in the Black Sea.  However, any 
                    The Protocol to this Convention may provide otherwise for 
                    the purposes of such a Protocol. 
                     
                                                Article II
                     
                                               DEFINITIONS 
                     
                       For the purposes of this Convention: 
                       1. "Pollution of the marine environment" means the introduction by man, 
                    directly or indirectly, substances or energy into the marine environment, including 
                    estuaries that cause or may lead to such harmful 
                    consequences like harm to living resources and life at sea, danger 
                    for human health, interference with activities at sea, 
                    including for fishing and other lawful uses 
                    seas, reduced quality of seawater used and deterioration 
                    conditions of rest. 
                       2. (a) "Vessel" means a vessel operated in the marine environment 
                    any type.  This term includes hydrofoils, vessels 
                    hovercraft, underwater vessels, towed and self-propelled 
                    floating facilities, as well as platforms and other artificially 
                    constructed structures in the sea. 
                       (b) "Aircraft" means the aircraft of any 
                    Sort of. 
                       (3) (a) "Burial" means: 
                       (i) Any intentional disposal of wastes or other materials from 
                    ships or aircraft; 
                       (ii) Any intentional destruction of ships or aircraft 
                    Devices; 
                       (b) "Burial" shall not be deemed to be: 
                       (i) Disposal of wastes or other materials inherent in, or 
                    resulting from the normal operation of vessels, or 
                    aircraft and their equipment, other than waste or other 
                    materials transported by ships or aircraft, 
                    which are operated for the purpose of disposal of such materials, or 
                    brought to such vessels or aircraft, as well as except for 
                    those resulting from the treatment of such waste or other 
                    materials on such vessels or aircraft; 
                       (ii) Placing materials for purposes other than their simple 
                    removal, provided that this is not contrary to the purposes of the present 
                    Convention. 
                       4. "Harmful substance" means any dangerous, poisonous or other 
                    a substance which, once in the marine environment, due to its 
                    toxicity and/or persistence and/or capacity to accumulate in 
                    living organisms, causes pollution or adversely affects 
                    biological processes. 
                     
                                                Article III
                     
                                             GENERAL 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties shall be parties to this Convention at 
                    on the basis of full equality of rights and duties, respect for 
                    national sovereignty and independence, non-interference in their 
                    internal affairs, mutual benefit and other relevant 
                    principles and norms of international law. 
                     
                                                Article IV
                     
                                           SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY 
                     
                       This Convention shall not apply to any warship, 
                    military auxiliary vessels, to other vessels or aircraft 
                    apparatus owned or operated by the State, and 
                    currently used only for government
                    a non-profit service. 
                       However, each Contracting Party by adopting
                    appropriate measures without prejudice to the operation of such vessels, or
                    aircraft owned or operated by it, 
                    ensures that such vessels or aircraft, as far as
                    it is practically possible to act in a way that
                    is compatible with this Convention. 
                     
                                                 Article V 
                     
                                           GENERAL OBLIGATIONS 
                     
                       1. Each Contracting Party shall ensure the application of
                    of this Convention in those areas of the Black Sea where it
                    exercise its sovereignty as well as its sovereign rights, and 
                    jurisdiction, without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Contracting Parties
                    Parties arising from the rules of international law. 
                       Each Contracting Party in order to achieve the objectives of this
                    The Convention shall take into account the adverse effects of pollution in its
                    inland waters on the marine environment of the Black Sea. 
                       2. The Contracting Parties individually or, depending on
                    circumstances, jointly take all necessary measures, 
                    compatible with international law, in accordance with the provisions
                    of this Convention for the purpose of prevention and reduction
                    pollution and control of the marine environment of the Black Sea, as well as in 
                    for the purpose of its protection and preservation. 
                       3. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate in the development of
                    Additional Protocols and Annexes other than those annexed to 
                    of this Convention as may be required for its
                    Implementation. 
                       4. Contracting Parties, entering into bilateral or
                    multilateral agreements for the protection and preservation of maritime
                    the environment of the Black Sea shall strive to ensure that such
                    the agreements shall be compatible with this Convention.  Copies of such
                    Agreements shall be communicated to other Contracting Parties through
                    The Commission referred to in Article XVII of this Convention. 
                       5. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate within the framework of
                    international organizations which they deem to be, 
                    competent, in promoting the development of measures conducive to protection
                    and the preservation of the marine environment of the Black Sea. 
                     
                                                Article VI 
                     
                              POLLUTION BY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES AND MATERIALS 
                     
                       Each Contracting Party shall prevent pollution
                    of the marine environment of the Black Sea from any source by substances or
                    materials specified in the Annex to this Convention. 
                     
                                                Article VII 
                     
                              POLLUTION FROM LAND-BASED SOURCES 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties shall take measures to prevent and 
                    reduction of pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea from those located
                    on land-based sources and their control under the Protocol on Land Sources 
                    protection of the marine environment of the Black Sea from pollution from those on the
                    land sources, which is an integral part of the present
                    Convention. 
                     
                                               Article VIII 
                     
                                           POLLUTION FROM SHIPS 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties individually or, where appropriate, 
                    jointly take all appropriate measures to prevent and 
                    reducing pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea from ships and combating
                    with it in accordance with generally accepted international norms
                    and standards. 
                     
                                                Article IX 
                     
                          COOPERATION IN POLLUTION CONTROL IN EMERGENCY 
                                                SITUATIONS 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties shall cooperate to prevent and 
                    reducing pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea and combating it in 
                    as a result of emergency situations under the Protocol on 
                    cooperation in combating oil pollution of the Black Sea, and 
                    other harmful substances in emergency situations, which
                    is an integral part of this Convention. 
                     
                                                 Article X 
                     
                                   CONTAMINATION CAUSED BY DISPOSAL 
                     
                       1. The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures and 
                    cooperate in the prevention and reduction of the caused
                    disposal of pollution and its control in accordance with 
                    The Protocol on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Black Sea against Pollution, 
                    caused by burial, which is an integral part of
                    of this Convention. 
                       2. Contracting Parties in the areas beneath them
                    jurisdiction, do not allow the implementation of burial by physical
                    or legal entities of non-Black Sea States. 
                     
                                                Article XI 
                         POLLUTION CAUSED BY ACTIVITIES ON THE CONTINENTAL 
                                                  SHELF 
                     
                       1. Each Contracting Party shall, as soon as possible, accept
                    laws and regulations, as well as measures to prevent, reduce and 
                    Combating pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea caused by or
                    related to activities on its continental shelf, including:
                    exploration and exploitation of the natural resources of the continental shelf. 
                       The Contracting Parties shall inform each other through the Commission
                    on the laws, regulations and measures adopted by them in this regard. 
                       2. The Contracting Parties, where appropriate, 
                    cooperate in this field and seek to harmonize measures, 
                    referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. 
                     
                                                Article XII 
                     
                                  POLLUTION FROM OR THROUGH THE ATMOSPHERE 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties shall adopt laws and regulations, and
                    individual or concerted measures to prevent and 
                    reducing pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea from the atmosphere, or
                    through it and the fight against it, applicable to the airspace over
                    their territory and vessels flying their flag or vessels, or
                    aircraft registered on their territory. 
                     
                                               Article XIII 
                     
                                      PROTECTION OF MARINE LIVING RESOURCES 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties, taking measures in accordance with 
                    This Convention for the Purpose of Prevention and Reduction
                    pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea and its control, devote
                    special attention to not harming life at sea and living
                    resources, in particular by changing their habitat and 
                    interference with fishing and other legitimate species
                    use of the Black Sea, and in this regard, properly
                    take into account the recommendations of competent international organizations. 
                     
                                                Article XIV 
                     
                           POLLUTION BY HAZARDOUS WASTES IN TRANSBOUNDARY 
                                               MOVING 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties shall take all measures in accordance with 
                    international law and cooperate in the prevention of pollution
                    of the marine environment of the Black Sea caused by hazardous wastes in their
                    cross-border movement, as well as in the fight against their illegal
                    in accordance with the Protocol to be adopted by them. 
                     
                                                Article XV 
                     
                              SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND MONITORING 
                     
                       1. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate in the conduct of scientific
                    research aimed at the protection and preservation of the marine environment
                    Black Sea and implement, where appropriate, joint
                    research programmes and the exchange of relevant
                    scientific data and information. 
                       2. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate in the conduct of
                    research aimed at developing ways and means of evaluation
                    the nature and extent of pollution and its impact on the environment
                    system in the water column and sediments, identification of contaminated
                    areas, study and assessment of hazards and development of measures for
                    their elimination;  in particular, they are developing alternative
                    methods of handling, removing, eliminating or using harmful
                    Substances. 
                       3. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate, through the Commission, in 
                    establishing appropriate scientific criteria for formulation
                    and the development of rules, standards and recommended practices; 
                    procedures for the prevention and reduction of pollution of the marine environment
                    The Black Sea, as well as the fight against it. 
                       4. The Contracting Parties shall, in particular, develop through
                    The Commission and, where appropriate, in cooperation with 
                    international organizations which they consider competent, 
                    complementary or joint monitoring programmes, 
                    covering all sources of pollution, and also create for
                    Black Sea pollution monitoring system, including,
                    necessities, bilateral or multilateral programmes
                    monitoring, measuring, assessing and analysing hazards, or
                    and the effects of pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea. 
                       5. Where the Contracting Parties have sufficient
                    reasons to believe that activities within their jurisdiction or
                    under their control may lead to substantial contamination or to 
                    significant and harmful changes in the marine environment of the Black Sea, they
                    before starting such an activity, its potential
                    consequences based on all relevant information and data
                    monitoring, and forwarding the results of such assessments to the Commission. 
                       6. Contracting Parties, where appropriate, 
                    collaborate in the development, acquisition and implementation of pure and 
                    low-waste technologies, in particular by taking measures to
                    and facilitating the exchange of such technology. 
                       7. Each Contracting Party shall designate a competent
                    the national body responsible for scientific activities and 
                    monitoring. 
                     
                                                Article XVI 
                     
                                     RESPONSIBILITIES AND OBLIGATIONS 
                     
                       1. The Contracting Parties shall be responsible for the implementation of
                    its international obligations to protect and preserve the maritime
                    environment of the Black Sea. 
                       2. Each Contracting Party shall adopt rules and regulations, 
                    relating to liability for damage caused by physical or
                    legal entities of the marine environment of the Black Sea in areas above
                    which it exercises in accordance with international law
                    its sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction. 
                       3. The Contracting Parties shall ensure that, in their legal proceedings,
                    systems were provided with the possibility of recourse in order to
                    prompt receipt of adequate compensation or other reparation
                    damage caused by pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea
                    natural or legal persons under their control
                    Jurisdiction. 
                       4. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate in the development and 
                    harmonizing its laws, regulations and procedures relating to
                    liability, assessment and compensation for damage caused
                    pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea in order to 
                    maximum degree of protection and protection against
                    pollution of the Black Sea as a whole. 
                     
                                               Article XVII 
                     
                                                 COMMISSION 
                     
                       1. In order to achieve the objectives of this Convention, the Contracting Parties
                    The Parties shall establish a Commission for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Black Sea against
                    "The Commission" hereinafter referred to as "the Commission". 
                       2. Each of the Contracting Parties shall be represented in the Commission
                    one representative who may have alternates
                    a representative, advisers and experts. 
                       3. The Chairmanship of the Commission shall be exercised by each
                    by the Contracting Party in turn, in order of English
                    Alphabet. The first Chairman of the Commission will be a representative
                    Of the Republic of Bulgaria. 
                       The President shall serve for a period of one year and shall 
                    this time cannot act as a representative of its
                    Country. In the event that the seat of the President becomes vacant, 
                    The Contracting Party presiding over the Commission, 
                    appoints a successor who remains in the post until the expiry
                    of the term of office of the Presidency of that Contracting Party. 
                       4. The Commission shall meet at least once a year.  Along
                    at the request of any Contracting Party, the Chairman shall convene
                    extraordinary meetings. 
                       5. Decisions and recommendations of the Commission shall be made by the Black Sea region
                    by states unanimously. 
                       6. The Commission shall be assisted in its work by a permanent
                    Secretariat. The Commission appoints the Executive Director and others
                    Secretariat officials.   The Executive Director appoints
                    technical staff in accordance with the rules that will be
                    established by the Commission.  The Secretariat is composed of citizens of all
                    black sea states. 
                       The headquarters of the Commission and the Secretariat are located in Istanbul. 
                    The location of the headquarters is subject to change by decision
                    the Contracting Parties, adopted by consensus. 
                       7. The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure for
                    performing its functions, makes decisions on the organization of its
                    activities and establish subsidiary bodies in accordance with 
                    and the provisions of this Convention. 
                       8. Representatives, Alternate Representatives, Advisers and 
                    experts of the Contracting Parties shall use the territory of
                    of the relevant Contracting Party by diplomatic
                    privileges and immunities under international law. 
                       9. Privileges and immunities of Secretariat officials
                    shall be determined by agreement between the Contracting Parties. 
                       10. The Commission shall have such powers as are necessary for it
                    perform its functions. 
                       11. The Commission shall conclude with the host Contracting Party
                    headquarters agreement. 
                     
                                               Article XVIII 
                     
                                             FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
                     
                       Commission: 
                       1. Promotes the implementation of this Convention and informs
                    the Contracting Parties on their activities; 
                       2. Make recommendations on the measures necessary for
                    achieving the objectives of this Convention; 
                       3. Consider issues related to the implementation of this
                    Convention, and makes recommendations for amendments to 
                    Concepts and to Protocols that may be required, including:
                    amendments to the annexes to this Convention and to the Protocols; 
                       4. Develops criteria relating to prevention and 
                    reducing and combating pollution of the marine environment of the Black Sea, and 
                    elimination of the consequences of pollution, as well as recommendations in 
                    with regard to measures in this regard. 
                       5. Promotes acceptance by contracting Parties
                    additional measures necessary to protect the Marine Environment of the Black Sea
                    sea, and for this purpose receives, processes and distributes among
                    of the Contracting Parties relevant scientific, technical and 
                    statistical information, as well as contributes to scientific and technical
                    Research; 
                       5. Cooperates with competent international organizations, 
                    primarily for the purpose of developing appropriate programmes or
                    to obtain assistance for the achievement of the objectives of this Convention; 
                       7. Consider any questions raised by the Contracting Parties
                    Parties; 
                       8. Performs other functions provided for by other
                    by the provisions of this Convention or entrusted to the Commission by the
                    by unanimous decision of the Contracting Parties. 
                     
                                                Article XIX 
                     
                                    MEETINGS OF THE CONTRACTING PARTIES 
                     
                       1. Meetings of the Contracting Parties shall be convened on the recommendation of
                    Commission. They shall also be convened within 10 days at the request of one
                    from the Contracting Parties in extraordinary circumstances. 
                       2. The basic task of the meetings of the Contracting Parties
                    is to review the implementation of this Convention
                    and the Protocol, based on the report of the Commission. 
                       3. A state other than the Black Sea region, which
                    accedes to this Convention, may attend
                    meetings of the Contracting Parties in consultative status. 
                     
                                                Article XX 
                     
                              ADOPTION OF AMENDMENTS TO THE CONVENTION AND/OR PROTOCOLS 
                     
                       1. Any Contracting Party may propose amendments to 
                    the articles of this Convention. 
                       2. Any Contracting Party to this Convention may
                    to propose amendments to any Protocol. 
                       3. Any such proposed amendments shall be communicated to the Depositary and 
                    are brought to the attention of all through diplomatic channels
                    the Contracting Parties and the Commission. 
                       4. Amendments to this Convention and to any of the Protocols
                    adopted by consensus at the Diplomatic Conference
                    of the Contracting Parties, which shall be convened within 90 days
                    after the circulation of the proposed amendments by the Depositary. 
                       5. Amendments shall enter into force 30 days after receipt
                    By the Depositary of notifications from all Contracting Parties concerning 
                    And agree with these amendments. 
                     
                                                Article XXI 
                     
                                   ANNEXES AND AMENDMENTS TO THE ANNEXES 
                     
                       1. Annexes to this Convention or to any Protocol
                    are an integral part of the Convention or, as appropriate, such
                    Protocol. 
                       2. Any Contracting Party may propose amendments to 
                    Annexes to this Convention or to Annexes to any
                    Protocol through its representative on the Commission.  Such amendments
                    shall be adopted by consensus by the Commission.  Depositary, due
                    informed by the Chairman of the Commission of its decision, 
                    immediately communicate the amendments thus adopted to all
                    To the Contracting Parties. Such amendments shall enter into force in 30 years. 
                    days after receipt by the Depositary from all Contracting Parties
                    notifications of acceptance of the relevant amendment. 
                       3. The provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article shall apply to
                    the adoption and entry into force of any new Annex to 
                    of this Convention or to any Protocol. 
                     
                                               Article XXII 
                     
                                 NOTIFICATION OF ENTRY INTO FORCE OF AMENDMENTS 
                     
                       The Depositary reports through diplomatic channels
                    to the Contracting Parties on the date of entry into force of the amendments, 
                    adopted in accordance with articles XX and XXI. 
                     
                                               Article XXIII 
                     
                                            FINANCIAL RULES 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties shall resolve all financial matters on the
                    and the principle of unanimity, taking into account the recommendations of the Board. 
                     
                                               Article XXIV 
                     
                               ATTITUDES TOWARDS OTHER INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS 
                     
                       Nothing in this Convention shall affect in any way
                    the sovereignty of States over their territorial sea, 
                    established in accordance with international law, and sovereign
                    rights and jurisdictions enjoyed by States in their
                    exclusive economic zones and their continental shelf
                    in accordance with international law, as well as the implementation of
                    vessels and aircraft of navigational rights and freedoms, 
                    provided for by international law and reflected in 
                    relevant international instruments. 
                     
                                                Article XXV 
                     
                                          DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
                     
                       In the event of a dispute between the Contracting Parties
                    with regard to the interpretation or application of this Convention, they
                    seek a settlement of such dispute through negotiations or with 
                    by any other peaceful means of their choice. 
                     
                                               Article XXVI 
                     
                                    ADOPTION OF ADDITIONAL PROTOCOLS 
                     
                       1. At the request of a Contracting Party or on the recommendation of
                    The Commission may, with the consent of all other Contracting Parties, be
                    the Diplomatic Conference of the Contracting Parties has been convened with 
                    with a view to adopting additional Protocols. 
                       2. Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval, accession to 
                    force, denunciation of and accession to additional Protocols
                    shall be carried out in accordance with the procedures contained, 
                    in articles XXVIII, XXIX and XXX of this Convention, respectively. 
                     
                                               Article XXVII 
                     
                                                 RESERVATIONS 
                     
                       No reservations to this Convention shall be permitted. 
                     
                                              Article XXVIII 
                     
                              SIGNATURE, RATIFICATION, ACCEPTANCE, APPROVAL AND APPROVAL 
                                              ANNEXATION 
                     
                       1. This Convention shall be open for signature by the Black Sea region
                    States. 
                       2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or
                    and the approval of the signatory States. 
                       3. This Convention is open for accession by anyone
                    a state other than the Black Sea region, which
                    is interested in achieving the objectives of this Convention, and 
                    contributes significantly to the protection and preservation of the marine environment
                    Black Sea, subject to the invitation of the above-mentioned state
                    by all Contracting Parties.   Procedures relating to
                    invitations to join will be drawn up by the Depositary. 
                       4. Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or
                    Accessions shall be deposited with the Depositary.  Depositary
                    This Convention is the Government of Romania. 
                     
                                               Article XXIX 
                     
                                            ENTRY INTO FORCE 
                     
                       This Convention shall enter into force 60 days after its delivery
                    to be deposited with the Depositary of the Fourth Instrument of Ratification, 
                    acceptance or approval. 
                       For a State acceding to this Convention in 
                    in accordance with Article XXVIII, the Convention shall enter into force after 60 
                    days after the deposit of the instrument of accession. 
                     
                                                Article XXX 
                     
                                                DENUNCIATION 
                     
                       After five years from the date of entry of this Convention into 
                    any Contracting Party may denounce this
                    The Convention by means of a written notification addressed to
                    Depositary.  Denunciation takes effect on the thirty-first of December
                    the year following the year in which the Depositary was notified of 
                    Denunciation. 
                       DONE in the English language on the twenty-first of April one
                    one thousand nine hundred and ninety-two, in Bucharest. 

