CONVENTION BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF
FINLAND AND THE RUSSIAN
SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET
REPUBLIC REGARDING FISHING
REGULATIONS IN THE
GULF OF FINLAND. SIGNED
AT HELSINGFORS, SEPTEMBER
20, 1922.

The GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
FINLAND and the GOVERNMENT OF THE
RUSSIAN SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC
having decided, in pursuance of Article
19 of the Treaty of Peace signed at
Dorpat on October 14, 1920, to conclude
an Agreement regarding the exploitation of
the fisheries in the Gulf of Finland, and having
delegated the task of drawing up and signing
the said Convention to the Mixed Finnish-Russian Central Committee, have for that
purpose appointed as their plenipotentiary
representatives:

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FINNISH
REPUBLIC:
A. AHONEN,
P. J. HYNNINEN,
A. E. ALFTHAN,
V. HUPLI,
Y. W. PUHAKKA; and
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN
SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC:
S. M. FRANKFURT,
A. M. SMIRNOFF,
A. M. IGNATIEFF,
N. P. KOLTCHANOVSKI,
who, after having exchanged their full powers,
which were found in good and due form, have
agreed as follows:

Article 1.
The two Contracting Powers reserve for
their nationals, until further notice, the exclusive
right of fishing and seal catching in
their respective territorial waters in the Gulf
of Finland, but are prepared to enter into
negotiations, whenever circumstances permit,
with a view to granting the widest possible
fishing rights to each other's citizens in the
said territorial waters.

Article 2.
When Finnish and Russian citizens are
engaged in fishing, outside the territorial
waters of the Contracting Powers, in the
portions of the Gulf of Finland lying to the
east of longitude 27&#186;30' E. of Greenwich,
the following provisions of the present Convention
shall-be applicable.

Article 3.
When fishermen of either State are engaged
in fishing in the waters referred to in Article 2,
they shall avoid causing any molestation
or hindrance to any person engaged in fishing
on a spot which he has selected for the occasion.
In particular it is forbidden to set bag-nets
(bragder) in front of others which have been
properly marked, or so near to them as -to
damage them or in any way to interfere with
their use.

Anyone who may cause injury to the interests
of others in the manner set forth in the
preceding paragraph shall be liable to make
good the damage.

Article 4.
Fishing gear which is set in the sea shall
be considered as being properly marked for
fishing purposes if, in the case of drift-net
fishing, one end of the drift-net is made fast
to a boat, or, when the drift-net is anchored
only at one end, if it is marked at that point
by a red flag.
The size of such flag shall be not less than
20 cm. (or 8 inches) square and must be raised
at least half a metre (or three-quarters of
an arshin) above the surface of the water.

Seine nets and "winter-seines" (vintervarp)
do not require to be specially marked.
In the interests of navigation, " bag-nets
(bragder) must be provided, during the hours
of darkness, with signal lights in conformity
with the international navigation instructions.

Article 5.
The use of explosives and poisons or stupefying
substances for fishing outside territorial
waters is forbidden.
Article 6.
Any claims for compensation which may be
made in consequence of infractions of the present
Convention shall be brought before the courts
of the country in which the accused party
is resident.
Article 7.
It shall not be regarded as a breach of the
Convention for fishermen of either Contracting
Party or their boats to enter the territorial
waters or land on the coast of the other Contracting
Party owing to stress of weather,
fog, ice, or other perils of the sea (relache forcee).

Article 8.
The present Convention shall come into
force two months after the date of signature
and shall remain valid, except in so far as it
may be modified by the consent of both parties,
for ten years; it shall be prolonged for successive
periods of ten years unless it shall have
been denounced by either Contracting Party
at least one year before the termination of
any period of ten years.

Article 9.
The present Convention has been drawn
up in two copies in the Finnish, Swedish and
Russian languages, and all three texts are
equally authentic.
In confirmation whereof the plenipotentiary
representatives of the two Contracting Parties
have signed the present Convention and have
thereto affixed their seals at Helsingfors
on September 20, 1922.
