AGREEMENT ON THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE BOUNDARIES
AND MARITIME ECONOMIC ZONES OF THE STATES-PARTICIPANTS
OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
The States participants of the present Agreement, hereianfter 'States-participants
of the Commonwealth', in accordance with the Agreement of the
Council of Heads of States-Participants of the Commonwealth of Independent
States on Armed Forces and Border Forces of 30 December 1991,
Proceeding from the necessity of protecting the states boundaries and maritime decisions in the interests
of the States-participants of the Commonwealth, and taking into account the system and principles
which have formed for ensuring the inviolability of those boundaries
Have agreed on the following:
Article 1
In the present agreement the following terms shall mean
1. "State boundaries of States-Participants of the Commonwealth
  of Independent states" -- sectors of the State boundaries of Independent States-Participants
of the Commonwealth with States which are not part of the Commonwealth.
2. "Border force" -- formations of border forces of the Commonwealth and the
own border forces of the States.
3. "Own border forces" -- formations of border forces which belong to a state-participant of the
Commonwealth.
4. "Border forces of the Commonwealth" -- formations of border forces which are not relegated to own
border forces.
Article 2
The protection of the boundaries and maritime economic zones of the
Participant States of the Commonwealth shall be effectuated by the border
forces of the Commonwealth or own border forces of the States.
Article 3
The States-Participants of the Commonwealth shall, for the purposes of
their own security, be obliged not to undertake on the State boundaries and
in the maritime economic zones actions which cause harm to the politieal,
economic, and other interests of other States-Participants of the
Commonwealth. The establishment and change of the regime of state boundaries
shall be effectuated by mutual arran9ement with adjacent States, taking into
account the interests of the States-Participants of the Commonwealth.
Article 4
The Council of Heads of states shall be the highest coordinating organ
of the Commonwealth of Independent Statee in the sphere of the protection of
State boundaries and maritime economic zones of States-Participants of the
Commonwealth. The Council of Heads of Governments shall effectuated the
cooroinacion ot measures relating to ensuring tne protection or state
boundaries and maritime economic zones.
The realisation of decisions of the Council of Heads of States and the
Council of Reads of Governments relating to questions of protecting State
boundaries and maritime economic zones and coordination of the activity of
border forces ohall be effectuated by the unified command of border forces.
The Statute on the Unified Command shall be confirmed by the Council of
the Heads of States.
The direction of the border forces of the Commonwealth shall be
effectuated by the commander-in-Chief of the border forces appointed by the
Council of the Heads of States.
Article S
Until the conclusion by the States-Participants of the CollUD.onwealtb of
inter-republic agreemants on boundaries, maritime economic zones, and their
regime, the organiaation and activity of border forces shall be regulated by
acts of the Commonwealth, national legislation of the States, and normative
acts of the former soviet Union which are not contrary to it.
Questions of the peraonnel manning, financing, and material-technical
supply of the border forces of the Comm.ouwealtb and the socio-legal status of
their servicemen shall be regulated by special agreements of the Participant States
of the Commonwealth.
Article 6
The present Agreement shall be open with the consent of all of its
participants to the accession of States thereto which are not Participant States
of the Commonwealth of Independent states.
DONE at the city of Kiew, 20 March 1992, in one original copy in the
Russian language. The original copy shall be kept in the archive of the
Government of the Republic Belarus, which shall send a certified copy thereof to the States which have
signed the present Agreement.
