CONVENTION BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF
FINLAND AND THE RUSSIAN
SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET
REPUBLIC CONCERNING THE
MAINTENANCE OF RIVER
CHANNELS AND THE REGULATION
OF FISHING ON WATER
COURSES FORMING PART OF
THE FRONTIER BETWEEN FINLAND
AND RUSSIA, SIGNED AT
HELSINGFORS, OCTOBER 28,
1922.

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
FINLAND and THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC
have, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 21 of the Treaty of Peace of Dorpat,
signed on October 14, 1920, decided to conclude
an Agreement regarding the maintenance
of river channels and the regulation of fishing
on water courses which flow from the territory
of one of the contracting States to the territory
of the other, or which are situated along the
common frontier between the contracting
States (with the exception of Lake Ladoga,
on which the fishing is regulated by a special
agreement), and have entrusted the preparation
and conclusion of the said Agreement
to the mixed Finnish-Russian Central Committee,
and for this purpose have appointed
the following as their Plenipotentiaries:
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF FINLAND :
A. AHONEN,
P. J. HYNNINEN,
A. E. ALFTHAN,
V. HUPLI,
Y. W. PUHAKKA,
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIALIST
FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC:
S. M. FRANKFURT,
A. M. SMIRNOFF,
A. M. IGNATJEFF,
N. P. KOLTCHANOVSKI,
who, after having communicated their full
powers found to be in good and due form, have
agreed upon the following provisions:

Article 1.
In water-courses flowing from Finland to
Russia and vice versa, or situated along the
common frontier between those two countries,
the Contracting States undertake to leave
the fairway open for the free flow of the water,
for navigation by sea-going and river craft,
for timber floating, and for the migration
of fish.

Article 2.
On rivers and in straits, the fairway shall
be held to consist of at least one-third of the
width of the water at its mean level and at
its deepest part. Nevertheless, where there
is a current, the fairway shall not be considered
as wider than at most a portion corresponding
to one-third of the volume of water flowing
past at mean level. Moreover, in the case
of a fairway used for navigation or timberfloating,
the width of the channel may not
be less than seven metres.
On lakes, channels used for navigation
or timber-floating must be left open for the
necessary width.

Article 3.
Water may not be diverted from the watercourses
referred to in Article 1, nor may any
constructions be erected therein or any steps
be taken such as to cause damage, by altering
the present depth or condition of the parts
of the watercourse situated in the territory
of the other Contracting State, to the extent
of water in its territory, or to its fish, land or
other property, or thereby to damage the fairway
or to encroach upon channels used for
navigation or timber-floating, unless a special
agreement has been concluded in each case
between the Contracting States.

Article 4.
Exceptions to the provisions laid down
in Articles 1-3 of the present Agreement may
be allowed in virtue of the laws in force in
each country, except in the cases referred
to in Article 3, but only on condition that the
owners of the land or water concerned in
the other Contracting State shall be indemnified
in a manner to be agreed upon beforehand
for any damage or inconvenience which may
be caused.
If the fairway is blocked, and the consequent
effects extend to the territory of the other
Contracting State, the purposes for which
the fairway is used must be provided for
by some other means.

Article 5.
The following regulations shall be put into
force in order to protect fisheries and fish
in the following salmon and gwyniad (sik)
waters flowing from the territory of one Contracting
State to that of the other, namely:
On the Tuulomanjoki and its upper
waters, known as the Luttojoki, which
flows into the Col Fiord on the Russian
side, from the mouth of the former river
as far as the upper waters of the Luttojoki
on the Finnish side ;
On the Kutajoki and its upper waters,
known as the Tuntsajoki, which flows
into the Kutalahti on the Russian side
from the mouth of the Kutajoki as far
as the upper waters of the Tuntsajoki
on the Finnish side,
On the southern part of the upper waters
of the Kutajoki, known as the Ulanganjoki,
from the entry of the latter river
into the Pddjdrvi outside Russia, as far
as Paanajd.rvi on the Finnish side ;
on the river known as the Pistojoki
from the lake of Yla-Kuittijairvi situated
on the Russian side as far as Kuusamonjarvi
on the Finnish side;
On the river Lieksa and its tributary,
the Tuulijoki, which flows into the Pielisjarvi on the Finnish side, from the
entry of the former river into the Pielisjarvi
as far as Lentiera and the lake of
Tuulijairvi on, the Russian side;
On the Tulenmanjoki, which flows into
the lake, Ladoga in Finnish territory,
from the entry of the river into the lake
as far as Lake Tulenanjarvi on the Russian
side; and:
On the Miinalanjoki, which flows into
the lake Ladoga on the Finnish side,
from the mouth of the river as far as the
upper waters of the river on the Russian
side.

(1) On the above watercourses a fairway
shall be regarded as fishing water; for this
purpose the fairway shall be held to include
the water at the ends of the fairway, for double
the width of the fairway, until a depth of
two metres is reached.
(2) No nets, fish traps or other permanent
gear, except bait, may. be placed in position
in the fishing water, nor may fishing installations
be erected elsewhere, nor may fishing
be carried on with permanent apparatus
in such a manner as appreciably to prevent
the fish from ascending to the upper waters
or from surmounting waterfalls.

(3) If the fairway is blocked by a dam
or by any other means, the Contracting State
concerned shall take measures to protect
the existing conditions. as regards the fish
and the fisheries by erecting suitable salmon
ladders or by some other means.

(4) It is absolutely forbidden to catch
salmon or lake trout (taimen) in streams
or torrents from the beginning of September
until the end of October.
(5) It is forbidden to use poisons, drugs
or explosives for fishing.
(6) It is forbidden to establish factories
or other structures, either fixed or floating,
which retard the flow of the stream, in so
far as such structures cause damage to the fish
in the territory of. the other State.

Article 6.
The regulations laid down in the previous
article shall be carried out where applicable
in the case of watercourses which form natural
frontiers between the two States.

Article 7.
The present Agreement shall be ratified
and the ratifications shall be exchanged as
soon as possible at Helsingfors.
Article 8.
The present Agreement shall remain in force
for five years reckoned from the date of the
exchange of the necessary ratifications, and
shall be extended for successive periods of
five years unless it is denounced by either
of the Contracting States at not less than
six months' notice, to be given before the
expiration of one of the periodsof five years.

Article 9.
The present Convention is done in duplicate,
in Finnish, Swedish and Russian, all texts
being authentic.
In faith whereof the above-mentioned Plenipotentiaries
appointed by the Contracting
States have signed the present Agreement
and have thereto affixed their seals.
HELSINGFORS, October 28, 1922.
