CONVENTION ON REGISTRATION OF OBJECTS LAUNCHED INTO OUTER SPACE
The States Parties to this Convention,
Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in furthering the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Recalling that the Treaty on principles governing the activities of States in
the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies
of 21 January 1961 affirms that States shall bear international responsibility for
their national activities in outer space and refers to the State on whose registry
an object launched into outer space is carried,
Recalling also that the Agreement on the rescue of astronauts, the return of
astronauts and the return of objects launched into outer space of 22 April 1968
provides that a launching authority shall, upon request, furnish identifYing data
prior to the return of an object it has launched into outer space found beyond the
territorial limits of the launching authority,
Recalling further that the Convention on international liability for damage
caused by space objects of 29 March 1912 establishes international rules and
procedures concerning the liability of launching States for damage caused by their
space objects,
Desiring, in the light of the Treaty on principles governing the activities
of States in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other
celestial bodies, to make provision for the national registration by launching
States of space objects launched into outer space,
Desiring further that a central register of objects launched into outer
space be established and maintained, on a mandatory basis, by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations,
Desiring also to provide for States Parties additional means and procedures
to assist in the identification of space objects,
Believing that a mandatory system of registering objects launched into outer
space would, in particular, assist in their identification and would contribute to
the application and development of international law governing the exploration and use of
outer space,
Have agreed on the following:
Article I
For the purposes of this Convention:
(a) The term "launching State" means:
(i) A State which launches or procures the launching of a state object;
(ii) A State from whose territory or facility a space object is launched;
(b) The term "space object" includes component parts of a space object as
well as its launch vehicle and parts thereof;
(c) The term "State of registry" means a launching State on whose registry
a space object is carried in accordance with article II.
Article II
1. When a space object is launched into earth orbit or beyond, the launching
State shall register the space object by means of an entry in an appropriate
registry which it shall maintain. Each launching State shall inform the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of the establishment of such a registry.
2. Where there are two or more launching States in respect of any such space
object, they shall jointly determine which one of them shall register the object
in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article, bearing in mind the provisions of
article VIII of the Treaty on principles governing the activities of States in the exploration
and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, and without prejudice
to appropriate agreements concluded or to be concluded among the launching States on jurisdiction
and control over the space object and over any personnel thereof.
3. The contents of each registry and the conditions under which it is maintained shall be determined by the
State of registry concerned.
Article III
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall maintain a Register
in which the information furnished in accordance with article IV shall be recorded.
2. There shall be full and open access to the information in this Register.
Article IV
1. Each State of registry shall furnish to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as soon
as practicable, the following information concerning each space object carried on its registry:
(a) Name of launching State or States;
(b) An appropriate designator of the space object or its registration number;
(c) Date and territory or location of launch;
(d) Basic orbital parameters, including:
(i) Nodal period,
(ii) Inclination,
(iii) Apogee;
(iv) Perigee;
(e) General function of the space object.
2. Each State of registry may, from time to time, provide the Secretary-General
of the United Nations with additional information concerning a space
object carried on its registry.
3. Each State of registry shall notitfy the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, to the greatest extent feasible and as soon as practicable, of space
objects concerning which it has previously transmitted information, and which have
been but no longer are in earth orbit.
Article V
Whenever a space object launched into earth orbit or beyond is marked with the designator
or registration number referred to in article IV, paragraph 1 (b), or both, the State of registry
shall notify the Secretary-General of this fact when submitting the information regarding the space object
in accordance with article IV. In such case, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
record this notification in the Register.
Article VI
Where the application of the provisions of this Convention has not enabled a
State Party to identify a space object which has caused damage to it or to any of its
natural or juridical persons, or which may be of a hazardous or deleterious nature,
other State Parties, including in particular States possessing space monitoring and tracking
facilities, shall respond to the greatest extent feasible to a request by that State Party,
or transmitted through the Secretary-General on its behalf, for assistance under equitable and reasonable
conditions in the identification of the object. A State Party making such a request shall, to the
greatest extent feasible, submit information as to the time, nature and circumstances of the events
giving rise to the request. Arrangements under which such assistance shall be rendered shall be the
subject of agreement between the parties concerned.
Article VII
1. In this Convention. with the exception of articles VIII to XII inclusive,
references to States shall be deemed to apply to any international intergovernmental
organization which conducts space activities if the organization declares its
acceptance of the rights and obligations provided for in this Convention and if a
majority of the States members of the organization are States Parties to this
Convention and to the Treaty on principles governing the activities of States in
the exploration and use of outer space. including the moon and other celestial
bodies.
2. States members of any such organization which are States Parties to this
Convention shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that the organization makes a
declaration in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article.
Article VIII
1. This Convention shall be open for signature by all States at United
Nations Headquarters in New York. Any State which does not sign this Convention
before its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. Instruments
of ratification and instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall enter into force among the States which have
deposited instruments of ratification on the deposit of the fifth such instrument
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are deposited subsequent to the entry
into force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their
instrument of ratification or accession.
5. The Secretary-General shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding
States of the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument of
ratification of and accession to this Convention, the date of its entry into force
and other notices.
Article IX
Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to the Convention.
Amendments shall enter into force for each State Party to the Convention accepting
its amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the
Convention and thereafter for each remaining State Party to the Convention on the date of acceptance
by it.
Article X
Ten years after the entry into force of this Convention, the question of the review of the Convention
shall be included in the provisional agenda of the United Nations General Assembly in order to
consider, in the light of past application of the Convention, whether it requires revision. However, at any
time after the Convention has been in force for five years, at the request of one third of the States Parties
to the Convention and with the concurrence of the majority of the States Parties, a conference of the States
Parties shall be convened to review this Convention. Such review shall take into account in particular
any relevant technological developments, including those relating to the identification of space objects.
Article XI
Any State Party to this Convention may give notice of its withdrawal
from the Convention one year after its entry into force by written notification to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Such withdrawal shall take effect one year from the
date of receipt of this notification.
Article XII
The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish texts
are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall send
certified copies thereof to all signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS THEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Convention, opened
for signature at New York on the fourteenth day of January one thousand nine hundred and seventy-five.

