MainText:
The Governments of the Argentine Republic and the Federative Republic of Brazil, represented by the Plenipotentiaries that sign this Protocol, duly accredited by their respective Governments, according to powers that were granted in a form, timely deposited in the General Secretariat of the Association. CONSIDERING 1) That in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of the Integration, Cooperation and Development Treaty, signed between the two countries on November 29, 1988, it is convenient to implement through a broad mechanism the removal of all tariff barriers and not tariffs to the reciprocal exchange of goods, agreed through different partial scope agreements in accordance with the different modalities provided for in the Montevideo Treaty 1980; 2) That the partial scope Agreement of "Renegotiation of the preferences granted in the period 1962/1980" had the purpose of incorporating the results of the renegotiation of the so-called "historical heritage" into the new integration scheme established by the Treaty of Montevideo 1980. LAFTA, provided for in Resolution 1 of the Council of Ministers, an objective that has been achieved in all its terms in accordance with the aforementioned Resolution; Y 3) That the commitments assumed between both countries in the different agreements concluded and the objective of establishing a Common Market by December 31, 1994, constitute the basis for the execution of this Economic Complementation Agreement, in accordance with the Montevideo Treaty 1980, AGREE: Sign a Partial Scope Agreement for Economic Complementation in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers of the Association, Agreement that will be governed by the rules of the aforementioned Treaty and of the aforementioned Resolution, in as applicable, and by the provisions established below. CHAPTER I Object and scope of application ARTICLE 1.- The purpose of this Agreement is, among others: a) Facilitate the creation of the necessary conditions for the establishment of the Common Market between both signatory countries. b) promote economic complementarity, especially industrial and technological, in order to optimize the use and mobility of production factors and to achieve efficient operational scales; Y c) Stimulate investments aimed at making intensive use of the markets and the competitive capacity of both countries in regional and global trade flows. ARTICLE 2.- The Agreement includes the entire tariff universe of goods, classified in accordance with the Tariff Nomenclature used by the Association. CHAPTER II release schedule ARTICLE 3.- Both countries agree to eliminate, no later than December 31, 1994, taxes and other restrictions applied to their reciprocal trade. ARTICLE 4.- For the purposes set forth in the previous article, it shall be understood: a) for "encumbrances" customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affect foreign trade. Similar rates and surcharges are not included in said concept when they respond to the approximate cost of the services rendered; Y b) due to “restrictions”, any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate or of any nature, through which a signatory country prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, reciprocal trade. The measures adopted by virtue of the situations provided for in Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty are not included in this concept. ARTICLE 5.- In Annexes I and II that are part of this Agreement, the preferences and other conditions agreed upon by both signatory countries for the importation of the products consigned in said Annexes, originating in and coming from their respective territories, are recorded. ARTICLE 6.- The preferences referred to in the previous article consist of a percentage reduction of the most favorable taxes applied to the importation of products from third countries that are not members of ALADI. ARTICLE 7.- As of January 1, 1991, both countries will initiate a progressive, linear, and automatic reduction program, which will benefit the importation of the products included in the Tariff Universe referred to in article 2, in accordance with the schedule set out below: The preferences will be applied to the Tariff in force at the time of their application. In the event that any of the signatory countries raise said Tariff for imports from third countries, the schedule established in accordance with the previous paragraph will continue to be applied on the level of tariff in force on January 1, 1991. If tariffs are lowered, the corresponding preference will be It will automatically apply to the new tariff on the effective date of the same. For such purposes, the two Governments will exchange and send to the ALADI General Secretariat, no later than January 15, 1991, updated copies of their customs tariffs. Notwithstanding this mechanism, both Parties may deepen said preferences through product negotiations to be carried out within the framework of the relevant Annexes included in this Agreement. ARTICLE 8.- The products included in the exception lists of both countries, registered in Annexes III and IV of this Agreement, shall be excluded from the tariff reduction schedule referred to in article 7. The aforementioned lists will be reduced at the expiration of each calendar year, at a rate of twenty percent (20%) of the items that compose them. The lists attached in the Annex include the reduction corresponding to December 31, 1990. ARTICLE 9.- The products that are withdrawn from the lists of exceptions in the terms established by the previous article, will automatically benefit from the preferences that result from the reduction program established in article 7, with at least the minimum margin of preference. scheduled on the date on which their withdrawal from said lists is operated. ARTICLE 10.- In order to enable compliance with the tax reduction schedule provided in articles 7 and 8 as well as the definitive establishment of the Common Market, both countries will harmonize their macroeconomic policies referred to in the Integration, Cooperation and Development Treaty, beginning with those that are linked to trade flows and the configuration of the industrial sector of the two countries. ARTICLE 11.- The signatory countries may only apply until December 31, 1994 to the products included in this Agreement, the non-tariff restrictions expressly declared in the Complementary Notes . As of December 31, 1994 and within the scope of the Common Market, all non-tariff restrictions will be eliminated. CHAPTER III Sectoral Complementation Agreements ARTICLE 12.- Taking into account the importance of sectoral complementation for the establishment of the Common Market, as expressed in article 1, both countries may incorporate additional Annexes to this Agreement in order to include in its body agreements with said characteristics, especially sectoral agreements for industrial complementation. CHAPTER IV Preservation of agreed preferences ARTICLE 13.- During the transition period, both countries undertake to maintain the agreed preferences, as well as to preserve a preference in relation to third countries, consulting before reductions that annul the tariff preference. ARTICLE 14.- When a signatory country faces a serious supply problem of a product that forces it to immediately import it, it will consult the other signatory country on the possibility of supplying said product under normal market conditions, in which case it will have priority to supply the missing product. This query must be answered within three business days of receipt. If no response is received or if it is negative, if the country temporarily reduces the import tariff of said product for third countries in order to overcome the emergency, the modified tariff will not be taken into account for the application of the reduction schedule provided for in article 7. CHAPTER V Origin Regime ARTICLE 15.- The preferences negotiated under the liberalization program of this Agreement will exclusively benefit products originating from both countries in accordance with the rules of origin established in Annex V. The products subject to special regimes will be governed by the specific rules described in the corresponding Annexes incorporated to this Agreement and those that will be incorporated in the future. CHAPTER VI Safeguard clauses ARTICLE 16.- Each country may apply, until December 31, 1994, safeguard clauses to the importation of products covered by this Agreement. Both countries agree that they should only resort to this regime in exceptional cases. ARTICLE 17.- If the importing country estimates that serious damage or threat of damage is being caused to its market as a consequence of a significant increase in imports of a certain product in a short period, coming from the other signatory country, it will request diplomatic consultation with the other party in order to eliminate such a situation. The importing country's request shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of the facts, reasons and justifications for the request. Consultations must be initiated within a maximum period of 10 calendar days after said request and must have concluded within twenty calendar days after their initiation. ARTICLE 18.- The determination of damage or threat of serious damage within the meaning of this regime will be analyzed by each country taking into account the evolution, among others, of the following aspects related to the product in question: a) level of production and capacity used; b) level of employment; c) market share; d) bilateral trade; e) performance of imports and exports with third countries. None of the aforementioned factors constitutes by itself a decisive criterion for the determination of damage. Factors such as technological changes or changes in consumer preferences in favor of similar and/or directly competitive products within the same sector will not be considered in the determination of damage or threat of damage. The application of the safeguard clause will depend in each country on the final approval of the national section of the Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group. ARTICLE 19.- In order not to interrupt the trade flows that have been generated, the importing country will negotiate a quota for the importation of the product subject to safeguard, which will be governed by the preferences and other conditions registered in the corresponding Annexes. The aforementioned quota will be negotiated with the other signatory country during the consultation period referred to in article 17. Once the consultation period has expired and there is no agreement, the country that considers itself affected may set a quota, which will be maintained for the term of one year. In no case will the quota set unilaterally by the importing country be less than the average of the physical volumes imported in the last three calendar years. ARTICLE 20.- The safeguard clauses will have a duration of one year and will be extendable for a new annual and consecutive period, applying in the terms and conditions established in this regime. These measures may only be adopted once for each product. In no case may the application of the safeguard clauses be extended beyond December 31, 1994. ARTICLE 21.- The application of the safeguard clauses provided for in this Chapter will not affect the merchandise shipped on the date of its adoption, which will be computed against the quota provided for in article 19. CHAPTER VII Balanced expansion of exchanges ARTICLE 22.- Both countries will seek to promote the balanced and harmonious use of the benefits of this Agreement and will adopt, to this end, through the Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group, the pertinent measures to correct any imbalances in the use of those benefits. benefits and for the expansion of trade, with a view to ensuring equitable market conditions, the maximum use of production factors, the increase in economic complementarity, the balanced and harmonious development of the two countries and the competitive insertion of their products in the international market. CHAPTER VIII Agreement Administration ARTICLE 23.- The Administration of this Agreement will be in charge of the Binational Group for the establishment of the Common Market between the Argentine Republic and the Federative Republic of Brazil, called the COMMON MARKET GROUP, created by order of the Presidents in accordance with the terms of the Act of Buenos Aires signed on July 6, 1990. ARTICLE 24.- The Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group will propose, within its scope, specific measures for the gradual harmonization of policies that affect the production, commercialization, and technological development of the negotiated products and to accompany and ensure the good execution of this Agreement and even examine issues related, among other things, to equalization measures, safeguard clauses and exceptional market situations and the implementation of imbalance correction mechanisms. In this context, the Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group will ensure that trade between the two countries develops under equitable conditions, avoiding, among other things, dumping practices and subsidies. With the same objective, it will coordinate its positions in this area against possible unfair practices from third countries. CHAPTER IX Agreement Evaluation ARTICLE 25.- As from the entry into force of this Agreement, both countries will evaluate its evolution every six months, or at any time at the request of one of the parties, with the main purpose of adopting the measures they deem necessary for its implementation. better performance and development. Said evaluation will be carried out by the Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group, which will have the advice of the respective Representations before ALADI regarding the evolution of trade within the scope of this Agreement. If modifications or adjustments to this Agreement arise by virtue of the provisions of this article, they will be incorporated through Protocols signed by Plenipotentiaries duly accredited by the Governments of both countries. CHAPTER X dispute settlement ARTICLE 26.- The differences and controversies that may arise in the execution of this Agreement will be the subject of an agile consultation and resolution procedure, to be implemented by the Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group. This will take the necessary steps so that in each country the appropriate means are arbitrated in order to provide the most efficient and rapid solution to the issues raised. CHAPTER XI Accession ARTICLE 27.- This Agreement is open to adhesion, after negotiation, by the other member countries of the Association. The accession will be formalized, once the terms of the same have been negotiated, between both signatory countries and the adherent country, through the signing of a Protocol, which will enter into force thirty days after its deposit in the Secretariat of the Association. CHAPTER XII Convergence ARTICLE 28.- Both countries will examine the possibility of proceeding in a negotiated manner to the progressive multilateralization of the treatments included in this Agreement. CHAPTER XIII Validity ARTICLE 29.- This Agreement is effective from the date of subscription and will have an indefinite duration. CHAPTER XIV final provisions ARTICLE 30.- The following Annexes are part of this Agreement: a) Annexes I and II and an Appendix on the fishing sector : Agreement of Partial Scope of Renegotiation of the preferences granted in the period 1962/1980, with its Additional and/or Modifying Protocols. b) Annex III: List of Exceptions of the Argentine Republic. c) Annex IV: List of Exceptions of the Federative Republic of Brazil. d) Annex V : Regime of Origin. e) Annex VI : Protocol No. 1: Capital Assets, of the Argentina-Brazil Economic Cooperation and Integration Program, implemented in the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 7. f) Annex VII : Protocol No. 22: Food Industry, of the Argentina-Brazil Integration and Economic Cooperation Program, implemented in the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 12. g) Annex VIII : Protocol No. 21. Automotive Industry, of the Argentina-Brazil Economic Cooperation and Integration Program. h) Annex IX : Annex No. 1 of Protocol 17: Nuclear Cooperation, of the Argentina-Brazil Integration and Economic Cooperation Program. ARTICLE 31.- The Partial Scope Agreements for “Renegotiation of the preferences granted in the period 1962/1980” (AAP.R/1) and Economic Complementation No. 7 on Capital Assets and No. 12 on Industrialized Foodstuffs and their respective Additional and/or Modifying Protocols registered in ALADI will be without effect from the date on which both countries communicate the entry into force of this Agreement in their respective territories. The General Secretariat of the Association will be the depositary of this Protocol, of which it will send duly authenticated copies to the signatory Governments. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Protocol in the city of Montevideo, on December 20, 1990, in one original in Spanish and Portuguese, both texts being equally valid.

AppendixText:
APPENDIX IMPORTS FROM THE FISHERIES SECTOR Release Program in the Fishing Sector Article 1.- Imports made by the Federative Republic of Brazil of the products included in this Regime, originating and coming from the Argentine Republic, will benefit from a reduction of one hundred percent of the current taxes applied to imports from third countries. . This benefit reaches the following products: a) Dead, fresh or refrigerated fish (except fillets) (item 03.01.2.01 of NALADI); b) Dead, frozen fish (except fillets) (item 03.01.2.02 of NALADI); c) Fish fillets, fresh or refrigerated (item 03.01.3.01 of the NALADI); Y d) Fish fillets, frozen (item 03.01.4.01 of the NALADI). Article 2.- The signatory countries agree that the imports made by the Federative Republic of Brazil will be regulated in such a way that for each dollar and thirty cents (US$ 1.30) of exports from the Argentine Republic of the products included in literals b) , c) and d) of the previous article, corresponds to one dollar (US$ 1.00) of export of the products included in literal a). Article 3.- In order to comply with the provisions of the previous article, every four months an analysis will be carried out of the level of relation of the export values ​(cost plus border freight and cost plus Rio Grande port freight) actually fulfilled. In said analysis there may be a margin of variation of no more than ten percent of the agreed ratio. In the event that a variation greater than the aforementioned percentage is verified, the respective authorizations will be regulated until operations are carried out according to the established margins.

AnnexText:
ANNEX V REGIMES OF ORIGIN CHAPTER I source qualification FIRST.- The following will be considered originating from the signatory countries: a. Products made entirely in the territory of any of them, when exclusively materials originating from the signatory countries of this Agreement are used in their preparation; b. The products included in the chapters or positions of the Tariff Nomenclature of the Association that are identified in Appendix 1 of this Annex, by the mere fact of being produced in their respective territories. The following shall be considered as produced in the territory of a signatory country: Yo. the products of the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms, including those of hunting and fishing, extracted, harvested or collected, born and raised in its territory or in its jurisdictional waters; ii. products of the sea extracted outside its jurisdictional waters by ships under its flag or leased by companies established in its territory; Y iii. the products resulting from operations or processes carried out in its territory by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed, except when said processes or operations consist only of simple assembly or assembly, packaging, fractioning into batches or volumes, selection and classification, marking, composition of merchandise assortments, or other equivalent operations or processes. iv. The products in the production of which materials that do not originate from the signatory countries of this Agreement are used, when they result from a transformation process carried out in the territory of one of them, which gives them a new individuality, characterized by the fact that they are classified in the Tariff Nomenclature of the Association in a position different from that of said materials, except in cases in which both countries determine that, in addition to the "NAB jump", the requirement set forth in article 2 is met. However, the products resulting from operations or processes carried out in the territory of a signatory country by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed will not be considered originating, when in said operations or processes exclusively materials or inputs are used that do not originate from their respective countries and consist solely of assembling or assembling, fractioning into batches or volumes, selection, classification, marking, composition of merchandise assortments or other similar operations or processes. d. Products resulting from assembly and assembly operations carried out in the territory of a signatory country using materials originating from the other signatory country and from third countries when the CIF port of destination or CIF seaport value of the materials originating from third countries does not exceed the 50 (fifty) percent of the FOB value of said products; and. Products that, in addition to being produced in their territory, meet the specific requirements established in Appendix 2 of this Annex. SECOND.- In the cases in which the requirement established in literal c) of the first article cannot be fulfilled because the transformation process operated does not imply a change of position in the nomenclature, it will suffice that the value CIF destination port or CIF port shipping of materials from third countries does not exceed 50 (fifty) percent of the FOB export value of the goods in question. THIRD.- The signatory countries may establish, by mutual agreement, specific requirements of origin for the qualification of the negotiated products. The origin regimes applicable to imports of capital goods included in the common list of the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 7, of industrialized food products of the common list of the automotive sector are registered in Annexes VI, CVII and VIII of this Agreement . The same criteria will be adopted for the sectorial Agreements that are signed in the future. The specific requirements of origin will prevail over the general qualification criteria established in this Annex. FOURTH.- In determining the origin requirements referred to in the second article, as well as in the revision of those that have been established, the signatory countries will take as a basis, individually or jointly, the following elements: I. Materials and other inputs used in production: a. Raw Materials: Yo. Preponderant raw material or that gives the product its essential characteristic; ii. Main raw materials. b. Parts or pieces: Yo. Part or piece that gives the product its essential characteristic; ii. Main parts or pieces; Y iii. Percentage of the parts or pieces in relation to the total weight. c. Other inputs II. Process of transformation or elaboration used. III. Maximum proportion of the value of materials imported from third countries in relation to the total value of the product, resulting from the valuation procedure agreed in each case. FIFTH.- Any of the signatory countries may request the revision of the origin requirements established in accordance with the first article. In your application you must propose and justify the requirements applicable to the product or products in question. SIXTH.- For the purposes of compliance with the origin requirements established in this Agreement, materials and other inputs, originating in the territory of one of the signatory countries incorporated by the other signatory country to the production of a certain product, will be considered originating. of the latter's territory. SEVENTH.- The criterion of maximum use of materials or other inputs originating from the signatory countries may not be used to set requirements that imply the imposition of materials or other inputs from said signatory countries, when in their opinion, these do not meet the conditions adequate supply, quality and price. EIGHTH.- In order for originating goods to benefit from preferential treatment, they must have been shipped directly from the exporting country to the importing country. For such purposes, the following is considered as a direct expedition: a. Goods transported without passing through the territory of a country not participating in the agreement. b. Goods transported in transit through one or more non-participating countries, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the surveillance of the competent customs authority in such countries, provided that: Yo. the transit is justified for geographical reasons or for considerations related to transportation requirements; ii. are not intended for trade, use or employment in the country of transit; Y iii. do not undergo, during their transport and storage, any operation other than loading and unloading or handling to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation. NINTH.- For the purposes of this Regime, the following shall be understood: a. that the expression “territory” includes the free zones located within the geographical limits of any of the signatory countries; b. that the expression "materials" includes raw materials, intermediate products and parts and pieces, used in the manufacture of merchandise. CHAPTER II Declaration, certification and verification TENTH.- In order for the importation of the products included in this Agreement to be able to benefit from the reductions in taxes and restrictions granted among themselves by the signatory countries, the documentation corresponding to the exportation of said products must include a declaration that proves compliance of the origin requirements established in accordance with the provisions of the previous chapter. ELEVENTH.- The declaration referred to in the preceding article will be issued by the final producer or exporter of the merchandise and certified by an official division or trade union entity with legal personality, authorized by the Government of the exporting signatory country. When enabling union entities, the member countries will ensure that they are organizations that act with national jurisdiction, being able to delegate powers to regional or local entities, always retaining direct responsibility for the veracity of the certifications that are issued. Both governments undertake to establish a harmonized regime of sanctions for cases of ideological falsehood in the certificates. TWELFTH.- The certificates of origin issued for the purposes of this Agreement will be valid for 180 days, counting from the date of issue. THIRTEENTH.- In all cases, the standard form that appears in Appendix 3 of this Annex shall be used, until another form approved by the Association or by the signatory countries enters into force. FOURTEENTH.- The member countries will notify the Committee of Representatives of the list of official departments and trade union entities authorized to issue the certification referred to in the previous article, with the register and facsimile of the authorized signatures. FIFTEENTH.- The General Secretariat will keep an updated record of the official departments or trade unions authorized by the signatory countries to issue certificates of origin. The modifications that are made at the request of the signatory countries in said registry will take effect within thirty days of the communication made to the Committee of Representatives. SIXTEENTH.- Whenever a signatory country considers that the certificates issued by an official department or authorized trade union entity of the other signatory country do not comply with the provisions contained in this regime, it shall notify the other signatory country so that it may adopt the measures that deems necessary to solve the problems raised. In no case shall the importing country stop the importation process of the products covered by the certificates referred to in the preceding paragraph, but it may, in addition to requesting the additional information that corresponds to the government authorities of the exporting signatory country, adopt the measures that considered necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest. SEVENTEENTH.- The provisions of this General Regime and the modifications that are introduced will not affect the merchandise shipped on the date of its adoption ANNEX VI ECONOMIC COMPLEMENTATION IN THE CAPITAL GOODS SECTOR 1. Scope of application ARTICLE 1.- This Regime includes the Universe of Capital Goods included in the positions of the Tariff Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association (NALADI). (See Appendix 1 of this Annex). Said Appendix may be expanded by mutual agreement between the signatory countries. ARTICLE 2.- Based on the Universe of Capital Goods referred to in the previous article, the signatory countries agree on a "common list" of products that will benefit from this Regime (See Appendix 2). During the transition period until the establishment of the Common Market, both countries may expand the "common list" through negotiations to be carried out with the purpose of including in said list products included in the Universe of Capital Goods. ARTICLE 3.- In order to create adequate conditions for investment, modernization and exchange, the "common list" negotiated in accordance with this Regime will not be modified in order to exclude products or establish restrictions on the exchange of products included in the same. 2. Release program ARTICLE 4.- The products included in the "common list" originating from both countries, will enjoy the treatment of "national product" both in the Argentine Republic and in the Federative Republic of Brazil, defining as such the application of a zero tariff per percent (0%) to their imports and the exclusion of any restriction or barrier of a non-tariff nature, whether administrative, quantitative or tax, applied by the signatory countries to their imports. 3. Preservation of agreed preferences ARTICLE 5.- In order to preserve the treatment agreed in this Regime, both countries undertake to progressively harmonize their tariffs applicable to the sector in order to ensure preference in relation to third countries. In order to maintain the margin of preference in relation to third parties, the signatory countries agree to consult each other to verify if there is similar national production in the other country, before granting tariff exemptions for imports from third countries of capital goods of the company. "common list". 4. Specific requirements of origin ARTICLE 6.- The capital goods covered by this Regime will be considered originating from the signatory countries when the value of the materials imported from third countries does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the price of the product. Said percentage will be calculated by comparing the FOB price of imported materials with the FOB international reference price of the finished product. In the absence of the FOB international reference price of the finished product, the FOB sale price of the exporting country without internal taxes will be used as a basis for comparison. Imported universal use raw materials that have not undergone industrial processing that makes them specific for their use in the manufacture of the final product are considered for these purposes of local origin. 5. Public sector purchases ARTICLE 7.- In the purchases of the public sector, direct or indirect, of the Argentine Republic and the Federative Republic of Brazil, the products included in the "common list" of Brazilian or Argentine origin, will have similar treatment to those of local origin . In the import decisions of the public sector, direct or indirect, from the Argentine Republic and the Federative Republic of Brazil, the products of the "common list" will have equivalent preferential treatment in relation to suppliers from third countries. In public works tenders financed with loans from international financial institutions, capital goods of Argentine and Brazilian origin, respectively, that are not included in the "common list" will be benefited in relation to third-party suppliers with a reduction of fifty percent. percent of the level of protection in the price range granted to products of local origin. ANNEX VII ECONOMIC COMPLEMENTATION IN THE CAPITAL GOODS SECTOR INDUSTRIALIZED FOOD GOODS 1. Scope of application ARTICLE 1.- This Regime includes the Universe of Industrialized Food Goods included in the positions of the Tariff Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association (NALADI). (See Appendix 1 of this Annex). Said Appendix may be expanded by mutual agreement between the signatory countries. ARTICLE 2.- Based on the Universe of Industrialized Food Goods, the signatory countries agree on a “common list” of products that will benefit from this Regime (See Appendix 2). During the transition period until the establishment of the Common Market, both countries may expand the "common list" through negotiations to be carried out with the purpose of including in said list products included in the Universe of Industrialized Food Goods. ARTICLE 3.- In order to create adequate conditions for investment, modernization and exchange, the "common list" negotiated in accordance with this Regime will not be modified in order to exclude products or establish restrictions on the exchange of products included in the same. 2. Release program ARTICLE 4.- In order to promote industrial and commercial complementation and integration in the Industrialized Food Goods sector, both countries agree to adopt the following measures: a) Exclude from the application of restrictions or obstacles of a non-tariff nature to imports of products included in the "common list" of Industrialized Food Goods; b) reduce to zero (0) the tariff applicable to imports of products included in the "common list" of Industrialized Food Goods, which will also be exempted from the application of additional taxes with effects equivalent to a customs duty. c) reduce to zero (0) the tariff applicable to imports of the aforementioned products with increasing annual quotas that will be established by mutual agreement for periods of not less than two (2) years from the signing of this Agreement. The quotas that are agreed may not be extended beyond December 31, 1994. The products included in the situation provided for in this literal will also be exempted from the application of additional taxes with effects equivalent to a customs duty. d) Make compatible the standards and controls of a metrological, phytosanitary and bromatological nature, applied to said products. The Governments of the Argentine Republic and the Federative Republic of Brazil will establish in the corresponding forum the measures that ensure compliance with the provisions of this literal. Until said compatibility is made, each of the signatory countries will accept the phytosanitary and bromatological controls applied by their counterpart. ARTICLE 5.- The products included in the “common list of Industrialized Food Goods” that is registered in Appendix 2 of this Annex, will enjoy the benefits established in literals a) and d) of article 4º. Both countries will also opt for the application, to said products, of the treatments referred to in subparagraphs b) and c) of the aforementioned article. 3. Preservation of agreed preferences ARTICLE 6.- Both countries will maintain the agreed reciprocal preferences for the exchange of products included in the "common list", in order to make the operation of this Regime viable. 4. Specific requirements of origin ARTICLE 7.- The treatment agreed for the importation of the products included in the "common list of Industrialized Food Goods", will exclusively reach the products qualified as originating in the territory of the signatory countries in accordance with the provisions of this Regime and in the Origin Regime of Annex V of this Agreement, as applicable. ARTICLE 8.- The percentage in value of raw materials of agricultural origin imported from non-signatory countries, used in the elaboration of the products of the "common list" may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the price of the product, calculated by comparing the FOB price of imported raw materials with the FOB international reference price of the finished product. 5. Consultation regime ARTICLE 9.- Both countries will establish, at the request of either of them, a consultation body on the effects that possible economic policy measures, such as modifications of the exchange policy, of the export and/or customs policy, have on the exchange of goods included in the "common list" referred to in this Regime. The consultation may result in measures to be adopted by one or both governments in order to neutralize the aforementioned effects. ANNEX VIII ECONOMIC COMPLEMENTATION IN THE AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY SECTOR CHAPTER I Purpose of this Regime ARTICLE 1.- The purpose of this Regime is: a) expand and diversify, in a dynamically balanced manner, the bilateral trade in the automotive industry sector; b) expand the total production of the sector, both in Argentina and in Brazil; c) avoid an increase in the current levels of vertical integration of the terminal sector; d) reduce unit production costs, making it possible to reduce sales prices to the consumer, e) increase the participation of parts, pieces and components, especially components with high added value or high technological content; f) stimulate investments in research and technological development, especially in the areas of project engineering and product engineering; Y g) improve the foreign exchange balance, tending to generate positive balances in the exchange with third countries. CHAPTER II Area of ​application ARTICLE 2.- This Regime includes: a) finished motor vehicles included in headings 87.02.1.01 “Jeep type”; 87.02.1.99 "Other vehicles for the transport of people"; 87.02.3.01 "Dump trucks, except dumpers"; 87.02.3.99 "Other trucks"; 87.04.1.01 "Chassis for jeep type"; 87.04.1.99 "Other chassis for passenger transport vehicles"; 87.04.9.01 "Other chassis with diesel engine"; and 87.04.9.99 "Other chassis", and b) its parts, pieces and components, which appear in the Appendix. In both cases, these are goods manufactured in the territory of the signatory countries. In all cases, the vehicles and the parts, pieces and components, subject to exchange, must be unused. CHAPTER III release schedule ARTICLE 3.- The products covered by this Regime will be treated as "national product" both in the Argentine Republic and in the Federative Republic of Brazil and will enjoy the benefits that are determined below: a) Zero percent tariff on their imports, which will also be exempted from the application of additional taxes with effects equivalent to customs duties; Y b) They will be exempt from any restriction or obstacle of a non-tariff nature, except those specifically agreed between both Parties. first section Import of passenger cars, trucks, chassis with motor and their parts, parts and original replacement components ARTICLE 4.- Passenger motor vehicles, of any weight and cylinder capacity and those of mixed use up to 1,500 kg. of payload included in item NALADI 8702.1.99, as well as its replacement parts, pieces and components, will be subject to the benefits established in the previous article. The aforementioned benefits will also apply to jeep-type vehicles and their chassis, and to trucks and chassis with motors, as well as their parts, pieces and replacement components, in the manner and with the quotas that will be established in an Additional Protocol to this Agreement. ARTICLE 5 - The Permanent Intergovernmental Working Group referred to in article 20º of this Annex, will propose annually to the Governments of both Parties the quota of vehicles that can be exchanged under the aforementioned benefits, meeting the objective of expanding and diversify, in a dynamically balanced way, the bilateral exchange. For 1991, the joint quota for vehicles intended for the transport of people and mixed-use vehicles up to 1,500 kg. payload included in item NALADI 87.02.1.99 will be 10,000 (ten thousand) units for each country. ARTICLE 6.- The benefits referred to in article 3º will also reach the original replacement parts, pieces and components that appear in the Appendix, intended for finished vehicles that are exchanged under the provisions of this Section, up to fifteen percent (15%) of the FOB value of finished vehicles exported by each country in the same year. ARTICLE 7.- For the purposes of making the implementation of the above provisions viable, will be considered, in principle as a "national product", the vehicles that meet the requirement of the minimum nationalization rates currently required in each country. ARTICLE 8.- The signatory countries will promote the gradual and progressive convergence of the aforementioned indices, taking into account the harmonious expansion of bilateral trade in finished vehicles, of the "common list" of parts, pieces and components and of the trade of the products included in the aforementioned “common list”. ARTICLE 9.- Both Governments will consider finished vehicles exchanged under the provisions of this Section as a national product for the purposes of applying the rules that regulate internal marketing in both countries. ARTICLE 10.- The signatory countries also establish that the finished vehicles referred to in article 4º must necessarily comply with the transit regulations of the importing country. In this matter, during 1991, and in order to facilitate the entry into force of this Regime, it will be required for the importation of vehicles, that they respect only what corresponds to a minimum universe of requirements, subject to control by the authorities of transit control, in force in the importing country, such as: a) VIN identification; b) minimal light absorption by the crystals; c) use of laminated glass on the front windshield; d) static noise; e) carbon monoxide at idle speed; f) seat belts; and g) free acceleration smoke index. Regarding the remaining requirements, not listed above, during 1991 the importation of vehicles that comply with the standards of the exporting country will be admitted. second section Import of parts, pieces and components, intended for the production and/or replacement of motor vehicles and of parts, pieces and components, included in the "common list" ARTICLE 11.- The parts, pieces and components, intended for the production and/or replacement of motor vehicles and parts, pieces and components, of each country, included in the "common list of parts, pieces and components" of this Regime (Appendix), will be subject to the benefits established in article 3. ARTICLE 12.- Until December 31, 1994, only the parts, pieces and components destined for the production and/or replacement of motor vehicles, that integrate Industrial Complementation Programs between terminal companies and/or will have access to the benefits provided for in this Section. or auto parts. These Programs will have the following characteristics: they must tend to balance and reflect productive complementarity schemes; They may be multi-annual, with annual review. ARTICLE 13.- The Programs referred to in the previous article will be presented by the terminal and/or auto parts companies before the authorities of each country. The aforementioned authorities will approve the programs, after evaluation by the Working Group referred to in article 20 of this Annex. These programs will be effective as of January 1, 1991. ARTICLE 14.- The products included in the "common list of parts, pieces and components" made entirely in the territory of either of the two countries will be considered as originating in Argentina and Brazil when exclusively materials originating from Argentina and Brazil were used in their production. the two countries or when the participation of materials imported from third countries was not greater, in value, than fifteen percent (15%). Said percentage will be calculated by comparing the FOB price of imported materials with the FOB international reference price of the finished product. In the absence of the FOB international reference price of the finished product, the FOB sale price of the exporting country without internal taxes will be used as a basis for comparison. Imported raw materials of universal use that have not undergone industrial processing that makes them specific for use in the manufacture of the final product, are considered for these purposes of local origin. Products with nationalization indices lower than the one indicated, may receive the benefits provided for in the third article by means of a joint decision of the two Governments, based on a case-by-case examination. ARTICLE 15.- The signatory countries establish that the products exchanged under the "common list of parts, pieces and components" will be treated as national products, including for the purposes of measuring the nationalization rates of finished vehicles. ARTICLE 16.- The signatory countries will maintain the reciprocal preferences granted for the exchange of products included in the "common list of parts, pieces and components" for the purpose of enabling the implementation of the above provisions. ARTICLE 17.- For 1991, the maximum global exchange value will be equivalent to US$ 600,000,000 (six hundred million dollars), according to the programs approved in accordance with the provisions of article 13º. For 1992, the aforementioned value will be determined by the Permanent Intergovernmental Working Group mentioned in article 20. As of 1993, it will be exempt from limit. third section Standards common to the first and second Sections ARTICLE 18.- The Parties will harmonize, before June 30, 1991, the technical standards for safety and the environment, so that they take effect as of January 1, 1992. In this task, the most demanding technical safety and environmental standards in force in either of the two countries will be taken into account as a guideline. Until the aforementioned harmonization is achieved, both Parties must communicate with a minimum of one hundred and eighty (180) days in advance, any modification of the respective regulations. ARTICLE 19.- As of January 1, 1991, the exchange mechanisms of complete vehicles and of parts, pieces and components must necessarily occur simultaneously. CHAPTER IV Administration of this Regime ARTICLE 20.- The Administration of this Regime will be in charge of the Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group, within which scope a Permanent Intergovernmental Working Group will function, integrated as follows: a) on behalf of the Argentine Republic, with representatives of the Undersecretaries of Economy (SE) and Industry and Commerce (SIC) of the Ministry of Economy; Y b) by the Federative Republic of Brazil with representatives of the Department of Foreign Trade (DECEX) and by the Department of Industry and Commerce (DIC), both from the Ministry of Economy, Finance and Planning. ARTICLE 21.- The Permanent Intergovernmental Working Group referred to in the previous article will have, among others, as special powers: a) evaluate the Industrial Complementation programs referred to in article 12; b) monitor the evolution of bilateral exchange in the automotive industry sector; c) monitor the evolution of the automotive industry, especially in the region; d) monitor the implementation of this Regime and suggest measures for its improvement, with special attention to avoid undesirable displacements in the national production of each country; e) propose the adoption of the specific measures necessary in order to achieve a coordinated and harmonious implementation of this Regime; f) promote the proper participation of auto parts companies in bilateral exchange; g) maintain consultations, whenever necessary, with the business entities interested in the implementation of this Regime; h) analyze the differences in the laws of each country on marketing, and assess their consequences for the operation of this Regime; i) establish the equivalences between the measurement systems of the nationalization indices in force in each country, in order to allow the proper application of the criteria set forth in the first section, articles 7 and 8 of this Annex and taking into account the objective of achieving a future convergence of the indices of nationalization and harmonization of the respective measurement systems; Y j) Submit semi-annual reports on activities to the Argentina-Brazil Common Market Group. CHAPTER V Consultation regime ARTICLE 22.- The signatory countries will initiate, at the request of one of the Parties, an instance of consultation on the effects that eventual economic policy measures, such as modifications of the exchange, export and/or customs policy, have on the exchange of the assets covered by this Regime. ANNEX IX EXCHANGE OF GOODS FOR THE NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS IN ARGENTINA AND BRAZIL 1. Scope of application ARTICLE 1.- This Regime includes the "common list" of goods destined for the Nuclear Power Plants of the signatory countries, the exchange of which will be regulated in accordance with the rules established in this Annex. ARTICLE 2.- The "common list" registered in the Appendix to this Annex may be expanded by decision adopted by mutual agreement between the Parties. Only companies from both countries qualified to supply products for Nuclear Power Plants will participate in the exchange of goods included in the aforementioned “common list”, in accordance with the qualification systems adopted by the competent authorities of the purchasing country. 2. Release program ARTICLE 3.- The products included in the "common list" will enjoy the treatment of "national product" both in the Argentine Republic and in the Federative Republic of Brazil, defining such treatment as: a) application, in both countries, of a zero (0) import tariff; Y b) Exclusion, in both countries, of any non-tariff restriction or bar, be it administrative, quantitative, tax or other of a different nature, applied by the signatory countries to their imports. The products to be imported must also be subject to destination verification through certificates issued by the competent entities of the importing country. 3. Public Sector Purchases ARTICLE 4.- The signatory countries also agree that in direct or indirect purchases by the public sector, the products on the common list originating from their respective countries, will have similar treatment to products of local origin and preferential in relation to suppliers of third countries. ARTICLE 5.- The signatory countries intend to achieve, through the aforementioned "common list", a reference value of fifteen (15) million United States dollars for exports of goods of Argentine origin and another equal sum for exports of Brazilian origin. The reference values ​for future common lists will be set by the successive extensions of the aforementioned “common list”. ARTICLE 6.- The financing of the exchange of goods included in the "common list" and in its successive extensions, will be governed by the provisions that regulate the matter in each one of the signatory countries. 4. Specific requirements of origin ARTICLE 7.- The signatory countries establish that the percentage in value of the components imported from third countries for the elaboration of the products included in the "common list", may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the price of the product. . Said percentage will be calculated by comparing the FOB price of the imported components with the FOB international reference price of the finished product. In the absence of the FOB international reference price of the finished product, the FOB sale price of the exporting country will be used, without internal taxes. Imported universal use raw materials that have not undergone industrial processing that makes them specific for use in the manufacture of the final product are considered for these purposes to be of local origin. 5. Administration of this Regime ARTICLE 8.- The coordination and follow-up of the execution of this Regime will be carried out by the Argentina/Brazil Standing Committee on Nuclear Policy. Based on the information and proposals of the Argentine-Brazilian Business Committee of the Nuclear Area (CEABAN) and jointly with it, the Argentina/Brazil Standing Committee on Nuclear Policy will annually verify the purchase orders actually awarded to Argentine and Brazilian producers in order to to evaluate the evolution of the exchange of the goods of the “common list”. ARTICLE 9.- The Argentine-Brazilian Business Committee of the Nuclear Area (CEABAN), may propose to the Argentina/Brazil Permanent Committee on Nuclear Policy, the expansion of the common list referred to in this Annex, as well as any measure tending to balance in the exchange of goods from the nuclear sector. The proposals formulated by CEABAN will be submitted to the consideration of the competent bodies of both countries after being examined by the Argentina/Brazil Standing Committee on Nuclear Policy.
