MainText:
ARTICLE 1 1. By this Agreement an Association is established between the European Economic Community and the Partner States of the East African Community. 2. The aim of the Association Agreement is to promote an increase of trade between the European Economic Community and the Partner States of the East African Community and thus contribute to the development of international trade. TITLE I TRADE ARTICLE 2 1. Products originating in the Partner States of the East African Community shall, on importation into the European Economic Community, be admitted free of customs duties and charges having equivalent effect, but the treatment applied to these products may not be more favourable than that applied by the Member States among themselves. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 above shall not, however, prejudice the import treatment applied to: (a) such products listed in Annex II of the Treaty as come under a common organization of the market within the meaning of Article 40 of the Treaty; (b) products subject, on importation into the European Economic Community, to specific rules as a consequence of the implementation of the common agricultural policy.The provisions of Protocol No. 1 to this Agreement stipulate the conditions under which the European Economic Community shall determine the treatment to be applied, notwithstanding the general treatment in force vis-à-vis third countries, to the products referred to above, when such products originate in the Partner States of the East African Community. With regard to unroasted coffee, cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems) and tinned pineapple, the special provisions laid down in Protocol No.. 2 to this Agreement shall apply. 3. At the request of one or more Partner States of the East African Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council regarding the conditions of application of this Article. ARTICLE 3 1. Products originating in Member States shall, when imported into Partner States of the East African Community, benefit, under the terms of Protocol No. 3 to this Agreement, from the elimination of any customs duties and charges leaving equivalent effect which the Partner States of the East African Community apply to imports of these products into their territories. 2. The Partner States of the East African Community may, however, retain or introduce, under the terms of Protocol No. 3 to this Agreement, customs duties and charges having equivalent effect which are necessary to meet their development needs or which are intended to contribute to their budgets. 3. Thee customs duties and charges having equivalent effect levied by the Partner States of the East African Community in accordance with paragraph 2 above may not give rise, de iure or de facto, to any direct or indirect discrimination between Member States. 4. At the request of the European Economic Community, there shall be consultations within the association Council regarding the conditions of application of this Article. ARTICLE 4 1. In so far as the Partner States of the East African Community levy duties on exports of their products to Member States, these duties may not give rise, de jure or de facto, any to direct or indirect biscrimination between Member States, 2. Without prejudice to the application of Article 14 (2), there shall be consultations within the Association Council if the application of such duties leads to serious disturbances in the conditions of competition. ARTICLE 5 1. The European Economic Community shall not apply to imports of products originating in the Partner States of the East African Community any quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect other than those that the Member States apply among themselves. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 above, however, shall not prejudice the import treatment accorded to the products referred to in Article 2 (2a). 3. At the request of one or more Partner States of the East African Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council regarding the conditions of application of this Article. ARTICLE 6 1. The Partner States of the East African Community shall not apply any quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect to the importation of products originating in Member States. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 above, the Partner States of the East African Community may retain or introduce new quantitative restrictions on the importation of products originating in Member States in order to meet their development needs or in the event of difficulties in their balance of payments or, where agricultural products are concerned in connexion with the development of the East African Common Market as provided for in the Treaty for East African Co-operation. Development needs are those, listed in Article 2 of Protocol No, 3 to this agreement. Application of such restrictions may not give rise, de Sure or de facto, to discrimination against Member States vis-à-vis third countries. 3. Application of the measures referred to in paragraph 2 above shall be subject to the proviso that the Partner States of the East African Community keep oppor-. tunities of importation open, without discrimination, to products originating in the European Economic Community. Nevertheless, where sales of a specific product meet with difficulties on the domestic market of the Partner States of the East African Community, those States may, notwithstanding the preceding sub-paragraph and subject to prior consultation within the Association Council, suspend imports of that product for a limited period, to be fixed case by case, on condition that they produce evidence of the existence of such difficulties and provide any explanations necessary for an assessment of the need to prohibit imports. 4. On the coming into force of this Agreement, the Partner States of the East African Community shall submit to the Association Council a list of the products subject to quantitative restrictions on imports applied in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 above, and any information they possess that may allow the Member States to know what opportunities there are for importing into the Partner States of the East African Community products subject to quantitative restrictions.At the request of the European Economic Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council regarding the conditions of application of these restrictions. 5. The Partner States of the East African Community shall, upon the introduction of any new quantitative restrictions in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 above, immediately notify the Association Council. As soon as the notification has been given, there shall be consultations within the Association Council, at the request of the European Economic Community. 6. On the coming into force of this Agreement, the Partner States of the East African Community shall notify the Association Council of the foreign tradé regulations applicable to Member States. The Association Council shall be notified of any change in these regulations. ARTICLE 7 The provisions of Articles 5 and 6 shall not prejudice the treatment that any Contracting Party signatory to a world agreement accords to any product under such an agreement. ARTICLE 8 Without prejudice to special provisions for border trade or to Articles 9 and 10: (a) the treatment that the Partner States of the East African Community apply by virtue of this Title to products originating in Member States shall not be less favourable than that applied to products originating in the most favoured third country; (b) the treatment that the Partner States of the East African Community apply by virtue of this Title to their products on exportation to the European Economic Community shall not be less, favourable than that applied to products exported to the most favoured third country. ARTICLE 9 The Partner States of the East African Community may maintain or establish among themselves customs unions or free- trade areas or conclude among themselves economic co-operation agreements. The Association Council shall be kept informed by the Partner States of the East African Community. ARTICLE 10 1. The Partner States of the East African Community may maintain or establish customs unions or free-trade areas or conclude economic co-operation agreements with one or more African third countries at a comparable stage of development, provided that this does not lead to any change in the provisions concerning origin for the purpose of implementing this Agreement. The Association Council shall be kept informed by the Partner States of the East African Community. 2. At the request of the European Economic Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council. 3. If these consultations reveal any incompatibility between the undertakings given by the Partner States of the East African CommunityÃ¡nd the principles or provisions of this Agreement, the Association Council shall, in case of need, take any measures necessary for the smooth functioning of the Association. It may also make any recommendations deemed useful. ARTICLE 11 The Partner States of the East African Community may likewise maintain or establish customs unions or free-trade areas or conclude economic co-operation agreements with one or more other third countries, provided that such customs unions, free-trade areas or economic co-operation agreements neither are nor prove to be incompatible with the principles or provisions of this Agreement. The Association Council shall be kept informed by the Partner States of the East African Community. At the request of the European Economic Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council. ARTICLE 12 The provisions of Articles 5 and 6 shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports,.exports or transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy, public security, the protection of human or animal life or health, or plant preservation, the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value, or the protection of industrial or commercial.property. However, such prohibitions or restrictions shall not constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade. ARTICLE 13 1. On matters of trade policy the Contracting Parties. shall keep each other informed and, should one of them so request, shall consult within the Association Council for the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement. 2. The information given and the consultations held shall bear on measures concerning trade with third countries if these measures are likely to harm the interests of any Contracting Party. ARTICLE 14 1. If serious disturbances occur in a sector of the economy of one or more Partner States of the East African Community or jeopardize their external financial stability, or if difficulties arise which result in a deterioration in the economic situation of a region in the East African Community, the Partner State or States concerned may, notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 3 and 6, take the necessary protective measures. These measures and the methods of applying them shall be notified immediately to the Association Council. 2. If serious disturbances occur in a sector of the economy of the European Economic Community or of one or more of its Member States or jeopardize their external financial stability, or if difficulties arise which result in a deterioration in the economic situation of a region in the European Economic Community, that Community may take, or may authorize the Member State or States concerned to take, the necessary protective measures, notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 2 and 5. These measures and the methods of applying them shall be notified immediately to the Association Council. 3. For the purpose of implementing paragraphs 1 and 2 above, priority shall be given to such measures as would least disturb the functioning of the Association. These measures shall not exceed the limits of what is strictly necessary to remedy the difficulties that have arisen. 4. There shall be consultations within the Association Council regarding measures taken in implementation of paragraphs 1 or 2 above Such consultations shall be held at the request of the European Economic Community in respect of measures under paragraph 1, and at the request of the Partner States of the East African Community in respect of those under paragraph 2. ARTICLE 15 Without prejudice to the special provisions laid down in this Agreement, each Contracting Party shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature that directly or indirectly leads to discrimination between its own products and like products originating in the territory of the other Contracting Parties. TITLE II RIGHT OF ESTABLISHMENT AND SERVICES ARTICLE 16 The Partner States of the East African Community shall ensure that, in the matter of the right of establishment and the provision of services, there shall be no discriminatory treatment, de jure or de facto, between nationals or between companies of Member States. ARTICLE 17 Should one or more Partner States of the East African Community grant nationals or companies of a non-Member State more favourable treatment as regards the right of establishment or provision of services, such treatment shall. be extended by the Partner State or States concerned to nationals or companies of the Member States, except whore it arises out of regional agreements. Nevertheless, nationals or companies of a Member State may not, for a specific activity, benefit in a Partner State of the East African Community from the provisions of this Article if the Member State to which they belong does not grant the nationals or companies of the Partner State of the East African Community concerned, as regards the right of establishment or provision of services, the same advantages for the activity in question as those obtained by the Partner State of the East African Community through an agreement with a non-Member. State referred to in the preceding paragraph. ARTICLE 18 Without prejudice to the provisions relating to movements of capital, the right establishment of within the meaning of this agreement shall include the right to engage in and to exercise self-employed activities; to set up and manage undertakings and, in particular, companies; and to set up agencies, branches or subsidiaries. ARTICLE 19 Services within, the meaning of this Agreement shall be deemed to be services normally provided against remuneration, provided that they are not governed by the provisions relating to trade, the right of establishment or movements of capital. Services shall include in particular activities of an industrial character, activities of a commercial character, artisan activities and activities of the liberal professions, excluding activities of employed persons. ARTICLE 20 1. Companies within the meaning of this Agreement shall be deemed to be companies under civil or commercial law, including co-operative societies and other legal persons under public or private law, but not including non-profit-making bodies. 2. "Company of a Member State or of a Partner State of the East African Community" shall mean any company constituted in accordance with the law of a Member State or of a Partner State of the East African Community and having its registered office, central administration or main establishment in a Member State or in a Partner State of the East African Community; nevertheless, should it have only its registered office in a Member State or in a Partner State of the East African Community, its business must have an effective and continuous link with the economy of that Member State or of that Partner State of the East African Community. TITLE -III PAYMENTS AND CAPITAL ARTICLE 21 The Member States and the Partner States of the East African Community shall authorize payments relating to trade in goods and in services, and also the transfer of such payments to the Partner Staten of the East African Community or to the Member State-in which the creditor or the beneficiary is resident, in so far as the movement of goods and services has been liberalized in pursuance of this Agreement. ARTICLE 22 The Partner States of the East African Community shall treat nationals and companies of Member States on an equal footing in respect of investments made by them, of capital movements and of current payments resulting therefrom, and also of transfers connected with such operations. TITLE IV INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 23 1. For the purpose of attaining the aims. set out in. this Agreement,. there shall be established an Association Council. It shall have the power to take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement; such decisions shall be binding on the Contracting Parties, who must take such, measures as are required to implement these decisions. The Association Council may examine all matters relating to the. implementation of this Agreement; it may formulate appropriate recommendations, and it shall undertake the consultations provided for by this Agreement. 2. The Association Council shall periodically review the results of the Association arrangements, taking into account the objectives of this Association. 3. The Association Council shall lay down its rules of procedure. ARTICLE 24 1. The Association Council shall be composed, on the one hand, of the members of the Council and of members of the Commission of the European Communities and, on the other hand, of members of the Government of each Partner State of the East African Community and of representatives of the East African Community. Ainy member of the Association Council may send a representative in accordance with conditions to be laid down in its rules of procedure. The Association Council shall meet either at the level of ministers or at the level of their representatives. 2. In the case of meetings at ministerial level, decisions of the association Council may be validly made only if, for the European Economic Community, a member of the Council and a member of the Commission of the European Communities, and, for the Partner States of the East African Community, a member of the Government of each Partner State of the East African Community, are present. 3. The Association Council shall act by mutual agreement between the European Economic Community on them one hand and the Partner States of the East African Community on the other. ARTICLE 25 The office of President of the Association Council shall be held alternately by a member of the Council of the European Communities and a member of the Government of a Partner State of the East African Community. ARTICLE 26 Meetings of the Association Council shall be called once a year by its President. The association Council shall, in addition, meet whenever necessary, in accordance with the conditions to be laid down in its rules of procedure. ARTICLE 27 The association Council may decide to set up a committee to assist the Council in the performance of its task and, in particular, to ensure the continuity of co-operation necessary for the smooth functioning of the Association. In its rules of procedure the Association Council shall determine the composition and duties of the committee and how it shall function. The Association Council may delegate to the committee the exercise of the powers entrusted to it by this Agreement, under the terms and within the limits laid down by the Association Council. ARTICLE 28 1. Any dispute concerning the interpretation or the application of this Agreement which arises between one or more Member States or the European Economic Community on the one hand, and one or more Partner States of the East African Community on the other, may be brought before the Association Council. 2. If the association Council fails to settle the dispute at its subsequent meeting, either Party may notify the other of the appointment of an arbitrator; the other Party must then appoint a second arbitrator within two months. For the application of this procedure, the European Economic Community and the Member States shall be deemed to be one Party to the dispute. The Association Council shall appoint a third arbitrator. The decisions of the arbitrators shall be taken by majority vote. 3. Each Party to the dispute must take the measures for the implementation of the arbitrators' decision. ARTICLE 29 A Parliamentary Committee of the Association shall meet once a year to discuss matters concerning the Association. It shall be composed, on a basis of parity, of members of the European Parliament and of members of the Parliaments of the Partner States of the East African Community. It shall lay down its rules of procedure. TITLE V GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 30 No treaty, convention, agreement or arrangement of any kind between one or more Member States and one or more Partner States of the East African Community may impede the implementation of the provisions of this Agreement. ARTICLE 31 1. The Association Council shall be informed of any request for membership of or association with the European Economic Community made by any State. 2. Any request for association with the European Economic Community made by a State whose economic structure and production are comparable with those of the Partner States of the East African Community, and which, after examination by the European Economic Community, has been referred by the latter to the Association Council, shall be the subject of consultations within the Association Council. ARTICLE 32 This Agreement shall apply to the European territory of the Member States and to the French overseas departments on the one hand, and to the territory of the Partner States of the East African Community on the other. ARTICLE 33 1. As regards the European Economic Community, this Agreement shall be validly concluded by a decision of the Council of the European Communities taken in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty and notified to the Parties to this Agreement. It shall be ratified by the Signatory States in conformity with their respective constitutional requirements. 2. The instruments of ratification of the Signatory States and the act of notification of the conclusion of this Agreement by the European Economic Community shall be exchanged in Brussels. ARTICLE 34 This Agreement shall come into force on the first day of the month following the date on which the instruments of ratification and the act of notification have been exchanged. ARTICLE 35 1. This Agreement shall be concluded for a period of five years from its entry into force and shall expire by 31 January.1975 at the latest. 2. This Agreement may be terminated by the European Economic Community in respect of each Partner..State of the East African Community, and by each Partner State of the East African Community in respect of the European Economic Community, upon six months' notice. ARTICLE 36 1. Eighteen months before the expiry of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall examine the provisions that might be made for a further period. 2. The Association Council shall take any transitional measures required until a new agreement comes into force. ARTICLE 37 The Protocols annexed to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. ARTICLE 38 This Agreement shall be drawn up in two copies, in the German, French, Italian, Dutch and English languages, each of these texts being equally authentic. PROTOCOL No. 1 concerning the implementation of Article 2(2) of the Association Agreement THE CONTRACTING PARTIES HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which are annexed to the Agreement: ARTICLE 1 1. After consultation within the Association Council, the European Economic Community shall determine, case by case, what treatment is to be accorded to imports of each of the products or groups of products referred to in Article. 2(2) of the Agreement, when such products originate in the Partner States of the East African Community, where these Stats have an economic interest in exporting the said products. The treatment which the European Economic Community applies to these products shall be more favourable than the general treatment applied to like products originating in third countries. 2. However, if, in respect of a. specific product, the economic situation of the European Economic Community so justifies, the latter may, by way of exception, refrain from according. special treatment to imports of that product from the Partner States of the East African Community. ARTICLE 2 If the products referred to in Article 2(2a) of the Agreement are liable to customs duties at the time of importation into the European Economic Community and if no provision concerning trade in those products with third countries is laid down under the common agricultural policy, imports of such products into the European Economic Community shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 1 above and provided that these products originate in the Partner States of the East African Community, be governed by the provisions of Article 2(1) of the Agreement. ARTICLE 3 1. The treatment established for the various products on the basis of this Protocol shall be applied until the expiry of the Agreement. 2. However, in the event of a change in the Community organization of markets, the European Economic Community reserves the right, after consultation within the Association Council, to change the treatment established. In such an event, the European Economic Community undertakes, in the framework of the new treatment, to maintain advantages for the Partner States of the East African Community comparable with those they enjoyed previously. PROTOCOL No. 2 concerning unrt;uasted coffee, cloves and tinned pineapple THE CONTRACTING PARTIES HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which are annexed to the Agreerient: Should imports into the European Community of unroasted coffee of Heading No. 09.01 A I of the customs tz-.riff of the European Communities, of cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems) of Heading No. 09.07 or of tinned pineapple of Heading No. 20.06 B II, originating in the Partner States of the East African Com:iunity, exceed the quantities stipulated below in the Course of any given year, the European Economic Community shall be authorized to take, subject to consultation with the Partner States of the East African Community, the necessary measures to avoid serious disturbances in traditiona-l trade flows. PROTOCOL No.3 concerning the implementation of Article 3 of the Association Agreement THE CONTRACTING PARTIES HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which are annexed to the Agreement: ARTICLE 1 For the purpose of implementing the provisions of Article 3 of the Agreement, the Partner States of the East African Community shall, on the date of coming into force of the Agreement, eliminate all customs duties and charges having equivalent effect other than those, which are necessary to meet their development needs or which are intended to contribute to -thirebudgets. ARTICLE 2 The develop:ment needs of thl- Partner States of the EastAfrican Community referred to in Article 1 above are those -arising from: (i) the implementation of economic development programs aimed at raising the general.standard of living in the country in question; (ii) the needs of their economic development, in particular where necessary to encourage the setting-up of branches of production for the purpose of raising the country' s general standard of living; (iii) the need to achieve equilibrium in their balance of payments and to alleviate such difficulties arise in the main from their efforts to expand their domestic markets and from. the instability of their terms of trade; (iv) the necessity to achieve rapid and sustained growth of their country's receipts from exports. ARTICLE 3 The Contracting Parties shall take note of the customs duties to be eliminated in accordance with the provisions of Article 1 above in respect of the products listed in the Schedule annexed to this Protocol. ARTICLE 4 On the date of coming into force of the Agreement, the Partner States of the East African Community shall communicate to the Association Council their customs tariff as it stands after application of the foregoing provisions. At the request of the European Economic Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council on this tariff. ARTICLE 5 The Partner States of the East African Community shall notify the Association Council of any amendment to the tariff so established, in particular of any increase in customs duties or charges having equivalent effect made to meet their development needs or which is intended to contribute to their budgets. At the request of the European Economic Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council on those amendments. ARTICLE 6 1. The advantages accorded to Member States vis-à-vis third countries in respect of the products listed in the Schedule annexed to this Protocol shall not be reduced during the life of the Agreement. 2. The Partner States of the East African Community may, however, make any adjustments in the Schedule of products annexed to this Protocol that are necessary to meet their development needs or are intended to contribute to their budgets, subject to prior consultation within the Association Council and provided that the overall volume of concessions and the balance of concessions among the Member States are maintained. 3. The Partner States of the East African Community shall inform the Association Council in due time of any changes which they contemplate raking. This notification shall be accompanied by information of an economic and/or financial nature whereby the necessity to make the contemplated changes in the Schedule can be assessed. ARTICLE 7 At the request of the Partner States of the East African Community, there shall be consultations within the Association Council regarding the conditions of application of this Protocol. PROTOCOL No.4 Concerning the concept of "originating products" for the purpose of implementing the Association Agreement the contracting parties have agreed upon the following provisions, which are annexed to the Agreement: ARTICLE 1 On the basis of a draft prepared by the Commission of the European Communities, the Association Council shall lay down at its first session the definition of the concept of "originating products" for the purpose of implementing Title I of the Agreement. It shall also determine the methods of administrative co-operation. ARTICLE 2 The Member states and the Partner States of the East African Community shall apply their respective regulations until the provisions referred to in Article 1 become operative. PROTOCOL No. 5 concerning the implementation of the Association Agreement and the establishment of international agreements on the granting of general preferences. the contracting parties, desirous of stating clearly their position on the compatibility of the preferences granted to the European Economic Community by the Partner States of the East African Community with the generalized preferences in the framework of the United Nations Conference on Trade. and Development, HAVE AGREED on the following provisions, which shall be annexed to the Agreement: The provisions of the Agreement, and in particular Article 3 thereof do not conflict with the establishment of a general system of preferences and do not prevent the Partner States of the East African Community from participating therein.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX I Declaration by the Delegation of the European Economic Community concerning nuclear products It follows from the combined provisions of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community And the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community that the provisions of Title I of the Agreement shall apply to the goods and products covered by Articles 92 onwards of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Community. ANNEX II Declaration by the Delegation of the European EconomicCommunity and by the Delegation of the Partner States of the East African Community concerning Article 2 of the Association Agreement The Contracting Parties agree to hold consultations within the Association Council as regards any difficulties which may arise in respect of goods and products exported from the Partner States of the East African Community competing with like products originating in the Associated African and Malagasy States or in other Associated States. Countries or Territories whose economic structure and production are comparable with those of the Associated African and Malagasy States. ANNEX III Declaration by the Delegation of the EuropeanEconomicCommunity and by the Delegation of the Partner States of the East AfricanCommunity concerning petroleum products. In respect of petroleum products, theEuropean Economic Community reserves the right to change the arrangements stipulated in Title I of the Agreement when a common policy is established. In this event, the European Economic Community shall accord imports of such products originating in the Partner States of the East African Community advantages comparable with those stipulated in the Agreement. ANNEX IV Declaration by the Delegation of the European Economic Community and by the Delegation of the Partner States of the East African Community concerning a good offices procedure Any Contracting Parties that are parties to a dispute within the meaning of Article 28 of theAgreement are prepared, if circumstances permit, and subject to the Association Council being informed so that any parties concerned may assert their rights, to have recourse, before bringing the dispute before the Association Council, to a good offices procedure. ANNEX V Declaration by the Delegation of the Partner States of the East African Community concerning the implementation of Article 6(2) of the Association Agreement The Partner States of the East African Community undertake not to apply any quantitative restrictions in such a way as would diminish the effect of the tariff advantages granted to theEuropean Economic Community and set out in the Schedule annexed to Protocol No. 3. ANNEX VI Declaration by the Delegationofthe Partner States of the East African Community concerning the implementation of Article 6 and 22 of theAssociation Agreement. The Partner States of the East African Community have noted the anxieties expressed by the Member States of the European EconomicCommunity as regards the implementation of the provision of Articles 6 and 22 of the Agreement, and hereby undertake not to treat the said Member Status of their nationals or companies less favourably than the most favoured third country. ANNEX VII Declaration by the Delegation of the European Economic Community concerning the implementation of Protocol No.4 to the Association Agreement. During the negotiations the Delegation of the European Economic Community informed the Delegationof the Partner States Of the East African Community that it is important that the definition of the concept of "originating products" for the purpose of implementing the Agreement should as far as possible be identical with the definition of the concept"originating of products"for the purpose of implementing the Association Convention signed at Yaoundé on 29 July 1969. ANNEX VIII Declaration by the Representative of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the definition of Germannationals. All Germans within the meaning of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany shall be deemed to be nationals of the Federal Republic of Germany. ANNEX IX Declaration by the Representative of the Government of the Federal Republic Of Germany concerning the application of the Association Agreement to Berlin. The Agreement shall also apply to Land Berlin unless the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany makes a declaration to the contrary to the other Contracting Parties within a period of three months from the coming into force of the Agreement.
