MainText:
Economic Complementation Agreement No. 22 signed between the Government of the Republic of Bolivia and the Government of the Republic of Chile The Government of the Republic of Bolivia and the Government of the Republic of Chile, CONSIDERING: The need to strengthen the integration process in Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, through the conclusion of the broadest possible bilateral and multilateral agreements. The active participation of Bolivia and Chile in the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), as signing members of the Treaty. The advantages of making the most of the negotiation mechanisms provided for in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty. The provisions of the Treaty of Montevideo of 1980, which recognize the Republic of Bolivia a more favorable differential treatment as a country with less relative economic development. The coincidences of the economic and commercial opening of both countries, both in tariff matters and in the elimination of non-tariff restrictions and in the basic orientations of their economic policies. The importance of adequate cooperation in the productive areas of goods and services for the economic development of the signatory countries. The convenience of achieving a more active participation of the economic agents of the signatory countries, through the existence of clear and predictable rules for the development of trade and investment. AGREE: to enter into an Economic Complementation Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the ALALC Council of Ministers. Said Agreement will be governed by the aforementioned provisions and the rules established below: Chapter I Objectives of the Agreement ARTICLE 1 . This Agreement has as objectives: 1. Lay the foundations for a growing and progressive integration of the economies of the signatory countries; 2. Facilitate, expand and diversify the commercial exchange of goods and services between the signatory countries, encourage and stimulate productive activities located in their territories and facilitate the investments of each signatory country in the territory of the other; 3. Create conditions to achieve a harmonious and balanced progress in bilateral trade; 4. Serve as a legal and institutional framework for the development of a broader economic cooperation in those areas that are of mutual interest; Y 5. Establish mechanisms to promote active participation of private economic agents in efforts to broaden and deepen economic relations between the signatory countries and achieve the progressive integration of their economies. Chapter II Release Program ARTICLE 2 . The signatory countries agree to grant each other tariff preferences according to the following scheme: ● Chile grants Bolivia tariff concessions without reciprocity for imports originating in that country, whose classification, treatment and conditions are specified in Annex I * of this Agreement. ● The signatory countries agree to free imports of products included in Annexes II and III of this Agreement from taxes. ● Annex IV includes the products benefiting from tariff preferences in the Partial Scope Agreement signed between Chile and Bolivia within the framework of ALADI, and which, in this Agreement, have not been subject to a deepening of their tariff preference in favor of neither of the two countries, leaving the existing preferential margin in force. ● The signatory countries may, by mutual agreement and prior negotiation, incorporate new products into Annexes II and III, as well as deepen the tariff preferences included in Annex IV of this Agreement. ARTICLE 3. For the purposes of this Agreement, "taxes" shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affect imports. Similar rates and surcharges will not be committed in this concept when they are equivalent to the cost of the services actually provided. ARTICLE 4. The signatory countries undertake to make the maximum efforts to prevent the application of measures that tend to hinder reciprocal trade. As regards the products included in the Liberalization Program, the signatory countries undertake not to introduce non-tariff restrictions on both their imports and their exports, with the exception of those referred to in Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty. "restrictions" shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate or of any other nature, through which a signatory country prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, its imports or exports. Chapter III Regime of origin ARTICLE 5 . The benefits derived from the Liberalization Program of this Agreement will be applied exclusively to products originating in and coming from the territories of the signatory countries. ARTICLE 6 . The signatory countries will apply the ALADI General Regime of Origin, adopted by Resolution 78 of the Committee of Representatives of the Association, to imports made under the Liberalization program, without prejudice to the specific origin requirements established in this Agreement. or by the Administrative Commission referred to in Chapter XI thereof. Chapter IV Safeguard clauses ARTICLE 7 . Prior timely notice, the signatory countries may apply to imports made under the Liberalization Program, the ALADI Regional Safeguards Regime, approved by Resolution 70 of the Committee of Representatives of the Association, with the limitations set by the following Article . ARTICLE 8 . In cases in which imports of products covered by the Liberalization Program are carried out in quantities and under conditions that cause or threaten to cause "serious damage" to domestic production of similar or directly competitive products, the signatory countries may apply discriminatory, safeguard measures lasting up to one year. The extension of said term will require a previous joint examination by the signatory countries of the background and grounds that justify it. In any case, the safeguard measures to be applied during a new term, which may not be extended for more than one year, must necessarily be ARTICLE 9 . The Administrative Commission of the Agreement will define, within 90 days following its constitution, what will be understood by "serious damage" and will adopt the procedural norms for the application of the provisions of this Chapter. Chapter V Unfair trade practices and conditions of competition ARTICLE 10 . The signatory countries condemn "dumping" and any unfair trade practice, as well as the granting of export subsidies and other internal subsidies of equivalent effect. ARTICLE 11 . In the event of reciprocal trade situations of "dumping" or distortions in competition as a result of the application of export subsidies and other subsidies of equivalent effect, both for products covered by the benefits of the Liberalization Program of this Agreement and of products that are not covered by such benefits, the affected signatory country will apply the corrective measures provided for in its internal legislation. In this regard, the signatory countries undertake to follow the criteria and procedures stipulated in the scope of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT), at the date of signing this Agreement. Chapter VI Evaluation of the Agreement ARTICLE 12 . The signatory countries will periodically evaluate, at least every three years, the provisions and preferences granted in this Agreement with the purpose of achieving a harmonious and balanced advance both in the evolution of reciprocal trade and in the achievement of the other objectives of Article 1. . To such effects, the Administrative Commission established in Chapter XI of this Agreement will exercise the functions that allow such evaluation and examination. The result of such evaluation and examination will be expressed in Resolutions of the Commission or in Protocols attached to this Agreement, depending on the legal nature of said Resolutions. Chapter VII Treatment in matters of internal taxes ARTICLE 13 . Pursuant to Article 46 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, regarding taxes, rates and other internal charges, products originating in the territory of a signatory country will enjoy in the territory of the other signatory country a treatment no less favorable than that applied to domestic similar products. Chapter VIII Investments ARTICLE 14 . In order to stimulate the circulation of capital between the two countries and the location of investments from one or the other in their respective territories, the signatory countries will adopt, among others, the following criteria in the application of their corresponding internal legislation: 1. Capital from any of the signatory countries will enjoy in the territory of the other signatory country a treatment no less favorable than that granted to capital from any other country, and 2. Capital from any of the signatory countries will enjoy in the territory of the other signatory country a treatment no less favorable than that granted to national capital. The aforementioned criteria will be applied without prejudice to the full validity, in what is pertinent, of the provisions of a constitutional or legal nature on the matter that govern the signatory countries. Chapter IX Energy supplementation ARTICLE 15 . The signatory countries will carry out actions aimed at promoting studies and energy complementation projects in the electrical, geothermal and hydrocarbon areas. Said actions will be carried out through the competent national organizations and, in particular, through the Technical Commission established by the Memorandum of Intentions, signed in Rio de Janeiro on November 12, 1990, by the Minister of Energy and Hydrocarbons of Bolivia. and the Minister Vice President of the National Energy Commission of Chile. ARTICLE 16 . Based on the guidelines agreed upon in the Memorandum of Understanding signed in the city of La Paz on June 20, 1991, by the Minister of Energy and Hydrocarbons of Bolivia and the Minister President of the National Energy Commission of Chile, the countries signatories will carry out the pertinent actions to promote the execution of specific energy integration projects. In the same way, the signatory countries will ensure that, in the future, agreements for the purchase and sale of natural gas of Bolivian origin are established, when the conditions of availability of Bolivian natural gas reserves are presented, whose corresponding production is not compromised and when the conditions of convenient technical and economic feasibility are presented. ARTICLE 17 . The actions for the purchase of Bolivian gas, financing and construction of the gas pipeline may be carried out by private Bolivian, Chilean, third-country companies or consortiums and international financial institutions, in accordance with the legislation in force in each signatory country. ARTICLE 18 . The signatory countries, taking into account the work carried out by the Technical Commission referred to in Article 15, will examine the convenience and need to negotiate and sign, in a timely manner, the additional legal instruments that are necessary to regulate the execution of the projects. of energy integration and, in particular, those projects based on the use of natural gas of Bolivian origin. Chapter X Economic cooperation ARTICLE 19 . The signatory countries will promote cooperation in matters such as: 1. Regulatory regimes and control systems in matters of animal and plant health; 2. Technical and bromatological standards; 3. Public health and safety standards; 4. Development of tourist activity with the aim that it contributes to a better reciprocal knowledge of the historical and cultural values ​of the signatory countries; 5. Develop actions in the areas of information and trade promotion; 6. Actions aimed at promoting a growing exchange of technology, particularly in the agricultural, agro-industrial, industrial, mining and communications sectors; 7. Regulatory regimes and control systems in matters of environmental preservation; Y 8. Regimes on Intellectual and Industrial Property. To carry out specific cooperation actions in these matters, the competent bodies in the respective areas of each signatory country may enter into agreements within the framework of their powers. The Administrative Commission of the Agreement will promote the concretion of these actions and will keep informed of the progress achieved in the agreed actions. Chapter XI Administrative Commission of the Agreement ARTICLE 20 . The administration of this Agreement will be in charge of a Commission made up of High Level Government Representatives of the signatory countries. The Administrative Commission will meet in ordinary sessions, once a year, in the place and date determined by mutual agreement and in extraordinary sessions, when the signatory countries, after consultations, so agree. The delegations of the signatory countries to the meetings of the Commission will be chaired by the high-level official designated by each of the respective governments and may be made up of other delegates and advisors that they decide to accredit. Said Commission must be constituted within 90 days of signing the Agreement and in its first session it will establish its own regulations. ARTICLE 21 . The Administrative Commission will have the following powers, powers and functions: 1. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement; 2. Periodically evaluate the results of the application of this Agreement, negotiate and agree on the measures it deems most convenient for the achievement of its objectives; 3. Periodically examine and evaluate the results in bilateral trade of the application of the Liberalization Program established in this Agreement and promote consultations and negotiations for the adoption of measures aimed at its improvement; 4. Agree, in accordance with the rules contained in Chapter II, the inclusion of new products in Annexes II, III and IV thereof; 5. Keep updated the tariff nomenclature adopted for the classification of the products included in Annexes I , II , III , and IV of this Agreement; 6. Promote consultations and negotiations and agree on the measures that are pertinent in everything related to the application of the rules of this Agreement on specific requirements of origin, safeguard clauses and unfair trade practices and conditions of competition; 7. Promote consultations and negotiations in order to stimulate economic cooperation between the signatory countries, in accordance with the rules contained in Chapter X of this Agreement, and coordinate the activities carried out jointly by the competent national bodies; 8. Exercise the functions that concern it within the procedures on Dispute Resolution, as stipulated in the regulations contained in Chapter XIII of this Agreement; 9. Request the advice and opinion of the Business Advisory Committee and consider the reports, recommendations, initiatives and proposals that are raised by it, particularly with regard to the inclusion of new products in Annexes II, III and IV; 10. Approve, amend or replace its own Regulations; 11. Propose to the Governments of the signatory countries the expansion, amendment or replacement of this Agreement; Y 12. Exercise the other powers and fulfill the other functions that are attributed to it by this Agreement. ARTICLE 22 . The Agreements that result from the exercise of the powers and functions attributed to the Administrative Commission and that deal with specific matters not regulated in detail by the rules of this Agreement, will be formalized through Additional Protocols to it and will be understood to be covered by the legal framework established by the same. ARTICLE 23 . The institutional ties of the signatory countries with the Administrative Commission will be in charge of the Competent National Organization that each one of them designates. Said Body will also fulfill the function of maintaining communications and links between the Governments of the signatory countries in everything related to the application of this Agreement. Chapter XII Business Advisory Committee ARTICLE 24 . In order to promote and stimulate a more active participation of the business sectors in the tasks related to the application of this Agreement, the Business Advisory Committee is established, which will be made up of representatives of the top business organizations of the signatory countries. The Committee, which will have the character of an advisory body, will be intended to contribute, as pertinent, to the fulfillment of the functions of the Administrative Commission and to facilitate, in this way, the achievement of the objectives set forth in this Agreement. ARTICLE 25 . The Business Advisory Committee will have the following powers, powers and functions: 1. Provide advice to the Administrative Commission on all matters included in this Agreement and in those areas that, in their opinion, contribute to broadening and deepening economic relations between the signatory countries and, in particular, business cooperation; 2. Promote initiatives to the Administrative Commission on actions to be undertaken for the application of the mechanisms and the best fulfillment of the objectives set forth in this Agreement, especially in matters of bilateral economic cooperation, as well as in matters of treatment of investments, circulation of capital and joint investments; 3. Propose to the Administrative Commission the incorporation of new products to the Annexes of this Agreement; 4. Examine, within the scope of its competence, the results derived from the application of the mechanisms of this Agreement; 5. Promote understandings or operational agreements of reciprocal cooperation between the business organizations of the signatory countries; 6. Adopt, amend and replace the rules intended to regulate its operation and activities; Y 7. Carry out other activities or tasks that are expressly requested by the Administrative Commission or that, by mutual agreement, are agreed upon by the delegations of the business organizations of the signatory countries. Chapter XIII Settlement of disputes ARTICLE 26 . For the solution of controversies that may arise due to the interpretation of the provisions contained in this Agreement, as well as its application or non-compliance or of any other nature different from those provided for in Chapter V, the signatory countries will submit to the procedure indicated in the following articles. ARTICLE 27 . The signatory country that understands that it is affected by a situation of application that is not in accordance with the law or based on an interpretation that it does not share or by a situation of non-compliance with the rules of this Agreement, will inform the other signatory country, through the National Organization Competent referred to in Article 23, their observations in this regard, which must be answered by the latter within a period not exceeding 15 days. In the event that the requested signatory country does not respond within the indicated period or that its response does not satisfy the affected signatory country, a direct negotiation procedure will be initiated immediately through the Competent National Organizations referred to. Article 23 or within the Administrative Commission as chosen by the affected signatory country. In this second case, the Commission will be summoned to meet within a period not exceeding 20 days after the request of the affected signatory country is known. For the best fulfillment of its mission, the Administrative Commission may request individual specialists or independent specialized organizations for technical opinions, which will be taken into consideration as additional evidence. ARTICLE 28 . If, in direct negotiations through the Competent National Organizations or within the Administrative Commission, a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute raised is not achieved within a period of 30 days, extendable by mutual agreement, it will be submitted for consideration. and ruling of an Arbitration Commission made up of three experts of recognized suitability, two of them appointed by each of the signatory countries and a third arbitrator who will preside over it. This may not be a national of the signatory countries and must be designated by the Secretary General of ALADI, from among the names included in a list of experts that the Administrative Commission will prepare annually for these purposes. The Arbitration Commission must be constituted and begin its tasks within a period not exceeding 20 days after the appointment of its members. ARTICLE 29 . The Arbitration Commission will adjust its performance to the provisions of the Regulations on Arbitration Procedure to be adopted by the Administrative Commission of the Agreement, within a period not exceeding 90 days from the date of its constitution. It will issue its ruling through a Resolution, which must be adopted within a period of no more than 60 days from the date of its constitution. ARTICLE 30 . Without prejudice to the power of its members to decide in conscience on the controversy submitted to its consideration, the Arbitration Commission will assess the situations and facts subject to its examination in light of the norms of this Agreement and the Treaty of Montevideo 1980, as well as of other norms and principles of International Law that are pertinent. ARTICLE 31 . The Resolution of the Arbitration Commission must contain its pronouncement on whether the situation submitted to its consideration constitutes a breach or an interpretation that is not in accordance with the law and on the measures to be adopted by the requested country to rectify this situation. In the same way, it must determine those measures that the affected country may adopt in the event that the requested country fails to comply with it. ARTICLE 32 . The Resolution of the Arbitration Commission will be unappealable and will only give rise to an appeal for clarification. It will be fully obligatory for the signatory countries from its notification. Non-compliance by the requested country may give rise to the temporary suspension of the application by the affected country of some or all of the provisions of this Agreement, as well as configuring, in case said non-compliance persists, grounds for denouncing it. Chapter XIV Validity and duration ARTICLE 33 . This Agreement will enter into force from the date of subscription and will have an indefinite duration. ARTICLE 34 . The tariff preferences contemplated in Annexes II, III and IV of this Agreement will have an indefinite duration. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tariff preferences and quotas incorporated in Annex I of this Agreement may be reviewed every five years, by mutual agreement and prior negotiation between the Parties. If the review is not carried out, said preferences and quotas will be extended for the same period. In the event that the suspension of the preferences referred to in the previous paragraph is agreed, a three-year linear reduction program of the respective quota will be applied. ARTICLE 35 . The tariff preferences that are enshrined in this Agreement will enter into force on the 1st day. July 1993, term within which the signatory countries will adopt the pertinent internal administrative measures to simultaneously apply said preferences. Chapter XV Accession ARTICLE 36 . This Agreement will be open, after negotiation, to the adherence of the remaining members of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI). ARTICLE 37 . The adhesion will be formalized once the terms of the same have been negotiated between the signatory countries and the adherent country, through the subscription of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement, which will enter into force 30 days after its deposit in the General Secretariat of ALADI. . Chapter XVI Complaint ARTICLE 38 . The signatory country that decides to denounce this Agreement must communicate this intention to the remaining signatory or adhering countries at least 180 days in advance of the date of deposit of the respective instrument of denunciation in the General Secretariat of ALADI. ARTICLE 39 . Once the complaint is formalized by depositing the respective document in the General Secretariat of ALADI, the rights acquired and obligations contracted under this Agreement will automatically cease for the complaining country, except with regard to trade preferences received or granted, which will continue in force for a period of one year, counted from the date of formalization of the complaint. Chapter XVII Convergence ARTICLE 40 . On the occasion of the Sessions of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), provided for in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the signatory countries will examine, together with the other member countries of the Association, the possibility of to proceed to the progressive multilateralization of the preferential treatments agreed or that are agreed under this Agreement. Chapter XVIII Final Provisions ARTICLE 41 . After signing this Agreement, the signatory countries, in compliance with the pertinent regulations contained in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and in the Resolutions of the Council of Ministers of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), will inform the remaining countries members of the Association the text thereof, according to the procedures established for this purpose. ARTICLE 42 . Once the signatory countries have complied with the provisions of Articles 33 and 35 and, consequently, this Agreement is fully applied, the Partial Scope Agreement for Renegotiation No. 27 and its Additional and Modifying Protocols will be without effect. Made in the City of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Republic of Bolivia, on the sixth day of April 1993, in two originals equally authenticated.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX 1", 
