MainText:
GENERAL TREATY ON CENTRAL AMERICAN ECONOMIC INTEGRATION The Governments of the Republics of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua, WITH THE PURPOSE of reaffirming their purpose of unifying the economies of the four countries and jointly promoting the development of Central America in order to improve the living conditions of its inhabitants, CONSIDERING the need to speed up the integration of their economies, consolidate the results achieved to date, and lay the foundations that should govern it in the future, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the commitments made in the following economic integration instruments: Multilateral Free Trade Agreement and Central American Economic Integration; Central American Agreement on the Equalization of Import Duties and its Protocol on Central American Tariff Preference; Bilateral free trade and economic integration treaties signed between Central American governments; and Economic Association Treaty signed between Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras, HAVE DECIDED to celebrate this Treaty for which purpose they have designated their respective Plenipotentiaries, namely: His Excellency the President of the Republic of Guatemala, Mr. Julio Prado García Salas , Coordinating Minister for Central American Integration and Mr. Alberto Fuentes Mohr, Head of the Office of Economic Integration. The Honorable Government Junta of the Republic of El Salvador, Mr. Gabriel Piloña Araujo, Minister of Economy, and Mr. Abelardo Torres, Undersecretary of Economy. His Excellency the President of the Republic of Honduras, Mr. Jorge Bueso Arias, Minister of Economy and Finance His Excellency the President of the Republic of Nicaragua, Mr. Juan José Lugo Marenco, Minister of Economy who, after having communicated their respective Full Powers and finding them in good and due form, agree to the following: Chapter I MARKET CENTRAL AMERICAN COMMON ARTICLE I The contracting States agree to establish among themselves a common market that must be perfected within a maximum period of five years from the date of entry into force of this Treaty. They also undertake to establish a customs union between their territories. ARTICLE II For the purposes of the preceding Article, the Contracting Parties undertake to perfect a Central American free trade zone within a period of five years and to adopt a uniform Central American tariff under the terms of the Central American Agreement on the Equalization of Import Duties. Chapter II TRADE REGIME ARTICLE III The signatory States grant each other free trade for all products originating in their respective territories, with the only limitations included in the special regimes referred to in Annex A of this Treaty. Consequently, the natural products of the contracting countries and the products manufactured in them will be exempt from the payment of import and export duties, including consular rights, and from all other taxes, surcharges and contributions caused by the import and export, or that are collected because of them, whether national, municipal or of another order. The exemptions contemplated in this Article do not include the rates or rights of barrage, wharfage, storage and handling of merchandise, nor any other that are legally required for port, custody or transport services; nor do they include exchange differences resulting from the existence of two or more exchange markets or from other exchange measures adopted in any of the contracting countries. Goods originating in the territory of the signatory States will enjoy national treatment in all of them and will be exempt from any restriction or measure of a quantitative nature, with the exception of control measures that are legally applicable in the territories of the contracting states for health reasons. , security or police. ARTICLE IV The Contracting Parties establish for certain products special transitory regimes of exception to immediate free trade referred to in Article III of this Agreement. Said products shall be automatically incorporated into free trade no later than the end of the fifth year of validity of this Treaty, except as specifically provided in Annex A. Annex A includes the products subject to special regimes whose exchange must be adjusted to the modalities and requirements set forth therein. Said modalities and requirements may only be modified after multilateral negotiation in the Executive Council. Annex A forms an integral part of this Agreement. The signatory States agree that the Protocol to the Central American Agreement on the Equalization of Import Duties, Central American Tariff Preference, will not be applicable to the exchange of products subject to special regimes referred to in this Article. ARTICLE V The goods that enjoy the benefits stipulated in this Treaty must be covered by a customs form signed by the exporter that contains the declaration of origin and that will be subject to the visa of the customs officials of the countries of issuance and destination. destination, as established in Annex B of this Treaty. When there is doubt about the origin of a merchandise and the problem has not been resolved by bilateral management, any of the affected Parties may request the intervention of the Executive Council so that it can verify the origin of said merchandise. The Council does not It will consider as originating products of one of the Contracting Parties those that, being originating from or manufactured in a third country, are only simply assembled, packaged, packaged, cut or diluted in the exporting country. In the cases referred to in the preceding paragraph, the importation of the merchandise in question will not be prevented, provided that a bond is granted to guarantee the importing country the payment of taxes and other surcharges that could be caused by importation. The deposit will become effective or will be canceled, as the case may be, when the problem raised is finally resolved. The Executive Council will establish, through regulations, the procedure to be followed to determine the origin of the merchandise. ARTICLE VI When the products subject to exchange are subject to taxes, excise duties or other internal contributions of any kind, which fall on the production, sale, distribution or consumption in one of the signatory countries, said country may tax the same amount to goods of the same nature that are imported from another contracting State, in which case imports from third countries must also be taxed in at least the same amount and for the same concepts. The Contracting Parties agree that the establishment of internal consumption taxes must comply with the following terms: a) They may be established for the amount deemed necessary when there is domestic production of the article in question, or when there is no production of said article in none of the signatory States; b) When there is no production of an article in one of the Contracting Parties, but there is in any of the others, the former may not establish consumption taxes on said article, except by prior favorable resolution of the Executive Council; c) When one of the Parties has established an internal tax on consumption and subsequently the production of the article thus taxed begins in any of the others, without such production existing in the Party that established the tax, the Executive Council, at the request of the interested party. , will hear the case and rule on whether the existence of the tax is compatible with free trade. The States undertake to eliminate, in accordance with their legal procedures, said consumption taxes by means of the sole notification to that effect of the Executive Council. ARTICLE VII None of the signatory States shall establish or maintain regulations on the distribution or sale of goods originating from another signatory State, when such regulations tend to place or effectively place them in a discriminated situation with respect to the same merchandise of national production or imported from any other country. ARTICLE VIII The articles that, by internal provisions of the Contracting Parties, constitute watertight or State monopolies on the date of entry into force of this Treaty, shall be subject to the pertinent legal provisions of each country and, where appropriate, to the provisions of Article VIII. Annex A of the same Treaty. In the case of creating new tobacconists or modifying the regime of the existing ones, consultations will be carried out between the Parties in order to subject the Central American exchange of the corresponding articles to a special regime. Chapter III EXPORT SUBSIDIES AND UNFAIR TRADE ARTICLE IX The Governments of the signatory States will not grant exemptions or reductions of customs duties on imports from outside Central America for articles produced in the contracting States under adequate conditions. When a signatory State considers itself affected by the granting of customs exemptions to imports or by government imports that are not destined for the Government's own use or its institutions, it may submit the problem to the Executive Council, which will study it and issue a resolution on it. the individual. ARTICLE X The Central Banks of the signatory States will cooperate closely to avoid currency speculation that may affect exchange rates and to maintain the convertibility of the currencies of the respective countries on a basis that guarantees, within a normal regime, freedom, exchange rate uniformity and stability. In the event that one of the signatory States were to establish quantitative restrictions on international money transfers, it must adopt the necessary measures so that such restrictions do not affect the other States in a discriminatory manner. In case of serious balance of payments difficulties that affect or could affect the monetary relations of payments between the signatory States, the Executive Council, ex officio or at the request of one of the Parties, will immediately study the problem in collaboration with the Central Banks, in order to recommend to the signatory governments a satisfactory solution compatible with the maintenance of the multilateral free trade regime. ARTICLE XI None of the signatory States will grant, directly or indirectly, subsidies for the export of merchandise destined for the territory of the other States, nor will it establish or maintain systems that result in the sale of certain merchandise, for export to another contracting State, to a price lower than that established for the sale of said merchandise in the national market, duly taking into account the differences in the conditions and terms of sale and taxation, as well as other factors that influence the price comparison. Any practice of fixing or price discrimination existing in one of the signatory States, which results in the establishment of sales prices of certain merchandise in the other contracting States at levels lower than those established, shall be considered as an indirect export subsidy. would result from the normal play of the market in the exporting country. In the event that the importation of products made in a contracting State with raw materials acquired under contempt conditions at artificially low prices, threaten existing production in another signatory State, the Party that considers itself affected will submit the problem to the consideration of the Executive Council. , in order for it to rule on whether an unfair trade practice is in fact being incurred. The Executive Council within the five days following the receipt of the request will rule on the matter or authorize a temporary suspension of free trade, allowing the exchange by providing a bond for the amount of customs duties. Said suspension will be authorized for a period of thirty days, and the Council must issue a final resolution before said period expires. If a ruling is not made within the stipulated five days, the affected Party may demand a bond until the Executive Council makes a definitive decision. Without However, tax exemptions generally granted by one of the signatory States in order to promote production are not considered as export subsidies. Neither will the export subsidy include the exemption from internal production, sale or consumption taxes, which fall on the exporting State on the goods exported to the territory of another State. Normally, the differences resulting from the sale of foreign currency in the free market at a higher exchange rate than the official one will not be considered as an export subsidy; but in case of doubt by one of the contracting States, it shall be submitted to the consideration and opinion of the Executive Council. ARTICLE XII Because it is a practice contrary to the purposes of this Treaty, each of the signatory States shall avoid, by legal means at their disposal, the export of merchandise from said State to the territory of the others at a price lower than their value. normal, in a way that causes or threatens to cause damage to the production of other countries, or that delays the establishment of a national or Central American industry. It will be considered that a merchandise has been exported at a price lower than its normal value, if the price of said merchandise is lower: a) than the comparable price, under normal trade conditions, of a similar merchandise, intended for consumption in the domestic market of the exporting country; or b) than the highest comparable price, for export to a third country, of a similar good, under normal conditions of trade; or c) than the cost of production of that good in the country of origin, plus a reasonable increase for sales and profit expenses. In each case, the existing differences related to the conditions and terms of sale and taxation and other differences that affect the price comparison will be taken into account. ARTICLE XIII If any of the Contracting Parties considers that there are unfair trade practices not included in Article XI, they may not prevent the exchange by unilateral decision, and must submit the problem to the consideration of the Executive Council so that it can rule on whether it is in effect engaging in such practices. The Council will render an opinion within a maximum period of 60 days from the date of receipt of the respective communication. When any of the Parties considers that there is evidence of unfair trade, they will request authorization from the Executive Council to demand a bond for the amount of import taxes. If the Executive Council does not rule within 8 days, the affected Party may demand the bond as long as the Executive Council does not resolve definitively. ARTICLE XIV Once the Executive Council renders an opinion on unfair trade practices, it will communicate to the Contracting Parties whether or not it is appropriate, in accordance with this Agreement, to apply protective measures against such practices. Chapter IV TRANSIT AND TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE XV Each one of the contracting States shall maintain full freedom of transit through its territory for merchandise destined for or coming from any of the other signatory States, as well as for the vehicles that transport such merchandise. Said transit will be made without deductions, discrimination or quantitative restrictions. In the event of cargo congestion or other force majeure, each of the signatory States will equitably attend to the mobilization of merchandise destined to supply its own population and merchandise in transit for the other States. Transit operations will be carried out through the routes legally authorized for this purpose and subject to customs and transit laws and regulations applicable in the territory of passage. Goods in transit will be exempt from all kinds of rights, taxes or fiscal, municipal or other contributions due to transit, whatever their destination, but they may be subject to the payment of the fees normally applicable for the provision of services, which may not in any case exceed their cost in a way that in fact constitutes levies or import taxes. Chapter V CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES ARTICLE XVI The contracting States shall grant the same treatment as national companies, to companies from the other signatory States engaged in the construction of roads, bridges, dams, irrigation systems, electrification, housing and Other works that tend to the development of the Central American economic infrastructure Chapter VI INDUSTRIAL INTEGRATION ARTICLE XVII The Contracting Parties adopt in this Treaty all the provisions of the Agreement on the Regime of Central American Integration Industries, and in order to comply with them as soon as possible, they agree sign, within a maximum period of six months from the date of entry into force of this Treaty, additional protocols that stipulate the industrial plants that will initially be covered by it, the free trade regime that is applicable to them to its products and the other conditions provided for in Article III of said Agreement. Chapter VII CENTRAL AMERICAN BANK FOR ECONOMIC INTEGRATION ARTICLE XVIII The signatory States agree to establish the Central American Bank for Economic Integration, which will have its own legal personality. The Bank will act as an instrument for financing and promoting integrated economic growth based on regional balance. To that end, they will sign the Constitutive Agreement of said institution, which will remain open for signature or accession by any other Central American State that wishes to be a member of the Bank. However, it is established that the members of the Bank may not obtain guarantees or loans from said institution, if they have not previously deposited the instruments of ratification of the following international conventions: This Treaty; Multilateral Treaty of Free Trade and Central American Economic Integration, signed on June 10, 1958; Agreement on the Regime of Central American Integration Industries, signed on July 10, 1958; and Central American Agreement on the Equalization of Import Duties, signed on I. September 1959 and the Protocol signed on the date of signing this Treaty. Chapter VIII FISCAL INCENTIVES FOR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE XIX The contracting States, with a view to establishing uniform fiscal incentives for industrial development, agree to achieve in the shortest possible time a reasonable equalization of the laws and provisions in force on this matter. To this end, they will sign, within a period of six months from the date of entry into force of this Treaty, a special protocol in which the amount and type of exemptions, the terms of the same, the conditions in which they will be granted, the industrial classification systems and the rules and application procedures. Coordination in the application of tax incentives to industrial development will be the responsibility of the Executive Council. Chapter IX ORGANISMS ARTICLE XX To direct the integration of the Central American economies and coordinate the economic policy of the contracting States, the Central American Economic Council is hereby created, made up of the Ministers of Economy of each of the contracting Parties. The Central American Economic Council will meet as many times as necessary or at the request of one of the contracting Parties; it will examine the work carried out by the Executive Council and will take the resolutions it deems pertinent. The Central American Economic Council will be the body in charge of facilitating the execution of the resolutions of the Committee for Economic Cooperation of the Central American Isthmus regarding economic integration. You can take advice from Central American and international technical organizations. ARTICLE XXI In order to apply and administer this Treaty, as well as to carry out all the efforts and work that have the objective of putting into practice the economic union of Central America, an Executive Council is created, made up of an official owner and an alternate designated by each of the Contracting Parties. The Executive Council will meet as many times as necessary, at the request of one of the Contracting Parties or by convocation of the Permanent Secretariat, and its resolutions will be taken by majority vote of the total Council members. In the event that there is no agreement, the Central American Economic Council will be resorted to, so that it reaches a final resolution on the matter. Before deciding on a matter, the Economic Council will unanimously determine if it should be resolved with the concurrent vote of all its members or by simple majority. ARTICLE XXII The Executive Council will dictate the measures that are necessary in order to ensure compliance with the commitments established by means of this Treaty and to resolve the problems that arise due to the application of its provisions. Likewise, it may propose to the Governments the signing of the multilateral agreements that are additionally required to achieve the goals of the economic integration of Central America, including a customs union between its territories. The Executive Council assumes for the Contracting Parties the functions entrusted to the Central American Trade Commission in the Central American Free Trade and Economic Integration Agreement and in the Central American Agreement on the Equalization of Import Duties, as well as those entrusted to the Central American Commission. of Industrial Integration in the Agreement on the Regime of Central American Integration Industries, and the attributions and duties of the mixed commissions of bilateral treaties in force between the contracting Parties. ARTICLE XXIII A Permanent Secretariat is hereby created, with the character of a legal person, which will be a legal entity of the Central American Economic Council and of the Executive Council created by this Treaty. The Secretariat will have its seat and headquarters in Guatemala City, capital of the Republic of Guatemala, and will be in charge of a Secretary General appointed for a period of three years by the Central American Economic Council. The Secretariat will establish the departments and sections that are necessary for the performance of their duties. Its expenses will conform to a general budget approved annually by the Central American Economic Council and each of the Contracting Parties must contribute to its support with a minimum annual sum equivalent to fifty thousand United States dollars (US$ 50,000.00). , payable in the respective currencies of the signatory countries. Officials of the Secretariat shall enjoy diplomatic immunity. Other diplomatic privileges are granted only to the Secretariat and the Secretary General. ARTICLE XXIV The Secretariat shall ensure the correct application between the Contracting Parties of this Agreement, of the Central American Free Trade and Economic Integration Agreement, of the Agreement on the Regime of Central American Integration Industries, of the Central American Agreement on the Equalization of Import Duties, of the bilateral or multilateral free trade and economic integration treaties in force between any of the contracting Parties, and of all other agreements signed or to be signed with the purpose of Central American economic integration and whose interpretation is not specifically entrusted to any other body . The Secretariat will ensure compliance with the resolutions of the Central American Economic Council and the Executive Council created by this Treaty and will also exercise the functions delegated to it by the Executive Council. The regulations governing its functions will be approved by the Economic Council. The Secretariat will also be in charge of carrying out the work and studies entrusted to it by the Executive Council and the Central American Economic Council. In carrying out these functions, it will take advantage of the studies and work carried out by other Central American and international organizations and will proceed, where appropriate, with their collaboration. Chapter X GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE XXV The signatory States agree not to unilaterally sign new treaties with non-Central American countries that affect the principles of Central American economic integration. They also agree to maintain the "Central American Exception Clause" in trade agreements that they celebrate on the basis of the most favored nation treatment with countries other than the contracting States. ARTICLE XXVI The signatory States agree to resolve fraternally within the spirit of this Treaty, and through the Executive Council or the Central American Economic Council, as the case may be, any differences that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of any of its clauses. If they cannot agree, they will settle the dispute by arbitration. To integrate the arbitral tribunal, each of the contracting Parties will propose to the General Secretariat of the Organization of Central American States the names of three magistrates of their respective Supreme Courts of Justice. From the total list of candidates, the Secretary General of the Organization of Central American States and the government representatives before that body will choose, by lot, an arbitrator for each Contracting Party, each of whom must be of a different nationality. The award of the arbitral tribunal will be pronounced with the concurring votes of at least three members, and will cause res judicata effects for all the Contracting Parties regarding any point that is resolved regarding the interpretation or application of the clauses of this Treaty. ARTICLE XXVII This Agreement shall prevail, between the Contracting Parties, over the Multilateral Free Trade Agreement and Central American Economic Integration and on the other free trade instruments signed bilaterally or multilaterally between the Contracting Parties; but it will not affect the validity of said agreements. Among the respective signatory countries, the provisions of the trade and economic integration agreements referred to in the preceding paragraph will be applied in what is not considered in this Treaty. As long as some of the Contracting Parties have not ratified this Treaty or in the case of denunciation by any of them, their commercial relations with the other signatory States will be governed by the commitments previously contracted in the current instruments referred to in the preamble. of this Treaty. ARTICLE XXVIII The Contracting Parties agree to carry out consultations in the Executive Council, prior to the signing between them of new treaties that affect free trade. The Executive Council will analyze the case and determine the effects that the conclusion of said agreements could have on the free trade regime established in this Treaty. Based on the study carried out by the Executive Council, the Party that considers itself affected by the celebration of these new treaties may adopt the measures that the Council recommends in order to safeguard its interests. ARTICLE XXIX For the purposes of customs regulations related to free trade, merchandise transit and the application of the Uniform Central American Import Tariff, the Contracting Parties shall sign within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of the present Treaty, special protocols through which a Central American Uniform Customs Code and the necessary transport regulations are adopted. Chapter XI FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE XXX This Treaty shall be submitted to ratification in each State, in accordance with the respective constitutional or legal norms. The instruments of ratification must be deposited in the General Secretariat of the Organization of Central American States. The Treaty will enter into In force eight days after the date on which the third instrument of ratification is deposited for the first three ratifiers, and for the subsequent one, on the date of deposit of their respective instrument. ARTICLE XXXI The duration of this Treaty will be twenty years counted from the initial date of its validity and will be extended indefinitely. Once the twenty-year term referred to in the preceding paragraph has expired, the Treaty may be denounced by any of the contracting Parties. The denunciation will take effect, for the denouncing State, five years after its presentation, and the Treaty will continue in force among the other contracting States as long as at least two of them remain adhered to it. ARTICLE XXXIII This Treaty remains open to the accession of any Central American State that has not originally signed it. Transitory Article From the moment the Government of the Republic of Costa Rica formally adheres to the stipulations of this Treaty, the organizations created by it will become part of the Organization of Central American States, mediating a binding agreement; and the restructuring of the ODECA that allows the organizations created by this Treaty to preserve all the modalities with which they have been endowed in their structure and operation. IN WITNESS whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Treaty in the city of Managua, capital of the Republic of Nicaragua, on the thirteenth /... day of December, one thousand nine hundred and sixty.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
