MainText:
Partial Scope Agreement signed between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Nicaragua The Plenipotentiaries of the Republic of Colombia and Nicaragua, within the spirit of the Economic and Commercial Cooperation Agreement signed between the two countries and duly authorized by their respective Governments according to powers presented in good and due form, agree to celebrate this Trade Agreement of scope partial that will be governed by the provisions that are established below and that, in the case of Colombia, are based on article 25 of the Treaty of Montevideo 1980. CHAPTER I : Object of the Agreement ARTICLE 1 - The purpose of this Agreement is to strengthen trade by granting tariff and non-tariff preferences that Colombia will grant to Nicaragua, anticipating that in the future Nicaragua may, when conditions permit, grant preferences to Colombia. Henceforth, for the purposes of this Agreement, Colombia and Nicaragua will be called signatory countries. CHAPTER II : Preferences ARTICLE 2 - The signatory countries agree, within the spirit of the previous article, to reduce or eliminate the taxes and other restrictions applied to the import of the products included in this Agreement and its respective Annexes, in the terms, scope and modalities established in them. ARTICLE 3 - For the purposes of this Agreement, "preferences" shall be understood as the advantages that the signatory countries grant themselves in terms of taxes, restrictions and margins of preference on the products that are the object of the Agreement. "Customs duties and any other surcharges of equivalent effect, whether of a fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any nature, that affect imports, shall be understood as "taxes". This concept excludes any similar tax or collection when they are equivalent to the approximate cost of services actually rendered. "Restrictions" shall be understood as any measure of an administrative nature such as quotas, quotas, quotas or licenses, financial, exchange rate, para-tariff or of any nature, through which a signatory country prevents or hinders by unilateral decision, their imports.This concept does not include the measures referred to in Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty. The "margin of preference" shall be understood as the percentage advantage that a signatory country assigns to another signatory country, with respect to the tariffs in force for third countries other than those that may derive from participation in integration agreements. Consequently, this percentage preference margin applied to the tariff for third countries is the one that should be applied in favor of the other signatory country. ARTICLE 4 -In Annex I, which is part of this Agreement, the preferences and other conditions agreed by the signatory countries for the importation of the negotiated products originating from their respective territories are recorded. Likewise, the tariff position and the description of the negotiated products are registered, in accordance with the tariff nomenclatures of the signatory countries and in the case of Colombia that of ALADI, as well as the other agreed conditions. ARTICLE 5 - The signatory countries undertake not to modify the preferences registered in Annex I in such a way that this means a less favorable situation than the one existing at the entry into force of this Agreement. Likewise, the signatory countries undertake not to apply restrictions to the imports of the products included in this Agreement, except those expressly indicated in Annex I or in Article 3, third paragraph of this Agreement. CHAPTER III : Origin ARTICLE 6 - The benefits derived from the preferences agreed in this Agreement will be applied exclusively to products originating in and coming from the territory of the signatory countries in accordance with the rules contained in Annex II of this Agreement. CHAPTER IV : Differential treatment ARTICLE 7 - The tariff preferences granted by Colombia to products originating in and coming from Nicaragua will be extended to the countries with the least relative economic development of the Latin American Integration Association, in accordance with article 25 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty. CHAPTER V : Preservation of preferences ARTICLE 8 - When a signatory country modifies its national tariff, either by increasing or decreasing the tariff rates and thereby violating the agreed margin of preference, the preference will automatically be readjusted in such a way that said margin is preserved. CHAPTER VI : Safeguard clause ARTICLE 9 - The signatory countries of this Agreement may apply, unilaterally, on a transitory basis, restrictions on the imports of the products subject to concessions when they are carried out in conditions and quantities such that they cause or threaten to cause serious damage to certain productive activities of significant importance to the national economy. These restrictions cannot fall on concessions that have less than one year of being in force and application. Said restrictions may not subsist for more than one year, after which, without having solved the problem that caused such application, the signatory countries will proceed to review the respective preference. ARTICLE 10 -The signatory country interested in invoking the safeguard clause must so notify the affected country; the safeguard clause will not apply to products that have been shipped within fifteen days after the date of notification of its application. ARTICLE 11 - Within thirty days of the communication, the signatory countries will carry out negotiations in order to establish a quota that will govern the application of the safeguard clause, in order to preserve an adequate volume of imports of the affected product. ARTICLE 12 -Any of the signatory countries may, prior communication to the other signatory country, apply to the trade of agricultural products included in this Agreement appropriate measures aimed at: a) limit imports to what is necessary to cover deficits in domestic production; and b) level the prices of the imported product with those of the similar national product. CHAPTER VII : Withdrawal of concessions ARTICLE 13 - During the term of this Agreement, the unilateral withdrawal of the agreed concessions shall not proceed. ARTICLE 14 - The exclusion of a concession that may occur as a consequence of the negotiations for the revision of this Agreement does not constitute unilateral withdrawal. It also does not establish the withdrawal of concessions, the elimination of the preferences agreed to term, if the renewal has not been carried out at the expiration of the respective terms of validity. CHAPTER VIII : Accession ARTICLE 15 - This Agreement will be open to the accession of any member country of the Latin American Integration Association, after negotiation. ARTICLE 16 - The accession will be formalized, once the terms of the same have been negotiated between the signatory countries and the aspiring country, through the subscription of an additional instrument to this Agreement, which will enter into force thirty (30) days after the delivery of the authenticated copy thereof to ALADI. For the purposes of this Agreement and of the additional instruments that are signed, the signatory country will be understood as the adherent. CHAPTER IX : Review ARTICLE 17 - The signatory countries may revise this Agreement at any time in order to preserve the trade flows generated by virtue of its application and promote its expansion. For these purposes they may: a) introduce new products; b) withdraw existing products; c) agree on greater preferences for the importation of the negotiated products; d) proceed to the renegotiation of the preferences granted; and e) introduce the necessary modifications to this Agreement. The review referred to in this article and any modification to this Agreement must be formalized by signing an additional instrument to this Agreement. CHAPTER X : Validity ARTICLE 18 - This Agreement is in effect from the date on which the signatory countries communicate that they have complied with the necessary legal requirements, and will have a duration of three (3) years, automatically extendable for equal periods, if the country interested in declaring it terminated does not communicate such intention to the other signatory country ninety (90) days prior to the date on which it expires. CHAPTER XI : Administration of the Agreement ARTICLE 19 - With the purpose of establishing a direct information channel that facilitates the application and better achievement of the objectives of this Agreement, the Governments of the signatory countries will designate an administrative authority to permanently attend to the queries of any of the Parties and administer the provisions of this Agreement. CHAPTER XII : Complaint ARTICLE 20 - Any of the signatory countries of this Agreement may denounce it, after one (1) year has elapsed since its participation in it. For this purpose, the denouncing country must communicate its decision to the other signatory country, at least sixty (60) days in advance. ARTICLE 21 - Once the denunciation is formalized, the rights acquired and the obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country. CHAPTER XIII : Convergence ARTICLE 22 - Colombia undertakes to advance negotiations with the other member countries of ALADI, with the purpose of proceeding to the progressive multilateralization of the benefits derived from this Agreement. CHAPTER XIV : Final provisions ARTICLE 23 - Colombia will inform the Committee of Representatives of the Latin American Integration Association of the progress made in the implementation of this Agreement, as well as of any modification that means a substantial change in its text. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Agreement in the city of Managua, on the second day of March, nineteen eighty-four. (Signed.:) For the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua: Luis Enrique Figueroa; For the Government of the Republic of Colombia: Rodrigo Marín Bernal.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
