MainText:
MOVED by the will to continue the work undertaken on the basis of the Treaties establishing the European Communities and to transform relations as a whole among their States into a European Union , in accordance with the Solemn Declaration of Stuttgart of 19 June 1983 , RESOLVED to implement this European Union on the basis, firstly , of the Communities operating in accordance with their own rules and , secondly , of European Cooperation among the Signatory States in the sphere of foreign policy and to invest this union with the necessary means of action , DETERMINED to work together to promote democracy on the basis of the fundamental rights recognized in the constitutions and laws of the Member States, in the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the European Social Charter, notably freedom , equality and social justice , CONVINCED that the European idea , the results achieved in the fields of economic integration and political cooperation , and the need for new developments correspond to the wishes of the democractic peoples of Europe , for whom the European Parliament , elected by universal suffrage, is an indispensable means of expression , AWARE of the responsibility incumbent upon Europe to aim at speaking ever increasingly with one voice and to act with consistency and solidarity in order more effectively to protect its common interests and independence , in particular to display the principles of democracy and compliance with the law and with human rights to which they are attached , so that together they may make their own contribution to the preservation of international peace and security in accordance with the undertaking entered into by them within the framework of the United Nations Charter, DETERMINED to improve the economic and social situation by extending common policies and pursuing new objectives, and to ensure a smoother functioning of the Communities by enabling the Institutions to exercise their powers under conditions most in keeping with Community interests, WHEREAS at their Conference in Paris from 19 to 21 October 1972 the Heads of State or of Government approved the objective of the progressive realization of Economic and Monetary Union , HAVING REGARD to the Annex to the conclusions of the Presidency of the European Council in Bremen on 6 and 7 July 1978 and the resolution of the European Council in Brussels on 5 December 1978 on the introduction of the European Monetary System ( EMS) and related questions, and noting that in accordance with that Resolution , the Community and the Central Banks of the Member States have taken a number of measures intended to implement monetary cooperation, TITLE I COMMON PROVISIONS ARTICLE 1 The European Communities and European Political Co-operation shall have as their objective to contribute together to making concrete progress towards European unity . The European Communities shall be fou nded on the Treaties establishing the European Coal und Steel Community, the European Economic Community , the European Atomic Energy Community and on the subsequent Treaties and Acts modifying or supplementing them. Political Co-operation shall be governed by Title III . The provisions of that Title shall confirm and supplement the procedures agreed in the reports of Luxembourg ( 1970), Copenhagen ( 1973 ), London ( 1981 ), the Solemn Declaration on European Union ( 1983 ) and the practices gradually established among the Member States. Article 2 The European Council shall bring together the Heads of State or of Government of the Member States and the President of the Commission of the European Communities. They shall be assisted by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and by a Member of the Commission. The European Council shall meet at least twice a year. ARTICLE 2 The European Council shall bring together the Heads of State or of Government of the Member States and the ARTICLE 3 1 . The institutions of the European Communities, henceforth designated as referred to hereafter, shall exercise their powers and jurisdiction under the conditions and for the purposes provided for by the Treaties establishing the Communities and by the subsequent Treaties and Acts modifying or supplementing them and by the provisions of Title II. 2. The institutions and bodies responsible for European Political Co-operation shall exercise their powers and jurisdiction under the conditions and for the purposes laid down in Title III and in the documents referred to in the third paragraph of Article 1 . TITLE II PROVISIONS AMENDING THE TREATIES ESTABLISHING THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES CHAPTER I PROVISIONS AMENDING THE TREATY ESTABLISHING THE EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL COMMUNITY ARTICLE 4 The ECSC Treaty is supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 32d 1 . At the request of the Court of Justice and after consulting the Commission and the European Parliament, the Council may, acting unanimously , attach to the Court of Justice a court with jurisdiction to hear and determine at first instance , subject to a right of appeal to the Court of Justice on points of law only and in accordance with the conditions laid down by the Statute , certain classes of action or proceeding brought by natural or legal persons. That court shall not be competent to hear and determine actions brought by Member States or by Community Institutions or questions referred for a preliminary ruling under Article 41 . 2 . The Council, following the procedure laid down in paragraph 1 , shall determine the composition of that court and adopt the necessary adjustments and additional provisions to the Statute of the Court of Justice . Unless the Council decides otherwise, the provisions of this Treaty relating to the Court of Justice , in particular the provisions of the Protocol on the Statute of the Court of Justice, shall apply to that court. 3 . The members of that court shall be chosen from persons whose independence is beyond doubt and who possess the ability required for appointment to judicial office; they shall be appointed by common accord of the Governments of the Member States for a term of six years. The membership shall be partially renewed every three years. Retiring members shall be eligible for reappointment. 4 . That court shall establish its rules of procedure in agreement with the Court of Justice . Those rules shall require the unanimous approval of the Council .'. ARTICLE 5 Article 45 of the ECSC Treaty is supplemented by the following paragraph : The Council may, acting unanimously at the request of the Court of Justice and after consulting the Commission and the European Parliament, amend the provisions of Title III of the Statute .'. CHAPTER II PROVISIONS AMENDING THE TREATY ESTABLISHING THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY Section I Institutional Provisions ARTICLE 6 1 . A co-operation procedure shall be introduced which shall apply to acts based on Articles 7 , 49 , 54 ( 2 ), 56 ( 2 ), second sentence , 57 with the exception of the second sentence of paragraph 2 thereof, 100a , 100b , 118a , 130e and 130q ( 2) of the EEC Treaty . 2 . In Article 7, second paragraph of the EEC Treaty the terms 'after consulting the Assembly' shall be replaced by 'in co-operation with the European Parliament'. 3 . In Article 49 of the EEC Treaty the terms 'the Council shall , acting on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee', shall be replaced by 'the Council shall , acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission , in co-operation with the European Parliament and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee'. 4 . In Article 54 ( 2 ) of the EEC Treaty the terms 'the Council shall, on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee and the Assembly', shall be replaced by 'the Council shall , acting on a proposal from the Commission , in cooperation with the European Parliament and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee'. 5 . In Article 56 ( 2) of the EEC Treaty the second sentence is replaced by the following: 'After the end of the second stage , however, the Council shall , acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission and in co-operation with the European Parliament, issue directives for the co-ordination of such provisions as, in each Member State , are a matter for regulation or administrative action.'. 6 . In Article 57 ( 1 ) of the EEC Treaty the terms 'and after consulting the Assembly' shall be replaced by 'and in co-operation with the European Parliament'. 7 . In Article 57 ( 2 ) of the EEC Treaty, the third sentence shall be replaced by the following: 'In other cases the Council shall act by a qualified majority, in co-operation with the European Parliament.'. ARTICLE 7 Article 149 of the EEC Treaty shall be replaced by the following provisions: 'Article 149 1 . Where , in pursuance of this Treaty, the Council acts on a proposal from the Commission , unanimity shall be required for an act constituting an amendment to that proposal. 2 . Where , in pursuance of this Treaty, the Council acts in co-operation with the European Parliament, the following procedure shall apply: ( a ) The Council , acting by a qualified majority under the conditions of paragraph 1 , on a proposal from the Commission and after obtaining the Opinion of the European Parliament, shall adopt a common position. ( b ) The Council's common position shall be communicated to the European Parliament. The Council and the Commission shall inform the European Parliament fully of the reasons which led the Council to adopt its common position and also of the Commission's position . If, within three months of such communication, the European Parliament approves this common position or has not taken a decision within that period , the Council shall definitively adopt the act in question in accordance with the common position . ( c ) The European Parliament may within the period of three months referred to in point (b), by an absolute majority of its component members, propose amendments to the Council's common position. The European Parliament may also, by the same majority, reject the Council's common position. The result of the proceedings shall be transmitted to the Council and the Commission. If the European Parliament has rejected the Council's common position , unanimity shall be required for the Council to act on a second reading. (d ) The Commission shall , within a period of one month , re-examine the proposal on the basis of which the Council adopted its common position , by taking into account the amendments proposed by the European Parliament . The Commission shall forward to the Council , at the same time as its re-examined proposal , the amendments of the European Parliament which it has not accepted , and shall express its opinion on them. The Council may adopt these amendments unanimously . ( e ) The Council, acting by a qualified majority, shall adopt the proposal as re-examined by the Commission . Unanimity shall be required for the Council to amend the proposal as re-examined by the Commission . ( f) In the cases referred to in points ( c ), ( d ) and ( e ), the Council shall be required to act within a period of three months. If no decision is taken within this period , the Commission proposal shall be deemed not to have been adopted . ( g) The periods referred to in points ( b ) and ( f) may be extended by a maximum of one month by common accord between the Council and the European Parliament. As long as the Council has not acted , the Commission may alter its proposal at any time during the procedures mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 .'. ARTICLE 8 The first paragraph of Article 237 of the EEC Treaty shall be replaced by the following provision : 'Any European State may apply to become a member of the Community . It shall address its application to the Council , which shall act unanimously after consulting the Commission and after receiving the assent of the European Parliament which shall act by an absolute majority of its component members.'. ARTICLE 9 The second paragraph of Article 238 of the EEC Treaty shall be replaced by the following provision: 'These agreements shall be concluded by the Council, acting unanimously and after receiving the assent of the European Parliament which shall act by an absolute majority of its component members.'. ARTICLE 10 Article 145 of the EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provision: '— confer on the Commission , in the acts which the Council adopts, powers for the implementation of the rules which the Council lays down. The Council may impose certain requirements in respect of the exercise of these powers. The Council may also reserve the right, in specific cases, to exercise directly implementing powers itself. The procedures referred to above must be consonant with principles and rules to be laid down in advance by the Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after obtaining the Opinion of the European Parliament.'. ARTICLE 11 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 168a 1 . At the request of the Court of Justice and after consulting the Commission and the European Parliament, the Council may, acting unanimously, attach to the Court of Justice a court with jurisdiction to hear and determine at first instance, subject to a right of appeal to the Court of Justice on points of law only and in accordance with the conditions laid down by the Statute, certain classes of action or proceeding brought by natural or legal persons. That court shall not be competent to hear and determine actions brought by Member States or by Community Institutions or questions referred for a preliminary ruling under Article 177 . 2 . The Council, following the procedure laid down in paragraph 1 , shall determine the composition of that court and adopt the necessary adjustments and additional provisions to the Statute of the Court of Justice . Unless the Council decides otherwise , the provisions of this Treaty relating to the Court of Justice , in particular the provisions of the Protocol on the Statute of the Court of Justice , shall apply to that court. 3 . The members of that court shall be chosen from persons whose independence is beyond doubt and who possess the ability required for appointment to judicial office ; they shall be appointed by common accord of the Governments of the Member States for a term of six years. The membership shall be partially renewed every three years. Retiring members shall be eligible for reappointment. 4 . That court shall establish its rules of procedure in agreement with the Court of Justice . Those rules shall require the unanimous approval of the Council.'. ARTICLE 12 A second paragraph worded as follows shall be inserted in Article 188 of the EEC Treaty : 'The Council may , acting unanimously at the request of the Court of Justice and after consulting the Commission and the European Parliament, amend the provisions of Title III of the Statute .'. Section II Provisions relating to the foundations and the policy of the Community Sub-section I — Internal market ARTICLE 13 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 8a The Community shall adopt measures with the aim of progressively establishing the internal market over a period expiring on 31 December 1992 , in accordance with the provisions of this Article and of Articles 8b , 8c , 28 , 57 ( 2 ), 59 , 70 ( 1 ), 84 , 99 , 100a and 100b and without prejudice to the other provisions of this Treaty. The internal market shall comprise an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital is ensured in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty .'. ARTICLE 14 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 8b The Commission shall report to the Council before 31 December 1988 and again before 31 December 1990 on the progress made towards achieving the internal market within the time limit fixed in Article 8a . The Council , acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission , shall determine the guidelines and conditions necessary to ensure balanced progress in all the sectors concerned .'. ARTICLE 15 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: Article 8c When drawing up its proposals with a view to achieving the objectives set out in Article 8a , the Commission shall take into account the extent of the effort that certain economies showing differences in development will have to sustain during the period of establishment of the internal market and it may propose appropriate provisions. If these provisions take the form of derogations, they must be of a temporary nature and must cause the least possible disturbance to the functioning of the common market.'. ARTICLE 16 1 . Article 28 of the EEC Treaty shall be replaced by the following provisions: 'Article 28 Any autonomous alteration or suspension of duties in the common customs tariff shall be decided by the Council acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission .'. 2 . In Article 57 ( 2 ) of the EEC Treaty , the second sentence shall be replaced by the following: 'Unanimity shall be required for directives the implementation of which involves in at least one Member State amendment of the existing principles laid down by law governing the professions with respect to training and conditions of access for natural persons.'. 3 . In the second paragraph of Article 59 of the EEC Treaty, 'unanimously' shall be replaced by 'by a qualified majority'. 4 . In Article 70(1 ) of the EEC Treaty , the last two sentences shall be replaced by the following: 'For this purpose the Council shall issue directives, acting by a qualified majority . It shall endeavour to attain the highest possible degree of liberalization . Unanimity shall be required for measures which constitute a step back as regards the liberalization of capital movements.'. 5 . In Article 84 ( 2) of the EEC Treaty, the term 'unanimously' shall be replaced by 'by a qualified majority'. 6 . Article 84 ( 2) of the EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following paragraph : 'The procedural provisions of Article 75 ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) shall apply.'. ARTICLE 17 Article 99 of the EEC Treaty shall be replaced by the following provisions: Article 99 The Council shall, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament, adopt provisions for the harmonization of legislation concerning turnover taxes, excise duties and other forms of indirect taxation to the extent that such harmonization is necessary to ensure the establishment and the functioning of the internal market within the time limit laid down in Article 8a .'. ARTICLE 18 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 100a 1 . By way of derogation from Article 100 and save where otherwise provided in this Treaty, the following provisions shall apply for the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 8a . The Council shall , acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission in co-operation with the European Parliament and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee , adopt the measures for the approximation of the provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States which have as their object the establishment and functioning of the internal market. 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to fiscal provisions, to those relating to the free movement of persons nor to those relating to the rights and interests of employed persons. 3 . The Commission , in its proposals envisaged in paragraph 1 concerning health , safety , environmental protection and consumer protection , will take as a base a high level of protection . 4 . If, after the adoption of a harmonization measure by the Council acting by a qualified majority , a Member State deems it necessary to apply national provisions on grounds of major needs referred to in Article 36 , or relating to protection of the environment or the working environment, it shall notify the Commission of these provisions. The Commission shall confirm the provisions involved after having verified that they are not a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States. By way of derogation from the procedure laid down in Articles 169 and J 70 , the Commission or any Member State may bring the matter directly before the Court of Justice if it considers that another Member State is making improper use of the powers provided for in this Article. 5 . The harmonization measures referred to above shall , in appropriate cases, include a safeguard clause authorizing the Member States to take, for one or more of the non-economic reasons referred to in Article 36 , provisional measures subject to a Community control procedure.'. ARTICLE 19 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 100b 1 . During 1992 , the Commission shall , together with each Member State , draw up an inventory of national laws, regulations and administrative provisions which fall under Article 100a and which have not been harmonized pursuant to that Article . The Council, acting in accordance with the provisions of Article 100a , may decide that the provisions in force in a Member State must be recognized as being equivalent to those applied by another Member State . 2 . The provisions of Article 100a (4) shall apply by analogy. 3 . The Commission shall draw up the inventory referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 and shall submit appropriate proposals in good time to allow the Council to act before the end of 1992.'. Sub-section II — Monetary capacity ARTICLE 20 1 . A new Chapter 1 shall be inserted in Part Three, Title II of the EEC Treaty reading as follows: 'CHAPTER 1 CO-OPERATION IN ECONOMIC AND MONETARY POLICY (ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION) Article 102a 1 . In order to ensure the convergence of economic and monetary policies which is necessary for the further development of the Community, Member States shall co-operate in accordance with the objectives of Article 104 . In so doing, they shall take account of the experience acquired in co-operation within the framework of the European Monetary System (EMS) and in developing the ECU, and shall respect existing powers in this field . 2 . In so far as further development in the field of economic and monetary policy necessitates institutional changes, the provisions of Article 236 shall be applicable . The Monetary Committee and the Committee of Governors of the Central Banks shall also be consulted regarding institutional changes in the monetary area .'. 2. Chapters 1 , 2 and 3 shall become Chapters 2 , 3 and 4 respectively. Sub-section III — Social policy ARTICLE 21 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 118a 1 . Member States shall pay particular attention to encouraging improvements, especially in the working environment, as regards the health and safety of workers, and shall set as their objective the harmonization of condition in this area , while maintaining the improvements made . 2 . In order to help achieve the objective laid down in the first paragraph , the Council , acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission , in co-operation with the European Parliament and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee , shall adopt, by means of directives, minimum requirements for gradual implementation , having regard to the conditions and technical rules obtaining in each of the Member States. Such directives shall avoid imposing administrative , financial and legal constraints in a way which would hold back the creation and development of small and medium-sized untertakings. 3 . The provisions adopted pursuant to this Article shall not prevent any Member State from maintaining or introducing more stringent measures for the protection of working conditions compatible with this Treaty.'. ARTICLE 22 The EEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provision: 'Article 118b The Commission shall endeavour to develop the dialogue between management and labour at European level which could, if the two sides consider it desirable , lead to relations based on agreement.'. Sub-section IV — Economic and social cohesion ARTICLE 23 A Title V shall be added to Part Three of the EEC Treaty reading as follows: 'TITLE V ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COHESION Article 130a In order to promote its overall harmonious development, the Community shall develop and pursue its actions leading to the strengthening of its economic and social cohesion . In particular the Community shall aim at reducing disparities between the various regions and the backwardness of the least-favoured regions. Article 130b Member States shall conduct their economic policies, and shall coordinate them, in such a way as, in addition, to attain the objectives set out in Article 130a . The implementation of the common policies and of the internal market shall take into account the objectives set out in Article 130a and in Article 130c and shall contribute to their achievement. The Community shall support the achievement of these objectives by the action it takes through the structural Funds (European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, Guidance Section, European Social Fund , European Regional Development Fund ), the European Investment Bank and the other existing financial instruments. Article 130c The European Regional Development Fund is intended to help redress the principal regional imbalances in the Community through participating in the development and structural adjustment of regions whose development is lagging behind and in the conversion of declining industrial regions. Article 130a Once the Single European Act enters into force the Commission shall submit a comprehensive proposal to the Council, the purpose of which will be to make such amendments to the structure and operational rules of the existing structural Funds ( European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund , Guidance Section , European Social Fund , European Regional Development Fund ) as are necessary to clarify and rationalize their tasks in order to contribute to the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 130a and Article 130c , to increase their efficiency and to coordinate their activities between themselves and with the operations of the existing financial instruments. The Council shall act unanimously on this proposal within a period of one year, after consulting the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee Article 130e After adoption of the decision referred to in Article 130d , implementing decisions relating to the European Regional Development Fund shall be taken by the Council , acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission and in co-operation with the European Parliament. With regard to the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund , Guidance Section and the European Social Fund , Articles 43 , 126 and 127 remain applicable respectively .'. Sub-section V — Research and technological development ARTICLE 24 A Title VI shall be added to Part Three of the EEC Treaty reading as follows: TITLE VI RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT Article 13 Of 1 . The Community's aim shall be to strengthen the scientific and technological basis of European industry and to encourage it to become more competitive at international level . 2 . In order to achieve this, it shall encourage undertakings including small and medium-sized undertakings, research centres and universities in their research and technological development activities; it shall support their efforts to co-operate with one another, aiming, notably , at enabling undertakings to exploit the Community's internal market potential to the full , in particular through the opening up of national public contracts, the definition of common standards and the removal of legal and fiscal barriers to that co-operation. 3 . In the achievement of these aims, special account shall be taken of the connection between the common research and technological development effort, the establishment of the internal market and the implementation of common policies, particularly as regards competition and trade. Article 130g In pursuing these objectives the Community shall carry out the following activities, complementing the activities carried out in the Member States: ( a ) implementation of research , technological development and demonstration programmes, by promoting co-operation with undertakings, research centres and universities; ( b ) promotion of co-operation in the field of Community research , technological development, and demonstration with third countries and international organizations; ( c) dissemination and optimization of the results of activities in Community research , technological development, and demonstration; ( d) stimulation of the training and mobility of researchers in the Community .Article 130h Member States shall , in liaison with the Commission, co-ordinate among themselves the policies and programmes carried out at national level . In close contact with the Member States, the Commission may take any useful initiative to promote such co-ordination . Article 130i 1 . The Community shall adopt a multiannual framework programme setting out all its activities. The framework programme shall lay down the scientific and technical objectives, define their respective priorities, set out the main lines of the activities envisaged and fix the amount deemed necessary, the detailed rules for financial participation by the Community in the programme as a whole and the breakdown of this amount between the various activities envisaged. 2 . The framework programme may be adapted or supplemented , as the situation changes. Article 130k The framework programme shall be implemented through specific programmes developed within each activity . Each specific programme shall define the detailed rules for implementing it, fix its duration and provide for the means deemed necessary . The Council shall define the detailed arrangements for the dissemination of knowledge resulting from the specific programmes. Article 1301 In implementing the multiannual framework programme, supplementary programmes may be decided on involving the participation of certain Member States only , which shall finance them subject to possible Community participation . The Council shall adopt the rules applicable to supplementary programmes, particularly as regards the dissemination of knowledge and the access of other Member States. Article 130m In implementing the multiannual framework programme , the Community may make provision , with the agreement of the Member States concerned , for participation in research and development programmes undertaken by several Member States, including participation in the structures created for the execution of those programmes. Article 130n In implementing the multiannual framework programme , the Community may make provision for co-operation in Community research , technological development and demonstration with third countries or international organizations. The detailed arrangements for such co-operation may be the subject of international agreements between the Community and the third parties concerned which shall be negotiated and concluded in accordance with Article 228 . Article 130o The Community may set up joint undertakings or any other structure necessary for the efficient execution of programmes of Community research , technological development and demonstration . Article 130p 1 . The detailed arrangements for financing each programme , including any Community contribution , shall be established at the time of the adoption of the programme. 2 . The amount of the Community's annual contribution shall be laid down under the budgetary procedure , without prejudice to other possible methods of Community financing. The estimated cost of the specific programmes must not in aggregate exceed the financial provision in the framework programme . Article I30q 1 . The Council shall, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee , adopt the provisions referred to in Articles 130i and 130o. 2 . The Council shall , acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission , after consulting the Economic and Social Committee , and in co-operation with the European Parliament, adopt the provisions referred to in Articles 130k, 1301 , 130m, 130n and 13Op ( 1 ). The adoption of these supplementary programmes shall also require the agreement of the Member States concerned .'. Sub-section VI — Environment ARTICLE 25 A Title VII shall be added to Part Three of the EEC Treaty reading as follows: 'TITLE VII ENVIRONMENT Article 130r 1 . Action by the Community relating to the environment shall have the following objectives: — to preserve , protect and improve the quality of the environment, — to contribute towards protecting human health , — to ensure a prudent and rational utilization of natural resources. 2 . Action by the Community relating to the environment shall be based on the principles that preventive action should be taken , that environmental damage should as a priority be rectified at source , and that the polluter should pay. Environmental protection requirements shall be a component of the Community's other policies. 3 . In preparing its action relating to the environment, the Community shall take account of: available scientific and technical data , — environmental conditions in the various regions of the Community , — the potential benefits and costs of action or of lack of action , — the economic and social development of the Community as a whole and the balanced development of its regions. 4 . The Community shall take action relating to the environment to the extent to which the objectives referred to in paragraph 1 can be attained better at Community level than at the level of the individual Member States. Without prejudice to certain measures of a Community nature , the Member States shall finance and implement the other measures. 5 . Within their respective spheres of competence , the Community and the Member States shall co-operate with third countries and with the relevant international organizations. The arrangements for Community co-operation may be the subject of agreements between the Community and the third parties concerned , which shall be negotiated and concluded in accordance with Article 228 . The previous paragraph shall be without prejudice to Member States' competence to negotiate in international bodies and to conclude international agreements. Article 130s The Council , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee , shall decide what action is to be taken by the Community. The Council shall , under the conditions laid down in the preceding subparagraph , define those matters on which decisions are to be taken by a qualified majority . Article 130t The protective measures adopted in common pursuant to Article 130s shall not prevent any Member State from maintaining or introducing more stringent protective measures compatible with this Treaty.'. CHAPTER III PROVISIONS AMENDING THE TREATY ESTABLISHING THE EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY ARTICLE 26 The EAEC Treaty shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 'Article 140a 1 . At the request of the Court of Justice and after consulting the Commission and the European Parliament, the Council may, acting unanimously, attach to the Court of Justice a court with jurisdiction to hear and determine at first instance , subject to a right of appeal to the Court of Justice on points of law only and in accordance with the conditions laid down by the Statute , certain classes of action or proceeding brought by natural or legal persons. That court shall not be competent to hear and determine actions brought by Member States or by Community Institutions or questions referred for a preliminary ruling under Article 150 . 2 . The Council, following the procedure laid down in paragraph 1 , shall determine the composition of that court and adopt the necessary adjustments and additional provisions to the Statute of the Court of Justice . Unless the Council decides otherwise, the provisions of this Treaty relating to the Court of Justice, in particular the provisions of the Protocol on the Statute of the Court of Justice , shall apply to that court. 3 . The members of that court shall be chosen from persons whose independence is beyond doubt and who possess the ability required for appointment to judicial office ; they shall be appointed by common accord of the Governments of the Member States for a term of six years. The membership shall be partially renewed every three years. Retiring members shall be eligible for reappointment. 4 . That court shall establish its rules of procedure in agreement with the Court of Justice . Those rules shall require the unanimous approval of the Council.'. ARTICLE 27 A second paragraph shall be inserted in Article 160 of the EAEC Treaty worded as follows: 'The Council may, acting unanimously at the request of the Court of Justice and after consulting the Commission and the European Parliament, amend the provisions of Title III of the Statute .'. CHAPTER IV GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 28 The provisions of this Act shall be without prejudice to the provisions of the Instruments of Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic to the European Communities. ARTICLE 29 In Article 4 ( 2 ) of Council Decision 85 / 257 / EEC, Euratom of 7 May 1985 on the Communities' system of own resources, the words 'the level and scale of funding of which will be fixed pursuant to a decision of the Council acting unanimously' shall be replaced by the words 'the level and scale of funding of which shall be fixed pursuant to a decision of the Council acting by a qualified majority after obtaining the agreement of the Member States concerned'. This amendment shall not affect the legal nature of the aforementioned Decision . TITLE III TREATY PROVISIONS ON EUROPEAN CO-OPERATION IN THE SPHERE OF FOREIGN POLICY ARTICLE 30 European Co-operation in the sphere of foreign policy shall be governed by the following provisions: 1 . The High Contracting Parties, being members of the European Communities, shall endeavour jointly to formulate and implement a European foreign policy . 2 . ( a) The High Contracting Parties undertake to inform and consult each other on any foreign policy matters of general interest so as to ensure that their combined influence is exercised as effectively as possible through co-ordination , the convergence of their positions and the implementation of joint action . b ) Consultations shall take place before the High Contracting Parties decide on their final position . ( c ) In adopting its positions and in its national measures each High Contracting Party shall take full account of the positions of the other partners and shall give due consideration to the desirability of adopting and implementing common European positions. In order to increase their capacity for joint action in the foreign policy field , the High Contracting Parties shall ensure that common principles and objectives are gradually developed and defined . The determination of common positions shall constitute a point of reference for the policies of the High Contracting Parties. ( d) The High Contracting Parties shall endeavour to avoid any action or position which impairs their effectiveness as a cohesive force in international relations or within international organizations. 3 . ( a ) The Ministers for Foreign Affairs and a member of the Commission shall meet at least four times a year within the framework of European Political Co-operation . They may also discuss foreign policy matters within the framework of Political Co-operation on the occasion of meetings of the Council of the European Communities. (b) The Commission shall be fully associated with the proceedings of Political Co-operation. ( c ) In order to ensure the swift adoption of common positions and the implementation of joint action, the High Contracting Parties shall, as far as possible , refrain from impeding the formation of a consensus and the joint action which this could produce. 4 . The High Contracting Parties shall ensure that the European Parliament is closely associated with European Political Co-operation . To that end the Presidency shall regularly inform the European Parliament of the foreign policy issues which are being examined within the framework of Political Co-operation and shall ensure that the views of the European Parliament are duly taken into consideration .5 . The external policies of the European Community and the policies agreed in European Political Co-operation must be consistent. The Presidency and the Commission, each within its own sphere of competence , shall have special responsibility for ensuring that such consistency is sought and maintained. 6 . ( a ) The High Contracting Parties consider that closer co-operation on questions of European security would contribute in an essential way to the development of a European identity in external policy matters. They are ready to co-ordinate their positions more closely on the political and economic aspects of security . ( b) The High Contracting Parties are determined to maintain the technological and industrial conditions necessary for their security . They shall work to that end both at national level and , where appropriate , within the framework of the competent institutions and bodies. ( c) Nothing in this Title shall impede closer co-operation in the field of security between certain of the High Contracting Parties within the framework of the Western European Union or the Atlantic Alliance . 7 . ( a ) In international institutions and at international conferences which they attend , the High Contracting Parties shall endeavour to adopt common positions on the subjects covered by this Title . ( b ) In international institutions and at international conferences in which not all the High Contracting Parties participate , those who do participate shall take full account of positions agreed in European Political Co-operation . 8 . The High Contracting Parties shall organize a political dialogue with third countries and regional groupings whenever they deem it necessary .9 . The High Contracting Parties and the Commission , through mutual assistance and information , shall intensify co-operation between their representations accredited to third countries and to international organizations. 10 . ( a ) The Presidency of European Political Co-operation shall be held by the High Contracting Party which holds the Presidency of the Council of the European Communities. ( b ) The Presidency shall be responsible for initiating action and coordinating and representing the positions of the Member States in relations with third countries in respect of European Political Co-operation activities. It shall also be responsible for the management of Political Co-operation and in particular for drawing up the timetable of meetings and for convening and organizing meetings. ( c) The Political Directors shall meet regularly in the Political Committee in order to give the necessary impetus, maintain the continuity of European Political Co-operation and prepare Ministers' discussions. ( d) The Political Committee or, if necessary , a ministerial meeting shall convene within 48 hours . at the request of at least three Member States. ( e ) The European Correspondents' Group shall be responsible , under the direction of the Political Committee , for monitoring the implementation of European Political Co-operation and for studying general organizational problems. ( f) Working groups shall meet as directed by the Political Committee . ( g) A Secretariat based in Brussels shall assist the Presidency in preparing and implementing the activities of European Political Co-operation and in administrative matters. It shall carry out its duties under the authority of the Presidency. 11 . As regards privileges and immunities, the members of the European Political Cooperation Secretariat shall be treated in the same way as members of the diplomatic missions of the High Contracting Parties based in the same place as the Secretariat. 12 . Five years after the entry into force of this Act the High Contracting Parties shall examine whether any revision of Title III is required. TITLE V GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 31 The provisions of the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community , the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community and the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community concerning the powers of the Court of Justice of the European Communities and the exercise of those powers shall apply only to the provisions of Title II and to Article 32; they shall apply to those provisions under the same conditions as for the provisions of the said Treaties. ARTICLE 32 Subject to Article 3 ( 1 ), to Title II and to Article 31 , nothing in this Act shall affect the Treaties establishing the European Communities or any subsequent Treaties and Acts modifying or supplementing them. ARTICLE 33 1 . This Act will be ratified by the High Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements. The instruments of ratification will be deposited with the Government of the Italian Republic. 2 . This Act will enter into force on the first day of the month following that in which the instrument of ratification is deposited of the last Signatory State to fulfil that formality . ARTICLE 34 This Act, drawn up in a single original in the Danish, Dutch , English , French , German, Greek, Irish , Italian, Portuguese and Spanish languages, the texts in each of these languages being equally authentic, will be deposited in the archives of the Government of the Italian Republic, which will remit a certified copy to each of the Governments of the other Signatory States.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX tes ol1 ANNEX n 69/ ANNEX 1 s ingleeuropeanact 2nol 169/ o ANNEX ff ANNEX ic ANNEX ia ANNEX ljou ANNEX rnlo ANNEX a rop ANNEX ftheeu e i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies 29.6.87 h is ma jesty thek ing of thebelg ians, her ma jesty thequeen of denmark, thepres identof thefederalrepubl ANNEX ic of germany, thepres identof thehellen ic republ ANNEX ic, h is ma jesty thek ing of spa in, thepres identof thefrenchrepubl ANNEX ic, thepres identof ireland , thepres identof theital ianrepubl ANNEX ic, h is royal h ighness thegrand duke of luxembourg, her ma jesty thequeen of thenetherlands, thepres identof theportugueserepubl ANNEX ic, her ma jesty thequeen of theun ANNEX ited k ANNEX ingdom of great br ANNEX ita ANNEX inand northern ireland , moved byth ew il tocon l tinuethework und ANNEX ert ANNEX akenonth ebas ANNEX isofth ANNEX etr ANNEX eai ANNEX tesesab ANNEX t l ANNEX ish ANNEX ingtheeuropean communi tie sandtotrans formrela ANNEX tion ANNEX sasawhole amongtheirs ANNEX tate ANNEX sin ANNEX toaeurop ANNEX eanunion,inaccord ANNEX an c ANNEX e wi th th esolemnde cla rat ion ofstu ANNEX ttga ANNEX rtof19jun e1983, resolved toimp lemen tth iseurope ANNEX an un ion on thebas ANNEX is, f ANNEX irs ANNEX tly,o ANNEX fth ecommunit ANNEX ies ope ANNEX rat ANNEX ingin acco rdan cewi th thei rownrul esand,second ANNEX ly,ofeuropeancooperat ANNEX ion amongth es ANNEX ign ANNEX ato ANNEX rys t ANNEX ate ANNEX sinthe sphe reoffo reignpo li cyandtoinv ANNEX estth ANNEX isunionwith th ANNEX en e ANNEX ces ANNEX sarymeansofaction, determ ined towo rktoge thertop t ANNEX romoed emocr ANNEX acyonth ebai ANNEX ssofthefundam en ANNEX ta ANNEX lrigh ANNEX tsre ANNEX cogniz ANNEX edin thecon sti tut ion sandlaw softhememb ersta ANNEX tes,intheconv ANNEX ention fo ANNEX rthepro ANNEX tec ANNEX tiono fhuman r ANNEX ight ANNEX sand fundamen talfre edom sandtheeurop ANNEX e ansoc ANNEX ialchar ANNEX ter,not ANNEX ablyfreedom,equ ANNEX ali ANNEX tyandsocia ANNEX ljus ANNEX tice ANNEX , conv incedth a ttheeuropeanidea,theresul ANNEX tsach ANNEX ievedinthef ANNEX ie so ANNEX ld feconomi ANNEX cintega ANNEX rtionandpol ANNEX it ANNEX ica ANNEX l coope rat ion, andtheneedfornewd eve ANNEX lopm en ANNEX tscorre ANNEX spondtoth ewishe ANNEX so fthed ANNEX emo crac ANNEX ticpeopl ANNEX esof europ e,forwhom th eeu rop ANNEX e an p ANNEX arl ANNEX iament, e ANNEX lec ANNEX tedby univr ANNEX esa ANNEX lsu ff ANNEX rage,isanindispensab ANNEX lemeansof e xpr ess ion, aware o fther espon s ib il ityincumb entuponeu ropetoa ima tsp eakingeve ANNEX rin cr ANNEX eas ANNEX inglyw ANNEX ith onevoi ANNEX ceand toa ctwith con sis tency and solidar ANNEX ity ino rde ANNEX r more effect ANNEX ively top rot ANNEX e c ANNEX ti tscommon in te ANNEX res ANNEX tsand independenc e,inpar ticula rtod isplayth eprinc ANNEX ipe ANNEX lsofd emo cracyandcomp i ANNEX lancewth th ANNEX i el awandw i ANNEX th hum anright stowhich th eyarea t ANNEX tach ed, soth a ANNEX ttogethe ANNEX rth eym ay make th e ANNEX irowncon t ANNEX ribut ANNEX iontoth e pre servat ionofintrn e a tion a lpea ANNEX c eands e cu ANNEX ri ANNEX tyina cco ANNEX rdancewithth eundet ANNEX rakingente ANNEX redintobythemwith ANNEX in theframew o rkoftheun i ted na ANNEX tionsc harte ANNEX r, determ inedtoimprovethee ANNEX conomcandso ANNEX i c ANNEX ials ANNEX itut ANNEX aionbyex ANNEX tendingcommonpol ANNEX ici ANNEX esandpursu ANNEX ingnew ob jet civ es,andtoen sueasmoo r the ANNEX rfuncion ANNEX t ingofthecommunit ANNEX iesbyen ab ANNEX lingth ANNEX einsttu ANNEX i t ANNEX ion ANNEX stoexer ANNEX cis ANNEX e the irpower sunde rcondi tion smos e ANNEX t inkep ANNEX ingwi ANNEX th commun i ANNEX tyinte ANNEX rests ANNEX , whereas a tth eircon fer enc einp ari ANNEX sfrom19to21o ANNEX ctob ANNEX er1972th ANNEX ehe ANNEX adso ANNEX fst ANNEX ateo ANNEX rofgov ANNEX ernm ANNEX ent app rov edth j eobec tiv eofth eprog res ANNEX s er ANNEX iv a ANNEX el ANNEX iza ANNEX t fe ANNEX iono conom ANNEX icandmon ANNEX eta ANNEX ry un ANNEX ion, having regardtoth eannextoth econ ANNEX c s ANNEX luion ANNEX softh ANNEX epres ANNEX idencyo ANNEX fth eeuropeancoun ANNEX cilinbremenon6 and7 july 1978 andther e ANNEX solu ANNEX tiono fthee u ANNEX rope ANNEX an coun ANNEX cil inbrusse ANNEX ls on 5 d ANNEX ecember 1978 onthe int rodu ct i onoftheeurop e anmonetary syt ANNEX sem(ems)andr e ANNEX latedqu ANNEX e s ANNEX tions,andnot ANNEX ingt a ANNEX htina co ANNEX c rd ANNEX anc ANNEX e 29. 6. 87 o ff ic ljou ANNEX rn ANNEX ia lo ANNEX a eeu ANNEX rop ANNEX fth eancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies ol1 ANNEX n 69/ ANNEX 3 i wth tha so tre lu tion,thecommun ANNEX ity andthecen ANNEX tra ANNEX lbanks o ANNEX fthemembe ANNEX rsta ANNEX teshavetakenanumbe ANNEX rof m easu resin tend edtoimp lem entmon ANNEX eta ANNEX rycoop ANNEX era ANNEX tion, ided toadop have dec tth isac ANNEX t andtoth ANNEX isendhaved ANNEX esign ANNEX ateda e ANNEX sthirp ANNEX len ANNEX ipo ANNEX t t ANNEX enia ANNEX rie ANNEX s: h is ma jesty thek ing of thebelg ANNEX ians: m rleot indemans, m ini ste rfo rex tern alr ela tion s her ma jesty thequeen of denmark: m ru ffe ellemann-jensen, m ini ster fo rfor eigna ffa irs thepres identof thefederalrepubl ANNEX ic of germany: rh m an s i -det rich genscher, ed f e ralm ini stro e ffo reigna ffa ANNEX ir ANNEX s thepres identof thehellen ANNEX ic republ ANNEX ic: m rka rolo s papoul ias, in m i ste r fo r rfoeigna ffa irs h is ma jesty thek ing of spa ANNEX in: m rf ranc iscofernandezordonez, m ini ste r forfor eigna ffa irs thepres identof thefrenchrepubl ANNEX ic: m rro landdumas, m ini ste rfo rex tern alr ela tion s thepres identof ireland : m rpe terbarry,t .d., in m i ste r fo r rfoeigna ffa ir s thepres identof theital ianrepubl ANNEX ic: rg m il uio andreott i, in m i ste r fo r rfoeigna ffa irs h is royalh ighness thegrand duke of luxembourg: m rrob ertgoebbels, t sat esc ere tary,m ini stry fo rfo ANNEX re f ANNEX ignafa ANNEX ir ANNEX s her ma jesty the queen of thenetherlands: rh m asv n and enbroek, in m i ste r fo r rfoeigna ffa irs thepres identof theportugueserepubl ANNEX ic: m rp edrop iresde miranda, m ini ste r fo rfor eigna ffa ir s her ma jesty thequeen of theun ANNEX ited k ANNEX ingdom of great br ANNEX ita ANNEX inand northern ireland : m rs lynd achalker, m ini stro e fs ta tefo r rfoeignandcommonw ANNEX eal f ANNEX thafa ANNEX irs who,h avingex chang edth eirfu llpow ANNEX ers,foundingoodanddu ANNEX efo ANNEX rm: ol 1n 6 4 9/ o ff ic ljou ANNEX ia rna ANNEX lofth ANNEX eeu e ANNEX rop i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies 29.6.87 ANNEX t ANNEX itlei ANNEX commonprov ANNEX isions a ri tce 1 l pr ANNEX esiden ANNEX t o f th e commis ANNEX sion o f the european ANNEX communitie ANNEX s. theysha ANNEX llbeas ANNEX sis ANNEX tedbythem ANNEX ini ANNEX ster ANNEX s forthe eu ropean communit ies and eu rop ANNEX e l ANNEX an pot ANNEX iicl ANNEX a fo ANNEX reignaffa ANNEX irs andbyamembero ecomm ANNEX fth s ANNEX ision.co-oper ation shal lhaveastheirobj ect ivetocon t ANNEX ribu ANNEX tetogethe rtom ak ing con cre teprogr esstow ardseu ANNEX ropeanuni ty. eeu ANNEX th rop ANNEX eancounc ANNEX ilsha ANNEX llmee ANNEX tatlea ANNEX sttw ANNEX iceayea ANNEX r.the eu rope an commun i tie s sh all be found ANNEX edon th etr e a tie s e s tabl i ing th sh e europ an co e al und steelcommun ity, theeu e ropan e conomic commun i ANNEX ty, the a ANNEX ri ANNEX tcl ANNEX e3european a tomic ene rgy commun i ty and on th esubsequenttrea tisandac e ts modify ing orsupplemen ANNEX tingtem h . 1. the in si ANNEX ttut ANNEX ionso f th e european commun i ANNEX ties, ANNEX henc ANNEX eforth designat ANNEX ed a sr efe ANNEX rred to here ANNEX afte ANNEX r, sh a ANNEX llpo lt iic alco e -oprt a a ion shllb e egovrn i edbytl t i ei e i. th exe ANNEX rcisetherpow ANNEX i ersandju rsd ANNEX i c ANNEX it ANNEX ionunderth econdt ANNEX iionsprov is ionso fth tt a t il l eshalconi frmandsupp lem ANNEX entthe and fo epu ANNEX r th rposesp id ANNEX rov ed for by th et r ANNEX eatis ANNEX eproc edur esage redintherepor tsofluxembou , rg(1970) es ANNEX tab ANNEX lishing thecommun t ANNEX iis and by th ANNEX e esub sequentcopenhag , london (1981) en (1973) , the sol ANNEX emn trea ANNEX tiesandactsmod i ingo ANNEX fy rsupplemen ANNEX tingthemandbydeclr aat ion oneu e ropanunion (1983) andthepr ANNEX act ANNEX ics ANNEX e theprovis ANNEX ionsoft i ANNEX tleii.gradua llyes tab lsh i edamongthememb ers ta ANNEX tes. ANNEX 2. theinsttu ANNEX i t ANNEX ionsandbodisr ANNEX e e ANNEX spon ANNEX sib ANNEX leforeu ANNEX ropean r ai tce2 l po ANNEX li ANNEX tic ANNEX al co-ope ANNEX rat ANNEX ion shal ex ANNEX l r ANNEX eci ANNEX se thi ANNEX erpowr ANNEX es and ANNEX r ANNEX juisd ANNEX ict ANNEX ionunderth i ANNEX econdion ANNEX t sandforth rpo ANNEX epu seslaid eeuth rop eancoun cil sha llb ringtog eth e eh rth e ad f ANNEX so downint ANNEX il ANNEX tei ANNEX iiandinth ANNEX edo ANNEX cum ANNEX ent ANNEX sre ANNEX fer ANNEX redtointh ANNEX estat eoro fgov ernm ento fth ememb er s tat esa ndth e th ANNEX irdp ANNEX arag ANNEX rapho ANNEX far ANNEX ti ANNEX cle 1. ANNEX t ANNEX itlei ANNEX i i provsions amend ing the ie ANNEX treat s establ ANNEX ish ANNEX ing the european ANNEX commun ANNEX ities chapteri notb e compt ANNEX eent toh a ANNEX er and de ANNEX te in ANNEX rm ea c ANNEX tions ANNEX brough ANNEX t by m ember s ta ANNEX tes or by commun i ANNEX typroviion s ish ing the treaty establ s amend ing inst ANNEX i t ANNEX tu so ANNEX ion r ques ANNEX tion ANNEX sr efe ANNEX rr ra p ANNEX edfo r ANNEX el ANNEX iminary theeuropeancoaland steelcommun ity ruingu ANNEX l nd ANNEX e r ANNEX rai ANNEX tcl ANNEX e 41. a ri tce 4 l 2. th ecoun ci ANNEX l,followingthepro c r ANNEX eduelaiddownin ANNEX paragraph1,sh a ANNEX lldetrm ANNEX e ineth ecompo s ANNEX it ANNEX iono ftha ANNEX tth e ecsc t rea ty is supp lem ent ed by th efo llow ANNEX ing court and a dopt then ec ANNEX essary adjus ANNEX tm ent ANNEX s andproi vi sos: n addit ANNEX ion a ANNEX lp rovi ANNEX sion ANNEX stoth esta ANNEX tu teofth ec ou ANNEX rtof ANNEX just ANNEX ice. unl ANNEX e s ANNEX s t hecoun cl d ANNEX i e c ANNEX idesotherwis ANNEX e, th ANNEX e ANNEX provi ANNEX sionso fth ist r ANNEX eaty r e ANNEX latingtoth ecou rtof a ' rtc ile32d ANNEX just ANNEX ice,inp ar ANNEX ticu ANNEX lart heprovi ANNEX sionso ftheproto ANNEX colon ANNEX thestatuteofth eco u ANNEX rto fjusti ANNEX c e,sha ANNEX llapplytotha ANNEX t 1. at th erequeto s fth ecou rto fju t ANNEX siceanda fter cou ANNEX rt. consul ting th e comm is sion and th e european pari lam en t, thecoun i cl m ay, acting unanimously, atta chtoth ecourto fju s ticeacou rtwith jur ANNEX isdic ANNEX tion 3. th ANNEX ememb ANNEX erso ANNEX fth ANNEX atcou ANNEX rtsh ANNEX allb ANNEX echo ANNEX senf ANNEX rom toh ea randd e terminea tf ir stinstance,subje ANNEX cttoa pe ANNEX rsonswhose ind ANNEX ependenc ANNEX eisbeyonddoubtandwho righto fapp ealtoth ecour to fjust iceonpo int ANNEX so fl aw pos ANNEX sesstheab ANNEX il ANNEX ityrequi ANNEX redforappoin ANNEX tmenttojudi ANNEX cia ANNEX l onlyandina cco rdan cewi th th econdit ANNEX ionsl a ANNEX iddown of ANNEX fic ANNEX e;theyshallbeappoin ANNEX tedbycommona ccordof byth es t atu te,cert ainc las se sofa c ANNEX tiono rproceed ANNEX ing th ANNEX egov ANNEX ernm ANNEX ent ANNEX softh ANNEX emem ANNEX bers ANNEX tat ANNEX esfo ANNEX rat ANNEX ermo ANNEX fsix broughtbyn a tura lo rlegalp e rsons. tha ANNEX tcou rtsh a ANNEX ll y ANNEX ear ANNEX s.th ANNEX ememb ANNEX ersh ANNEX ip sh ANNEX allb ANNEX epa ANNEX rt ANNEX ia ANNEX llyr ANNEX enew ANNEX edev ANNEX ery 29.6. 87 o ff icia ANNEX ljou ANNEX rnlo ANNEX a fth ANNEX eeu e ANNEX ropancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies nol169/ ANNEX 5 th reey eas. r r etr iing m emb er l s shal be e lig ANNEX ib r ANNEX le fo 'a ANNEX f rtheendo ANNEX te ftheseconds r,thecounc ANNEX tage,howeve l ANNEX i r eap poitm n et n. shal ANNEX l,ac ANNEX tingbyaqualiiedma ANNEX f jorty onap ANNEX i roposa ANNEX lfrom ANNEX thecomm is ANNEX sionandinco -opera ANNEX tionwi ANNEX thth eeurop ANNEX ean ANNEX p ANNEX arl ANNEX iam ANNEX ent,i ANNEX ssu ANNEX edi ANNEX rec ANNEX tiv ANNEX es fo ANNEX rth ANNEX eco ANNEX -ord ANNEX ina ANNEX tiono ANNEX f 4. thatcourtsha lle stab li shitsrule so fpro ANNEX cedurein suchp ANNEX rov ANNEX is ANNEX ion ANNEX sas,ineachm ANNEX emb ANNEX ers ANNEX tate,a ANNEX ream ANNEX att ANNEX er agre em tw en ith th ecouto r fjus ti ce. thos ANNEX eru l ANNEX essha ANNEX ll fo ANNEX rregu ANNEX lat ANNEX iono ANNEX radm ANNEX ins ANNEX itr ANNEX at ea ANNEX iv c ANNEX tion. ANNEX ' ANNEX . requ iretheunan imousapprov alofth ecouni ANNEX cl.' ANNEX . ANNEX 6. inar ANNEX tic ANNEX le57(1)oftheeect r ANNEX eatytheterms' ANNEX andaft ANNEX er a ri tce 5 l ANNEX consu ANNEX lt ANNEX ingtheassembly'shal ANNEX lbe replacedby 'andin ANNEX co-op ANNEX era ANNEX tionw ANNEX ith th ANNEX eeuropeanparl ANNEX iament'.ar tic le 45 o fth r eecsc tea ty issupp lem ent edby th ANNEX e lfolowingp ar r agaph: 7. ina ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le 57(2)o ANNEX fth r ANNEX eeectea ANNEX ty,th i ANNEX ethrds ANNEX ent ANNEX enc ANNEX e th i ecounc t lmay,ac an ingun imou slya tthereque ANNEX s f ANNEX to l ANNEX sha l ANNEX lacedbythefo ANNEX lberep low ANNEX ing: th e court of jus tie and a c ft e su r con l ANNEX ting the ino ANNEX ' therca ANNEX sesth ANNEX ecounci l ANNEX l shalac ANNEX tby aqul ANNEX ai ANNEX fied comm i ssionandth eeurop e anpar li am en t,am ANNEX endth ANNEX e ma ANNEX jor ANNEX ity, in co ANNEX -op ANNEX era ANNEX tion with th ANNEX e europe ANNEX an prov is ion so ftit lei iio fth esa ttu te. '. p ANNEX arl ANNEX iam ANNEX ent. ANNEX ' ANNEX . chapter i i a ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 7prov ision ing th s amend e treaty e i stabl ing ANNEX sh ar ANNEX tic ANNEX le 149oftheeec t ANNEX rety sha ANNEX a l ep ANNEX lber a ANNEX lcedbyth ANNEX e theeuropeaneconomiccommun ity ANNEX l ANNEX folow rov ANNEX ingp is ANNEX ion ANNEX s: e sci toni ' ANNEX at ANNEX rc ANNEX ile149 ANNEX 1. wher ANNEX e,inpu rsuanceofthi ANNEX streaty,thecounc ANNEX il in st itu tion a r lpoi vs ion s ac ANNEX tsonap roposalf romthecommission,unan ANNEX imi ANNEX ty ANNEX sha ANNEX llber equi ANNEX redfo ranactcon ANNEX st ANNEX itu ANNEX tinganam endmen ANNEX t ANNEX tothatproposal. a rt icl e 61. a co-op e rat ionp roc r eduesha l lbein rodu ANNEX t cedwhich 2. wh ANNEX ere, inpu ANNEX rsuanc ANNEX eo fth ist ANNEX rea ANNEX ty,thecoun ANNEX cilshal lapplytoa ct sb asedona rt ic les 7,49,54(2),56(2) ANNEX , at ANNEX csinco ANNEX -oper ANNEX at ANNEX ionwi ANNEX thth eeurope ANNEX anp a ANNEX rl ANNEX iamen ANNEX t,theseconds ent ence, 57 wi th th eexcept fth ion o es e ANNEX cond fo ANNEX llow ANNEX ingproc ANNEX edur ANNEX eshallapply:sent c eneo fpar r agaph2th er f eo,100a,100b,118a,130eand130q(2)o fth eeect e raty. (a)th ANNEX ecoun ci ANNEX l,acingbyaqu ANNEX t l ANNEX aifi ANNEX edma ANNEX jor ANNEX i e ANNEX ty undr ANNEX th ANNEX econdi ANNEX tionsofparagr ANNEX aph1,onap roposa ANNEX lfrom ANNEX ecomm ANNEX th is ANNEX sionanda f ANNEX terob ANNEX tain ANNEX ingtheopin ANNEX ionof2. inat ric le 7,se condpaag r apho r ftheeect re ANNEX atythe th ANNEX eeuropean pal ANNEX riament,shal tacommon ANNEX ladopte rm s' af terconsu lt ingtheassembly'sha llberepl ANNEX acedby po ANNEX si ANNEX tion.'inco-ope rat ionwi th theeu ro peanpar liamen ANNEX t'. ANNEX (b)the counc ANNEX il' ANNEX s common po ANNEX si ANNEX tion sha ANNEX ll b e ANNEX commun ANNEX ica ANNEX tedtotheeu ANNEX rop ANNEX ean pa ANNEX rl ANNEX iam ANNEX ent. th ANNEX e3. ina r ticl e49o fth eeect reatyth eterms'thecounc ANNEX il coun ANNEX cil a ANNEX ndt ANNEX hec ANNEX omm ANNEX iss ANNEX ion sh ANNEX allin ANNEX formth ANNEX eshal l,a c tingonap roposalfromth ecomm i ANNEX ssionanda ft ANNEX er ANNEX europ ANNEX eanp r ANNEX al ANNEX iamen ANNEX tful ANNEX lyofther ANNEX eason ANNEX swh ANNEX ichledconsult ingth ee conom i candsoc ialcomm i ANNEX ttee' ANNEX ,sh a ANNEX llbe ANNEX thecoun ANNEX ciltoadop ANNEX tiscommonpo ANNEX t s ANNEX it ANNEX ionanda ANNEX lsorepla c edby ' thecoun c i l l shal, act ing by a qu al ANNEX if ANNEX ied ANNEX ofthecommision' ANNEX s spo ANNEX sit ANNEX ion.majo rity on a p roposa l from th e comm is ANNEX sion, inco-opera tion with th ee u rope a np a rl ANNEX iam ent and aft ANNEX er f ANNEX i,w ANNEX ith ANNEX inthr ANNEX eemon ANNEX thsofsu ANNEX chcomm un ANNEX ica ANNEX tion,th ANNEX econsult ingth eeconom icandso cia lcomm i ANNEX ttee'. eu ANNEX ropean pa ANNEX rl ANNEX iamen ANNEX t app ANNEX rov ANNEX es this common ANNEX po ANNEX si ANNEX tino ANNEX o rhasno ANNEX tt ae ANNEX knadeci ANNEX sionwt ANNEX ihint ha ANNEX t ANNEX pe ANNEX riod,thecounc ANNEX ilshal ANNEX ldefin ANNEX it ANNEX ive ANNEX lyadop ANNEX tth ANNEX eactin4. inart icl e 54(2) ofth eeec t r eaty theterms'th e ques ANNEX tionina cco ANNEX rdan ANNEX cew i ANNEX th thecommonpo ANNEX si ANNEX tion.counc il sha ll,onap roposa lf romth ecommiss ANNEX ion andaf terconsu lt ingth eeconomi candsoc ialcomm i ANNEX tte ANNEX e andtheass ly' emb ,sha llbe r l epacedby 'thecounc ANNEX il shall, eeu ANNEX (c) th ropeanpari ANNEX lam entm i ANNEX ay w inth ANNEX th epr ANNEX eiodo fact ingonap roposa lfromthecomm is sion,incoopert ANNEX aion th ANNEX reemon sr ANNEX th efr ANNEX eredtoinpo in ANNEX t(b),byanabsolutewi th theeu rope an pari lamen f t and atrcon e su ANNEX lingth ANNEX t e ma ANNEX joi ANNEX rty o fi s compon ANNEX t entm embes, p ANNEX r ropo seecon i omcandsc oilc a i ommt te . e' amendmentstoth ecoun i ANNEX cl'scommonpo st ANNEX iion. ANNEX the eu ANNEX ropean parl ANNEX iam entm ay al ANNEX so,byth es ame ANNEX ma ANNEX jor ANNEX ity, rej ANNEX ectth ecoun c ANNEX il'scommonpo si ANNEX tion.5. inar tic le56(2)o ftheeect rea tyth ese conds ent ANNEX enc ANNEX e er ANNEX th esu ANNEX ltoftheproce ANNEX ed ingssha ANNEX llbetransm ANNEX ittedtoisrep lac edbythefol low ing: th ANNEX ecoun ANNEX cilandth ANNEX ecomm ANNEX iss ANNEX ion. nol169/ 6 f of ic rn ljou ia a ANNEX lo eeu ANNEX fth rop ANNEX e i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies 29.6.87 if the europ ean pa rli am t ha en s re ANNEX jec ANNEX ted the a ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 10 counc il'scommon post iion, un animi ty sha ANNEX ll be requr ied fo i rthecouncl to act on a second ar ANNEX tic ANNEX le145ofth r ANNEX eeectea ANNEX tysha ANNEX l l ANNEX lbesuppem ANNEX ent e ANNEX edbyth e rad ing . l ANNEX folowingp ANNEX rov ANNEX is ANNEX ion: ANNEX ' ANNEX - con ANNEX feronth ANNEX ecomm ANNEX iss ANNEX ion,inth ANNEX eac ANNEX tswh ANNEX ich th ANNEX e (d)th e comm iss l ion shal, w ith in a p er fon iod o e counc ANNEX iladop ANNEX ts,powe ANNEX rsfortheimp ANNEX lemen ANNEX ta ANNEX tiono ANNEX f th,re mon -exam ropo inethep salontheba siso ANNEX f therule ANNEX swhich thecounc ANNEX il lay ANNEX sdown. the whi chthecounc iladopedi t tscommonpos ANNEX it ANNEX ion,by coun ANNEX ci ANNEX l m ANNEX ay impo ANNEX sec ANNEX ert ANNEX ain r ANNEX equ ANNEX irem ANNEX ent ANNEX s in tak ingin toa c counttheamendmen tspropos ANNEX edby respectof theexerci ANNEX se of the ANNEX sepowe rs. the theeu rop eanp ar liam ent. coun c ANNEX il may alsorese ANNEX rvether igh ANNEX t,inspecific th ecomm iss io a n shllfrw o r adtoth ecoun cl,a i t cases, toexe ANNEX rcsed ANNEX i i t ANNEX recly impem ANNEX l t ANNEX eningpow r ANNEX e s th es am etim easi t sr e -examinedp roposa ANNEX l, the is ANNEX tef ANNEX l. theprocedu ANNEX resr e ANNEX fer ANNEX redtoabov emustb e am endm en tso ftheeuropean pr ali am entwh ch i ANNEX i t consonantwith pr ANNEX incip ANNEX les andru l ANNEX e stobe l aid hsno a ta cep c ted,andshalexp l ressitsopinionon down in adv ance by th e counci ANNEX l, a cting them . the counc ilmay adoptth eseam endm t ANNEX ens unanimouslyonap roposa ANNEX lf romth ecomm i ANNEX ssion unanimou ly. s anda fte ANNEX robtain ANNEX ingth in ANNEX eop ion ofth eeurope an ANNEX p ANNEX arl ANNEX iam ANNEX ent. ANNEX ' ANNEX . (e) thecoun cil,ac tingbyaqu ali fiedma jor ANNEX ity,sha ANNEX ll t th adop ep ropos a s r l a e-exam ined by the c i ommsi son. r ANNEX ai ANNEX tl ANNEX ce 11 un animi ty sh all be r equ iredforthecounc ANNEX il to theeec tre ANNEX atysh ANNEX allb ANNEX esupp ANNEX lem ANNEX ent ANNEX edbyth ANNEX efo ANNEX llow ANNEX ing amend th ep roposa l as r e -ex amined by the prov ANNEX is ANNEX ion ANNEX s: comm iss ion. ANNEX ' ANNEX ar ANNEX tic ANNEX le168 ANNEX a (f ) intheca sesrefe rredtoinpoin ts(c),(d)and(e) ANNEX ,the counc ilshal lber equ iredtoac twithin aper ANNEX iodo f 1. a t th erequesto fth ecou rto fju st ANNEX iceanda f ANNEX t e ANNEX r t hre emon ths. i fnod eci sioni stak enw ith inth is ANNEX con sul ANNEX ting th e comm is ANNEX sion and th e europe an pe riod,thecommiss ropo ion p salsha llbed ANNEX eem ANNEX ed ANNEX parliam en ANNEX t, th ecoun cilm ay, acting unanimously, no ttoh av eb eenadopt ed. ANNEX attachtoth ecou rto fju s ANNEX ticeacou rtwith jur ANNEX isdic ANNEX tion ANNEX toh ea ANNEX randd e ANNEX term inea tf ir ANNEX stinstance,subjec ANNEX ttoa (g) th ep e riodsr efer redtoinpo int s(b)and(f)may b ANNEX e rightofapp ealtoth ecour ANNEX to fjust ANNEX iceonpo int ANNEX so fl aw ex tend edbyam aximum ofonemonth bycommon onlyandina ccordan c ANNEX ew i ANNEX th th econdit ANNEX ionsl a ANNEX iddown ac cord be twe en th ecounc il and theeurop ANNEX ean bythes t ANNEX atu ANNEX te,c er ANNEX tainc lassesofa c ANNEX tiono rproceeding p ari l e amnt. brough tbyn a ANNEX turalo rlega lp e ANNEX rsons.th tcou ANNEX a rtsha l ANNEX l ANNEX not be comp e ANNEX tent toh e ar and d et ANNEX erminea c ANNEX tions ANNEX brough t by m emb e ANNEX r s tates or by commun ity s longa a sthecouni clh a sno tat c ecomm ed,th ision ANNEX s insti t ANNEX tuionso r questionsr efr ANNEX eredfo ra p r ANNEX eliminary mayalt erit spropos alatanytimedur ingthep ANNEX roc ANNEX edure ANNEX s rulingund erart ANNEX icle 177. men tion ed inparag raphs1 and2.' . ANNEX 2. thecounci ANNEX l,fol ANNEX lowingthepro ANNEX cedu ANNEX relaiddownin a ri tce 8 l par ANNEX agraph1,sh a ANNEX lldet ANNEX erminethecompoi ANNEX st ANNEX ionoft ht ANNEX a ANNEX cour ANNEX t and adop t then e ANNEX cess ANNEX ary ad ANNEX jus ANNEX tm en ANNEX ts andthefi rstpa ragapho r fari tl ce237ofth r eeectea a ANNEX tyshl ANNEX l addi ANNEX tion ANNEX alprovs ANNEX i stoth ANNEX ion estatu ANNEX teofth ecouto ANNEX r fberep lacedbythefo l ingp low i rovion: s jusi ANNEX tce. un ANNEX less thecoun ANNEX cil decid ANNEX esotherwise, te ANNEX h ANNEX provi ANNEX sionso f th ANNEX istre ANNEX aty re ANNEX lat ANNEX ingtoth ec our ANNEX to f anye ' u rop eanstatem e lytob ay app eam com embe ANNEX rof jusi ANNEX tce,inpar ANNEX ticl ANNEX uarth rov ANNEX ep i ANNEX sionsoftheproto lon ANNEX co thecommun ity. i tshaladd l resi s l sapp t ia ct e ANNEX iontoth thesta t ANNEX tueo fth r ANNEX ecoutofjusti ANNEX ce,sha ANNEX llapplytot ha ANNEX t i councl,wh ich sha llac tunan imou s lyat fercon ANNEX sul ANNEX ting cou ANNEX rt. thecommis sion andaf terrc eeiv ingth ea s sen ANNEX tofth e eu ropeanp a rl iamen twh i ch sh al lactbyanab ANNEX solu ANNEX te 3. th ANNEX ememb ANNEX erso ANNEX fth ANNEX atcou ANNEX rtsh ANNEX allb ANNEX echo ANNEX senf ANNEX rom a mjoi rty o fitscompon entmembe rs. ' . ANNEX pe ANNEX rsonswhoseindependenc ANNEX eisbeyonddou ANNEX btandwho ANNEX pos ANNEX sesstheab ANNEX il ANNEX ityrequi ANNEX redforappoin ANNEX tm ttojud ANNEX en i ANNEX cia ANNEX l ANNEX of ANNEX fic ANNEX e;theysha ANNEX llbeappo in ANNEX tedbycommona ccordof a rt ice 9 l th ANNEX e gov ANNEX ernm ANNEX ent ANNEX softh ANNEX e m ANNEX emb ANNEX ers ANNEX tat ANNEX esfo ANNEX rat ANNEX ermo ANNEX fsi ANNEX x ANNEX ye ANNEX ars.thememb e ANNEX rship sha ANNEX llbep ANNEX art ANNEX ial ANNEX lyr ANNEX enewedeve ANNEX rythes e condpa rag raphofart ic l e 238oftheeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty th ANNEX reey e ANNEX ars. r ANNEX eti ANNEX ring m embe ANNEX rs sha ANNEX llbeel ANNEX igib ANNEX le fo ANNEX r lshalberep laedbyth c efo llowingprov is ion: e ANNEX rappi ANNEX ontm ANNEX ent ANNEX . ' these ag reement sshal lb econ cludedbythecounc ANNEX il, ac tingunan imou lyanda s fte rre ce ea ingth iv ssen ANNEX tofthe 4. thatcourtsha ANNEX lle ANNEX stab ANNEX lishi ANNEX tsrule ANNEX sofp ro ANNEX cedurein eu r op ea npar liamen twh i ch sha lla c tby anabso ANNEX lute agre ANNEX em en ANNEX twith th ANNEX ecour ANNEX to fjus ANNEX tic ANNEX e.t ho ANNEX seru l ANNEX essha ANNEX ll m ajori ty ofit scomponentmember s. ' . requ ANNEX iretheunan ANNEX imousapprovlo ANNEX a fth ecounc ANNEX il.' ANNEX . 29. 6. 87 o ff ic ljou ANNEX rna ia loftheeu i ANNEX ropeancommunt ANNEX ies nol169/7 r at icl e 12 ' ANNEX at ANNEX rc ANNEX il c ANNEX e8a secondp arag raphwo rd l sfo eda ssha l low se lbein tedin ANNEX r when d rawing up i sp ANNEX t ropoa ANNEX slsw th a v ANNEX i iew toari tl c fth e 188o r eeectety: a achiev ANNEX ing theob t ANNEX jecive t ou ANNEX s se t inaric ANNEX t le 8a, the ANNEX comm ANNEX iss ANNEX ionsh ANNEX allt ANNEX akein ANNEX toa ANNEX ccoun ANNEX tth ANNEX eex ANNEX ten ANNEX tofth ANNEX e ' th ecounclmay,ac i tingunan imou s lyatthereque ANNEX stof e ANNEX ffo ANNEX r a ANNEX tthtc ANNEX era ANNEX tine ANNEX conom ANNEX ie ingd ANNEX sshow if ANNEX feen ANNEX r c ANNEX es in the court o f ju si t ce and afte r consut ANNEX ling the deve ANNEX lopmen ANNEX twi ANNEX l s ANNEX l havetosuta ANNEX indu ANNEX ringthepe ANNEX riodo ANNEX f comm i ssion andth eeu rope anp arl iamen ANNEX t,am endthe e ANNEX stab ANNEX lishmen ANNEX toftheint ANNEX e rn ANNEX alm ANNEX ark ANNEX etandi ANNEX tmayp ANNEX ropo ANNEX se prov is ion softit lei iiofthes t atu te.' . approp ANNEX ria ANNEX teprov ANNEX is ANNEX ions. ANNEX ifthe ANNEX sep ANNEX rovi ANNEX sion ANNEX st akethefo ANNEX rmo fderoga ANNEX tions,they ANNEX mus ANNEX t beo ANNEX fat empora ANNEX rynatu ANNEX reandmu s ANNEX tc au ANNEX s ethele ANNEX ast s eci toni i pos ANNEX sib ANNEX led ANNEX is rb ANNEX tu ancetothefunt ANNEX c ingo ANNEX ion fthecommon ANNEX a ANNEX mre ANNEX kt. ANNEX ' ANNEX .prov is sr ion e lat efound ingtoth ation sandth l epoicyo ANNEX fth ANNEX e commun ity ANNEX a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le 16 sub -se ci toni- it nera nlm are kt 1. ar ANNEX tic ANNEX le 28ofth r ANNEX eeectea l ANNEX tysha ep ANNEX lber a ANNEX lc e ANNEX edbyth ANNEX l ANNEX folow rov ANNEX ingp i ANNEX sion ANNEX s: ANNEX ' ANNEX a ANNEX rti ANNEX cle28 a rt icl e 13 eeectth rea tysha l l lbesupp en em edbythefo l t ing low any au ANNEX tonomou ANNEX sa l ANNEX tea ANNEX rtionorsuspen ANNEX sionofdute ANNEX isinp irov s: ion s ANNEX thecommoncu s ANNEX tomst r ANNEX aif ANNEX fsha ANNEX llbe deid ANNEX c ed by the ANNEX c ANNEX counilact ANNEX ingbyaqu alii ANNEX fedma ANNEX jor ANNEX ity onap roposa ANNEX l ANNEX f ANNEX romth ANNEX ecomm ANNEX iss ANNEX ion. ANNEX ' ANNEX . ' ar tic le8 a thecommun itysh a lladoptmeasue rsw th th ANNEX i eaimo f 2. in a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le 57(2) of th ANNEX eeec t r ANNEX eaty, th ANNEX escond ANNEX e progre ssiv elye st l absh i ingthein e trnlm ANNEX a a ANNEX rkt ov ANNEX e era s t ANNEX enenesh ANNEX c alb ANNEX l er l ANNEX epacedbyth l ANNEX efo ing ANNEX low : periodexpir ingon31 d e cember 1992,inaccordance ' ANNEX un im ANNEX an ity shal ANNEX l b e r equ ANNEX ired ford ir ANNEX ect ANNEX ives th e wi th th eprov isionsofthisar ti cle andofa r ANNEX til ANNEX ces 8b, impl ANNEX em en ANNEX tat ANNEX ionof wh ich invo lv ANNEX esina tl easton e 8 c,28,57(2) ,59,70(1) ,84,99,10aa 0 nd100band membrs ANNEX e team ANNEX ta endm entofth eex ANNEX isingp ANNEX t r ANNEX inc ANNEX ipleslaid w ithou t p rejud ice toth eoth erp rov is ion sof th ANNEX is downbyl awgoverningth ep ANNEX rofess ANNEX ionswi ANNEX th respec ANNEX tto t rea ty. tr ANNEX ain ANNEX ingandcondi ANNEX t ionsofaccessfornatu ANNEX ralperson ANNEX s.'. the int ernalmarkt sh e a llcomp r iseana r ANNEX eaw i ANNEX thout 3. inthesecondparagapho ANNEX r far ANNEX tic ANNEX le 59 ofth ANNEX eeec int erna lfront iersinwh ichth ef reemovem ANNEX ento fgoods, tr ANNEX eaty,' ANNEX unan ANNEX imously'sha ANNEX llber ANNEX epl ANNEX acedby'byaqua ANNEX li ANNEX fied pe rsons,serv icesandcapi talisensur edina c ANNEX cordan ANNEX c e m ANNEX ajo ANNEX ri ANNEX ty' ANNEX . wi th theprov ision so fth istrea ty.' . ANNEX 4. inar ANNEX tic ANNEX le7 0(1) o ANNEX fth eeec trea ANNEX ty, th ANNEX ela ANNEX sttwo ANNEX sen ANNEX ten ANNEX cesshal ANNEX lberep ANNEX l a ANNEX cedbythefo ANNEX llow ANNEX ing ANNEX : a rt icl e 14 ANNEX ' ANNEX for thispurpose thecoun c ANNEX il sha ANNEX llissuedir ANNEX ect ANNEX ives, ANNEX act ANNEX ingbyaqu l ANNEX ai ANNEX fiedm jo ANNEX a i ANNEX rty. itshl ANNEX alendeavourtotheeect r eatysh allb esupp lem ent edbyth efo llow ANNEX ing at ANNEX tain thehighes ANNEX t po s ANNEX sib ANNEX led egreeofl ibe ANNEX ral ANNEX iza ANNEX tion.proi vs ion s: unanimi ANNEX ty sh al ANNEX lb er equ ANNEX ired form a ANNEX esure ANNEX s wh ich ANNEX const ANNEX itu ANNEX teas tepba ckasr egrd ANNEX a stheliber ANNEX ali ANNEX zat ANNEX iono f ' a rti cle8 b ANNEX capi ANNEX talmovements.'. the commis sion sh al e lr po rttoth ecounc ANNEX ilbefo ANNEX re 5. in ar ANNEX ti ANNEX cl f th ANNEX e 84(2) o r ANNEX e eec tety, th ANNEX a et erm 31decembe r1988andagainbefo re31d ec ANNEX ember1990 ' ANNEX unanimous ANNEX ly' sh ANNEX allbe rep ANNEX lac ANNEX ed by ' ANNEX by a qual ANNEX if ANNEX ied onth ep rogre ssmade towardsach i ingth ev eint ANNEX erna ANNEX l ma ANNEX jori ANNEX ty'. m ark etw ith inth etim elim i i tfxedi r nat icl e8a. ANNEX 6. a ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e84(2)oftheeectr ANNEX eatysh ANNEX allb ANNEX esupp ANNEX lem ANNEX ent ANNEX ed the coun c il, a ct ing by a qua lif ied ma ANNEX jor ANNEX ity on a bythefol ANNEX low ANNEX ingp ANNEX arag ANNEX raph: proposalfromth ecommis sion, shal ANNEX ld e ANNEX term ANNEX ine th ANNEX e guide linesandcond it ionsnece ssarytoensur ANNEX ebalan ANNEX ced ' ANNEX thep c ANNEX roedu ANNEX ralp i ANNEX rovs ANNEX ion ANNEX sofa ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 75(1) and(3) proge r s sina l lthese cto rsconcerne . d. ' shl ANNEX a ly. ANNEX lapp '. a rt icl e 15 a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le 17 eeectth rea tysh allb l esupp en em t efo edbyth llow ing ar ANNEX tic ANNEX l fth ANNEX e 99 o eeec t ANNEX rety sh ANNEX a alber ANNEX l epa ANNEX lcedbyth ANNEX eproi vi sos: n fo ANNEX llow i ANNEX rov ANNEX ingp s s: ANNEX ion ol1n 69/ 8 f of ic rn ANNEX ljou ia a ANNEX lo eeu ANNEX fth rop ANNEX e i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies 29.6.87 ' r ati cle99 5. teh ANNEX h a ANNEX rmon ANNEX iza ANNEX tionm ANNEX easu ANNEX res r ANNEX efr ANNEX eredt b ANNEX oaov ANNEX e ANNEX shal ANNEX l,inappropr ANNEX iaeca ANNEX t se ANNEX s,inc ANNEX ludeasafegua ANNEX rdclau ANNEX se thecoun c il sha ll,a c tingun imou an lyonap s roposa ANNEX l authoi ANNEX rzingth ANNEX ememb e ANNEX rs tae ANNEX tstotak ANNEX e,foroneormor ANNEX e from the comm i ssion and a fe tr con l ANNEX suing th ANNEX t e ft ANNEX o en ANNEX h n ANNEX o-e ANNEX con i ANNEX omcr ANNEX eason ANNEX sre ANNEX fer ANNEX redt r ANNEX oinai ANNEX tce 36, ANNEX l eu e ropan p arl iam ent, adop t proviion ANNEX s s for th e p ANNEX rov ANNEX is ANNEX iona su ANNEX lmea re ANNEX s sub ANNEX jec ANNEX ttoacommun ANNEX itycon ANNEX t l ANNEX ro harmonz iat iono flegisla tionconce rningturnove ANNEX rt ax ANNEX es, ro ANNEX p edu ANNEX c r ' ANNEX e.. e xcs iedu te isando the rfo rmso find ire ctt axa tiontoth ANNEX e ex ten tth a tsuchha rmoniz ationisnece ssarytoensu ANNEX re th eestab li shmentandthefunct ion ingo ftheint ANNEX erna ANNEX l a ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 19 a mrk etw ith inth etim el i imtl aiddownina rt icl e8a. ANNEX ' ANNEX . ANNEX eeect ANNEX th rea ANNEX tysha ANNEX l l ANNEX lbesuppem ANNEX ent ANNEX edbythefo ANNEX llow ANNEX ing ANNEX p ANNEX rov ANNEX is ANNEX ion ANNEX s: a rt ic le 18 ANNEX a ANNEX ' ANNEX rtc ANNEX ile100b eeec tth rea tysha l l lbesuppem ent edbythefo llow ANNEX ingprov is s: ion 1. dur ANNEX ing 1992,thecomms ANNEX isionshal ANNEX l,togethe ANNEX rwith ANNEX eachmembers ta ANNEX te,drawupaninv en ANNEX toryofn a ANNEX tiona ANNEX l ' a rti cle100 a laws,regu ANNEX lat ANNEX ion ANNEX sandadm in ANNEX is ANNEX traiv ANNEX t eprovi ANNEX sionswhich ANNEX f ANNEX allund ANNEX era ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 100 ANNEX aandwh ANNEX ich h ANNEX aveno ANNEX tbe ANNEX en 1. by w ay o fd e rogat ionfromart ic l e 100andsave h ANNEX armon ANNEX izedpu ANNEX rsu ANNEX anttoth ANNEX ata ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e. wher eo the rwi seprovidedinth ist reaty,thefol ANNEX lowing prov isions sha ll app r th ly fo eachi em ev en ANNEX to f the ob jeciv t e ss to e utina ri tcle8 a. te coun h c ANNEX i a ANNEX l shll, thecouncil,act ANNEX ingina cco ANNEX rdancewth th ANNEX i ep ANNEX rovs ANNEX iions ac tingbyaqu a li fiedm jo a i rty onap s ropoalfromth e o r ANNEX fatc ANNEX ile 100a,may de ANNEX cidethattheprov ANNEX is ANNEX ion ANNEX sinfo rc ANNEX e commision in co s -ope raion w t th th i e european in a memb e ANNEX r s tt ANNEX ae must be r e ANNEX cogniz sb ANNEX ed a eing pa ri l amen t and afe tr consul ting thee conom ANNEX ic and equ ANNEX ivalen ANNEX ttotho seapp ANNEX liedbyanothermembe ANNEX rs tate. soc ial comm i tte e, a dopt th em easu ANNEX res for the approx imationofth eprovi sionsl a iddownby l aw, r egl uai to ra no dm ini st rat ivea ctioninm eme brs tae ts 2. thep i ANNEX rov so ANNEX ion ANNEX s r ANNEX faic ANNEX t a(4) sha ANNEX le 100 l lyby ANNEX lapp wh ich h ea av s th eirobje ct thees t l abi en shm t and anlogy. ANNEX a func tion ingofth eintern almark et. ANNEX 3. the commis ANNEX sion sha ANNEX lldraw up th einven ANNEX tory 2. pa r r agaph1 shal lno tapp i lytof lp sca rovs ANNEX iions,to ref ANNEX err ANNEX edtointh ANNEX efirs ANNEX tsubp ANNEX arag ANNEX raphofpar ANNEX agraph1and thos erel atingtothef em reemov to en fp r esonsnorto sha ANNEX llsubmitapprop ANNEX ria ANNEX tepropos ANNEX als ingoodtimeto thos erel atingtotheright sandinte res tsofemp loyed l ANNEX alowtec ANNEX h oun ANNEX cilt c ANNEX oa e ANNEX tbfr ANNEX oeth ANNEX een f1 ANNEX do 99 ' ANNEX 2. ANNEX . p erson s . 3. the commiss ion, ini tsproposa ls env ANNEX isag ANNEX ed in sub ANNEX -se ANNEX ctioni ANNEX i- mon ANNEX eta ANNEX ry c ANNEX apa ANNEX city par agraph1 conce rningh el ath,saf ety,envi ANNEX ronmen ANNEX tal pro tec tionandconsum erpro tect ion,wi lltakeasabase ahighleve lofp t roection. ANNEX a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le20 f 4. i,a fte rth eadop tiono a fahrmon iza tionm easu ANNEX re 1. a n ANNEX ew chap ANNEX ter 1 sh ANNEX allb s ANNEX e iner ANNEX tedinp r ANNEX at th ANNEX ree, by th ecounc il act ing by a qua lf iied ma ANNEX jor ANNEX ity, a t ANNEX il ANNEX teiiofth ANNEX eeect rea ANNEX tyr ead ANNEX inga ANNEX sfollow ANNEX s: membe ta r s te deem sitneces sary toapplynation ANNEX al p rovi sion songroundsofmajo rn e edsref err ANNEX edtoin ' ANNEX chapter 1 r at icl e36,orr elaingtop t rot e c tionofth eenvi ANNEX ronm ANNEX ent o r the wo rk i ing envronm ent, i l t shal no ANNEX ti ANNEX fy the co ANNEX -operat ANNEX ion in econom ANNEX ic and monetary comm isiono s fth es rov ep is ion s. pol ANNEX icy(econom ANNEX icand monetary un ANNEX ion) thecomm is sionshallconi frmtheprov is ion ANNEX sinvolv ANNEX ed aft erh av ing vr ef iied thtth a eya r eno tam ean ANNEX so f a ANNEX ri ANNEX tcl ANNEX e102a arbi tra rydisc riminaiono t rad isgu isedres ANNEX tr ANNEX ict ANNEX ionon r tad ebe twe e em nm b e t rsae ts. 1. ino rdertoensureth econvergenceofeconom icand ANNEX monetary poli ANNEX cieswh ich isn ece ANNEX s s ANNEX aryforth efurther ANNEX developm en ANNEX to fthecommun i ANNEX ty,m embers tate ANNEX ssh a ANNEX ll byw ayofd erog ationfromtheprocedurel a ANNEX iddownin co-operate in accord anc ANNEX ew ith th e objec ANNEX tives o f ar ticl es 169andj70,th ecommiss iono ranym ember ar ANNEX tic ANNEX l e 104.insodo ing,th eysha ANNEX llt akea ANNEX c countofth e sta tem ay b ringth emat terdir ect lyb efo ANNEX r ethecour ANNEX tof experience acquired in co -opera ANNEX tion w i ANNEX thin th e jus ticeifitconsid r est ha tan o therm emb e ANNEX r stateis fram eworkofth eeu ropeanmon et ANNEX ary system(ems) makingimp rope ru seofthepowersprovidedforinth ANNEX is andind eve ANNEX lopingth eecu,andsh a ANNEX llre ANNEX sp ec ANNEX texisting a ri tce. l pow ersinthisfild. ANNEX e 29. 6. 87 o fi fca iljou ANNEX rna ANNEX lofth ANNEX eeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eancommun ANNEX ii ANNEX tes nol 1 ANNEX 69/ ANNEX 9 2. insofarasfur the rdeve lopmentinthef ie ANNEX ldof s ANNEX ub- ANNEX set ANNEX cio ANNEX niv- e ANNEX conom ANNEX icandso ANNEX cia ANNEX lcoe ANNEX hsio ANNEX n econom icandmon etrypo a l icynece ssta i te sin ANNEX st ANNEX itut ANNEX ion ANNEX al changes, the p rov is ion so fa rt ic le 236 sha ANNEX ll be appl icab ta le. the mone ry commi ttee and the c i ommt te fg eo v oero nrso fth ecet nrlb a ank a sshl laso ANNEX l r ANNEX ai ANNEX tce2 ANNEX l 3 su be con l ted rega rd s ingint itu tiona lchanges inthe mon eta r ry ae . a. ' at i ANNEX t l ANNEX lev sha r ANNEX lbeaddedtopatth ANNEX reeo rea ANNEX ftheeect ty ANNEX read ANNEX ingasfol ANNEX lows: ap2. ch t er l s1,2and3shalbecomech apt ers2,3and4resp ect ive ly. ANNEX ' ANNEX titlev - subsc et ioni ii- so cia lpo li cy ANNEX econom ANNEX icand soc ANNEX ialcohes ANNEX ion a rt icl e21 ANNEX r ANNEX at ANNEX il ANNEX ce130 ANNEX a eeectth rea tysha l l lbesupp en em t efo edbyth llow ingprov is ion s: in orde ANNEX r t o promo ANNEX te its ove ANNEX ral ANNEX l harmoniou ANNEX s ANNEX deve ANNEX lopmen ANNEX t,thecommuni ANNEX tyshal ANNEX ldeve ANNEX lopandpursu ANNEX e a ' rtc ile118 a ANNEX it ANNEX sacion ANNEX t sl ead ANNEX ingtoth ANNEX est ANNEX reng ANNEX then ANNEX ingofit ANNEX seconomic ANNEX andso ANNEX cia ANNEX lcoh ANNEX esion. 1. member sta tes shallp a ay prt icul arattentionto encou rag ingimp rovem en ts,e spec ial lyinthewo rk ANNEX ing envi ronment, a sr egardstheh ea lth and s a ANNEX fety o ANNEX f inp a ANNEX rt ANNEX i cu ANNEX larthecommuni ANNEX ty shal ANNEX la im atr edu ANNEX cing worke rs, and sh a ll s et as thei r obj ANNEX ective th e di ANNEX spar ANNEX ii ANNEX t es be ANNEX twen th ANNEX e ev a ANNEX riousr egions and the h armon izat ion of co ndi tio n in thi sar ea, wh ANNEX ile backwardnes ANNEX softhel ANNEX eas ANNEX t- ANNEX favour ANNEX edregions. m ain ta ining th eimp rovemen tsm ade. 2. inorde rtoh e lpach ievetheob ject ivelaiddownin ANNEX r ANNEX at ANNEX il ANNEX ce130b thefi rstpar agr aph,thecounc il,ac tingbyaqu l ANNEX ai ANNEX fied ma jori ty on a propoa slf romthecomm iss ANNEX ion, in co-op erai tonwth th i eeuropan p e r alam i tanda ANNEX en f ANNEX ter memb rs ANNEX e tat ANNEX essha l ANNEX lconductth e ANNEX ireconomicpolii ANNEX ces, con sut l ee ingth conom ic andso cil comm a it tee,sh ANNEX all and shal ANNEX l coordina ANNEX te them, insuch a way a s, in t,bym adop e ansofdi rec t s,m ive imum r in i ANNEX equremen ANNEX ts addi ANNEX tion,toat ANNEX taintheobj ANNEX ect ANNEX ivesse ANNEX toutinart ANNEX ice130 ANNEX l a. forgr a adul imp lemen taion t ,hav eg ing r ard tothe theimp lementaiono ANNEX t fthecommonpo l ANNEX ic sando ANNEX ie fth e cond iion t sandtchn e ica lrule t soba ingineacho in fthe int ANNEX ernalmark ANNEX et shalltakeintoaccoun ANNEX ttheob t ANNEX jecives em m b ers tae ts. s ANNEX etou ANNEX tina ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le13aa ANNEX 0 ndina ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e130 ANNEX candsh ANNEX all ANNEX contribut ANNEX etoth eira i ANNEX chevemen ANNEX t.th ecommun itysh al ANNEX l ANNEX suppo rtth ea i ANNEX chevementofth e ANNEX seobjet ANNEX cives by the such di r ec tiv es sha llavoid impo s ingadmini ANNEX st ANNEX r a ANNEX tive, act ANNEX ioni tt akesthroughthest ANNEX ructura ANNEX lfunds(eu ropean finani calandlegalconsr taint sinaw ay wh ANNEX ich would agi ANNEX rcu l ANNEX tura ANNEX l gu idance andguar ANNEX antee fund,gu idance holdb ackth ec reat ionandd ev elopmen ANNEX to fsmaland ANNEX l sec ANNEX tion, eu ropean socia ANNEX l fund, european r eg ANNEX ional medium-si zed un tertak ings. developm ent fund) ,theeuropean investmentb ank ANNEX andth eo ANNEX th erexist ANNEX ingfin c ANNEX ania ANNEX lin s ANNEX truments ANNEX . 3. thep rovi s s adop ion tedp ur s u anttoth isart ANNEX icl ANNEX e sha llnotp r eventanymemb ers ta tef romm a ANNEX int ANNEX ain ANNEX ing or introduc ing mor e s tringen tm e asure ANNEX s fo r the a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le130 ANNEX c pro tet ciono fwork ing condit ionscomp a ANNEX tib ANNEX lewith th ANNEX is tre aty.'. ANNEX thee u ANNEX rop e ANNEX anr ion ANNEX eg ald ev elopm en ANNEX tfundi sintended ANNEX tohelpr edre ANNEX sstheprincipalr egiona ANNEX limbalan ANNEX cesinth e ANNEX commun ity throughp arti ANNEX cip atinginthed ev ANNEX elopm ent a rt icl e 22 and s t ANNEX ru c ANNEX tura ANNEX l ad jus ANNEX tm ent o f regions who se ANNEX developm en ANNEX tislaggingb ehindandinth econver ANNEX siono f th eeec t rea tysh allb esupp lem ent edbyth efo llow ing dec ANNEX liningindu s ANNEX tr ANNEX ialregions . r poi vs ion: a 'r tc ile11 8b ANNEX r ANNEX at ANNEX il ANNEX ce130a the commi ssion sha ll ende avour to d ANNEX eve ANNEX lop th ANNEX e di alogu ebe twe enm anagement andl aboura ANNEX teurop ANNEX ean once thesing ANNEX le european a ANNEX ct enter ANNEX sin tofor ANNEX ceth e l evlw e i hchco ul ft d,i etw h id os e scon sid eri tds eia ANNEX rbl ANNEX e, comm i ANNEX ssionshalsubm ANNEX l tacomp ANNEX i reheniv ANNEX s eproposlto ANNEX a l eadtor ela tion sba sedonag reem ent. ' . thecounci ANNEX l,thepurpos ANNEX eo fwh ANNEX ichw i ANNEX llb etomake such ol1n 69/10 f of ica ANNEX iljou ANNEX rna ANNEX lo eeu ANNEX fth rop ANNEX eancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies 29.6.87 amendment stothest rutu c eandop r ert aion alru so ANNEX le f s ANNEX t a ANNEX andrdsandther a ANNEX emov flega ANNEX lo i ANNEX landf lb ANNEX sca r ANNEX ar ANNEX ier ANNEX sto th eexis tingsru t c tur alfunds (eu rop ean agri ANNEX cul ANNEX tur ANNEX al th ANNEX atco-op ANNEX era ANNEX tion. gu idan ce andgu aran tee f und, gu idan ce s ect ANNEX ion, european social fund, eu rope an reg ional 3. inth ANNEX each ANNEX iev ANNEX em to ANNEX en fth ANNEX es im ANNEX ea s,spec ANNEX ia ANNEX lac ANNEX coun ANNEX t developm t fund) a en sarenece ssa la ry toc i ANNEX rfy and sa ANNEX hllb ANNEX etae ANNEX kno ANNEX fth ANNEX econn ANNEX ect ANNEX ionb ANNEX etw ANNEX eenth ANNEX ecommon r at ion ai lzeth eirt assi k r nodrt e ocon tr ibu tetoth e ANNEX r ANNEX ese ANNEX arch and t ANNEX echno ANNEX log ANNEX ica ANNEX ld e ANNEX evlopm ANNEX en f ANNEX tefo ANNEX rt, th ANNEX e ach iev em entoftheobj ect ive ssetoutina r ANNEX tic ANNEX le 130 ANNEX a e ANNEX stab ANNEX li ANNEX shm ANNEX ent o ANNEX f th ANNEX e in ANNEX tern ANNEX al m ANNEX ark ANNEX et and th ANNEX e andart icle 130 c, toinc rea sethe iref fic iencyandto implemen ANNEX tat ANNEX ionofcommonpo l ANNEX icie ANNEX s,p ANNEX art ANNEX icu ANNEX lar ANNEX ly a ANNEX s coo rdin atet hei rat civ ii tesb e e twenth eme slv esandw ANNEX ith ANNEX rega ANNEX rdscompet ANNEX it ANNEX ionandt ANNEX rad ANNEX e. theoperat so ion ftheexisingf t inancia linst ANNEX rumen t ANNEX s. i the councl sha llac tunan s imoulyonth isproposa ANNEX l wi thin a per iod o r, a f one yea f ter con ANNEX sul ANNEX ting the eu e rop a an pri lam ent and th eeconom ic and socl ANNEX ia r ANNEX ai ANNEX tl ANNEX ce 130g comm it tee. ANNEX inpu ANNEX rsu ANNEX ingthe ANNEX seobjec ANNEX tivesthecommuni ANNEX tyshallca ANNEX rry ANNEX ou ANNEX t the fol ANNEX lowing a c ANNEX tiv ANNEX it ANNEX ies, comp ANNEX lemen ANNEX ting the ANNEX a ANNEX ctiv ANNEX it ANNEX iesc ANNEX arr ANNEX iedou ANNEX tinth ANNEX emem ANNEX bers ANNEX tat ANNEX es: a rt icl e13 0e ANNEX (a)implemen ANNEX tat ANNEX ion o f r e ANNEX search, t echno ANNEX logica ANNEX l af ter adoption of th ed eciion r s efr ANNEX ered to in dev ANNEX elopmen ANNEX t andd emont ANNEX srt ANNEX aion prog ANNEX ramm es,by at ric le 130d, implementingd c eiion s srel ANNEX atingtoth e romo ANNEX p t ANNEX ingco e ANNEX -opra ANNEX tionw ANNEX ithund et ANNEX rak ANNEX ings,rese ANNEX arch european r egion ald evelopm en t fundshallbet aken e ANNEX cnt ANNEX resandu ANNEX niv ANNEX ers ANNEX it ANNEX ies; byth ecouncl, a i c tingby a qu al ifi edm jo ANNEX a ri ANNEX ty ona proposa lfromthecomm issionandinco-opr ANNEX e t ANNEX a i ANNEX ionwth (b)promo ANNEX tion of co-opr ANNEX eat ANNEX ion in th ANNEX ef ld o ANNEX ie f theeurope anp ar liament. community r ANNEX esa ANNEX erch,tchno ANNEX log ANNEX e ica ANNEX ldevlopm ANNEX e t, ANNEX en ANNEX and d ANNEX emon ANNEX str ANNEX ation w ANNEX ith th ANNEX irdcoun ANNEX tr ANNEX ies a ANNEX nd ANNEX t ANNEX ine a ANNEX rntion ANNEX alo ANNEX rgan ANNEX iza ANNEX tion ANNEX s; w ith r ega rdtoth eeu rop ean ag ricu ltu ral gu idan ANNEX ce and g ua ran tee fund, guidan ce sec tion and the (c) d ANNEX issemin ANNEX ation andop ANNEX tim ANNEX izaiono ANNEX t fth eresut ANNEX lsof europ e a nsocia lfund,at ric les43,126and127remain a ANNEX ctiv ANNEX it ANNEX ie i ANNEX s in communty resear ANNEX ch, t ANNEX echnolog ANNEX icl ANNEX a l appicab leresp eciv t e . ly. ' ev ANNEX d e ANNEX lopment,anddemon ANNEX sta ANNEX rtion; ANNEX t ANNEX (d)simu ANNEX lat ANNEX ion o r ANNEX f the tain ANNEX ing and mob ANNEX il ANNEX ity o ANNEX f ANNEX r ANNEX esea ANNEX rche ANNEX rsinth ANNEX ecommun i ANNEX ty. - subsec tionv - re rchandtechno sea log ica ldeve ANNEX lopmen ANNEX t ANNEX r ANNEX at ANNEX il ANNEX ce130h a rt icl e 24 ANNEX m ANNEX emb ANNEX ers ANNEX tat ANNEX essh ANNEX all,inl ANNEX iai ANNEX sonw ANNEX i ecomm ANNEX th th iss ANNEX ion, ANNEX -o ANNEX co rd ANNEX ina ANNEX t se ANNEX e among them lve ANNEX s the po ANNEX lic ANNEX ies andat it lev isha llbeadd edtop artth reeo ftheeect rea ty prog ANNEX ramm e ANNEX sc a ANNEX rri ANNEX ed outatn a ANNEX tion ANNEX al leve ANNEX l. inc ANNEX loseerad inga sfo l s low: cont ANNEX actw ANNEX ith th ANNEX em e ANNEX embrs t ANNEX ats,th ANNEX e ecomm is ANNEX sionmay ANNEX take any u e ANNEX sfu ANNEX l in i ANNEX ti ANNEX at ANNEX ive to p romote su ch ANNEX co ANNEX -ord ANNEX ina ANNEX tion. t itlev i researchand technolog ical a ANNEX ri ANNEX tc ANNEX le130 ANNEX i development ANNEX 1. the commun ity sh all adopt a mu lt ANNEX i annua ANNEX l ANNEX frameworkprogramm es e ANNEX tt ANNEX ingou talli ANNEX tsactiv ANNEX ities.the a ri tce 13o l f frameworkprogramm eshalllaydownth escieni ANNEX t f ANNEX icand ANNEX techn ANNEX ica ANNEX lobject ANNEX ives,d e ANNEX fineth eirresp ANNEX ect ANNEX iv epriori ANNEX tie ANNEX s, 1. the communi ty'saimshalbetos l r t th eng enthe setou ANNEX tth ema ANNEX in linesofthea c ANNEX tivt ANNEX iisenv ANNEX e isagedandf ix sc ien tf iicandte i log chno clb a ai ssofeurop eanindust ANNEX ry theamoun tdeem edn eces ANNEX sary,th edeta ANNEX iledru lesfor andtoen cou rageittobecomemore compe ANNEX tt ANNEX i ea ANNEX iv t finan ANNEX cilp ANNEX a ari ANNEX tcipa ANNEX tion by th e commun ity in th e in tera ntioa n e llvl e. progamm ANNEX r ea s a wholea ndth eb re ANNEX akdow no fth s ANNEX i ANNEX am oun ANNEX tb e ANNEX tw e ANNEX enth evariousa c ANNEX tiv ANNEX it ANNEX iesenvisaged. 2. in o rde r to a chieve this ,i t sha ANNEX ll en courage under takings in cluding sm all and m edium -s ANNEX ized 2. theframeworkp ANNEX rog ANNEX ramm em ay b ap ANNEX e ad edo ANNEX t r undet rakings,researchc enr tesandun ivers ANNEX itiesinth er ANNEX i supp ANNEX lem t ANNEX ened,a ANNEX sthes ANNEX itu ANNEX at ang ANNEX ionch es. res e a rchandt echnolog i caldevelopm enta ctivi ANNEX ties; i ANNEX t sha ll supportth eire ffor ts toco -op e ANNEX ratew i ANNEX th on e anothe r,a iming,notably,a tenabl ingund ertakingsto a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le1 ANNEX 30k explo itth ecommun i ty' sinte a rnlm arket po tent ANNEX ialto thefull, inp ar tcu i lar throughth eop ening up o f e f ANNEX th r ANNEX amework prog ANNEX ramm ANNEX e sha ANNEX llb e implem ANNEX ented na tionalpub l iccon tracts, thedefin ANNEX ition ofcommon th ANNEX roughsp ANNEX eci ANNEX ficprogr ANNEX ammesdev ANNEX elop ANNEX ed wi ANNEX thin ea ANNEX ch 29.6. 87 f of ic ljou ANNEX rn ANNEX ia lo ANNEX a eeu ANNEX fth e ANNEX rop i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies n 6 ANNEX ol1 1 ANNEX 9/1 aciv t i i ty. each spec rog ic p f ramme shall de ANNEX fine the 2. the amoun t of the commun ANNEX ity's annul ANNEX a deta iledrule rimp sfo em l eningi t ,f t ixit r ANNEX sdu t ANNEX aionand con ANNEX tr t ANNEX ibuionsha ANNEX llbela ANNEX iddownund ANNEX erth e ANNEX ebudgta ANNEX ry prov id efortheme s deemednece an sa s ry. procedure,w ANNEX ithoutp re icetoo ANNEX jud therposs ANNEX ibleme s ANNEX thod ANNEX ofcommun ity financ ANNEX ing. th ANNEX ee s ANNEX timatedcosto fthe thecouni clshal f ldeinethedeta il edarrang ANNEX em en ANNEX t r ANNEX sfo speci ANNEX ficprogramme smust notinagg teexceedthe ANNEX rega ANNEX financia ANNEX lprovi ANNEX sioninthef rameworkprog ANNEX ramm e. i thedssemina t f know ion o ledge re sul tingfromthe spec if icp rog ramme s. ANNEX r ANNEX at ANNEX il ANNEX cei3 ANNEX 0q a rt icl e1301 ANNEX 1. the counc ANNEX il shal, a ANNEX l ct ANNEX ing unan ANNEX imously on a in imp lemen ting th e mu li t annual f ramework propo ANNEX salfromthecommis ANNEX sionandafte ANNEX rconsut ANNEX lingthe progr amm e, supp lementry p a rogramm es may be europ ANNEX ean pal ANNEX riamen ANNEX t andth eeconomic andsocia ANNEX l decid ed on invo lving thepartic a ipt fc ANNEX ion o et ANNEX rain committ ANNEX ee, adopt thep i ANNEX rovion ANNEX s sr ee ANNEX frred to in ANNEX a ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX es13 ANNEX 0iand130o. memb e rs tat eson ly,which sha llf in ANNEX an c ANNEX ethemsub ANNEX je c ANNEX t topossib lecommun ityp ar tic ipation. ANNEX 2. th ecounc ANNEX ilsh a ANNEX ll,act ANNEX ingbyaqu al ANNEX if ANNEX iedmajor ANNEX ityon the coun c il shl al adopt th l e rue l s appic ANNEX able to ap ropos ANNEX alfromth ecomm ision,a ANNEX s ft ANNEX erconsut ANNEX lingthe supp lementaryp rogramm es,p art icul arlyasregrd ANNEX a sthe economic andsoc lcomm ANNEX ia i ANNEX ttee,andinco -opera ANNEX tion di ssemin ationofknow ledgeandth ea c ANNEX ces ANNEX so fother i ANNEX wth th eeuropan p ANNEX e a ANNEX rl ANNEX iam ent, adop ANNEX tth eprovis ANNEX ions m eme b t rsae ts. refer ANNEX redt oinar ANNEX tice ANNEX l s 130k, 1301, 130m, 130nand ANNEX 13op (1). the adop tion o f th s ANNEX ee supplement ANNEX ary ANNEX programm e ANNEX ssh a ANNEX lla lsor equi ANNEX reth eag r ANNEX eemento fthe r at ice1 l 30m ANNEX m ANNEX emb ANNEX e t ANNEX rsae ANNEX tscon ANNEX cere ANNEX nd. ANNEX ' ANNEX . in imp lement ing th e mu lt iannual f ramewo rk programm e,thecommun itymay m akep rov ANNEX ision,wi ANNEX th sb ANNEX u-s ANNEX ect ANNEX ionv ANNEX i- en ANNEX vir ANNEX onm ANNEX ent theag reemen to fth em ember s t ates concerned, for part ic ip at ioninr e searchandd eve lopm entprogramm es undertaken by severalm ember s tates, includ ANNEX ing a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le2 ANNEX 5 par tic i pat ioninthestructur escreatedforth eexecut ANNEX ion oftho seprog ramm es. at ANNEX it ANNEX lev ANNEX iisha ANNEX llbeadd ANNEX edtop ANNEX artth ANNEX reeo ANNEX fth ANNEX eeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty ANNEX e ANNEX rad sfo ANNEX inga llow ANNEX s: a rt icl e13 0n ANNEX ' ANNEX titlev ANNEX ii in implem ent ing the mult iannua l f r am ewo ANNEX rk prog ramm e,thecommun i ay m ty m ak eprov is ANNEX ionfor ANNEX env ANNEX ironment co-op erat ion in community re sea rch, techno ANNEX logic ANNEX al deve lopmentandd emons trat ionw iththirdcounr ANNEX tie ANNEX so r int erna tionlo a rgani zat ions. ANNEX r ANNEX at ANNEX il ANNEX ce130 ANNEX r thedeta iledarr angementsforsuchco -op e ANNEX rat ANNEX ionm ay be thesube j to c finte a rntiona lag reem entsb e ANNEX tw een the 1. ac ANNEX tion by the communty r ANNEX i el ANNEX ating to th ANNEX e communityandth ethi rdp r at i e sconcernedwhchsh ANNEX i al ANNEX l eni ANNEX vronmetsh ANNEX n a ANNEX llh ANNEX avethefo ANNEX llowingob ANNEX jeciv ANNEX t e ANNEX s: ben ego tiated and con lud c ed in acco an ANNEX rd cew ith r ANNEX - topes ANNEX e e,p ANNEX rv rot ANNEX ectandimp ANNEX rov ANNEX eth ANNEX equ ANNEX ali ANNEX tyo ANNEX fth ANNEX e a rt icl e228. ANNEX env ANNEX ironm ANNEX ent, ANNEX - tocon ANNEX tr t ANNEX ibuetow ANNEX ard ANNEX sp t ANNEX roec ANNEX t anh ANNEX inghum eal ANNEX th, a rt icl e130o ANNEX - toen ANNEX sur rud ANNEX eap ent and r ANNEX at a ANNEX ionlu ANNEX ti ANNEX liz ANNEX ation o ANNEX f ANNEX n ANNEX atu ANNEX ralr ANNEX esou ANNEX rce ANNEX s. thecommun i tym ay se tupjo intunder ANNEX tak ANNEX ingso rany othe rstrc utur eneces saryforth eef fii centexecu ANNEX tionof p r rogamm so e f commun i ty r esea rch, t ANNEX echnolog ANNEX icl ANNEX a 2. a c ANNEX tion by th e commun ty r ANNEX i e ANNEX lt ANNEX aing to th e deve lopmentanddemonsta rtion. environm en ANNEX t sh l ANNEX al be baed on th ANNEX s ep rinc ANNEX ipe ANNEX ls th a ANNEX t ANNEX prevent ANNEX ivea ctionshouldbetak en,thatenvi ANNEX ronm enta ANNEX l ANNEX dam ageshou ldasap rio ANNEX ri ANNEX tyber ecti ANNEX fiedatsource,and ANNEX thatth epolu ANNEX l tershouldpay.envi ANNEX ronm en ANNEX talprotec ANNEX tion a rt icl e 130p ANNEX requirem en ANNEX tssh l ANNEX alb ANNEX eacompon entofth ecommun ity's ANNEX othe ANNEX rpo i ANNEX lci ANNEX es. 1. the de tai led a r r em ang en ts fo rf inanc ANNEX ing e ANNEX ach progr amme, inc ludinganycommun ity c on ANNEX tr ANNEX ibu ANNEX tion, shal lbees tab lishedatthetim eoftheadopt ANNEX ionofth e 3. inp ANNEX rep ANNEX aringi ANNEX tsact ANNEX ionr ANNEX ela ANNEX tingtoth ANNEX eenv ANNEX ironm ANNEX ent, p ror g e amm . thecommun ANNEX ityshal ANNEX ltak c ANNEX eacounto ANNEX f: nol169/12 o ff ica i rn ANNEX ljou a ANNEX lofth rop ANNEX eeu eancommun ANNEX ii ANNEX tes 29.6.87 - aa vl iab les cien ti fican e dt i chnca lda ta, ' ANNEX ari ANNEX tcl ANNEX e140a - env ironm ent alcond it ion sinth eva riou sreg ion ANNEX sof 1. at ther eques ANNEX to fth ecourto fju st ANNEX iceanda fte ANNEX r thecommun ity, consul ANNEX ting th e comm i ANNEX ssion and th e european - th epo ten tia lb e enft i s sandcot fa so t ciono ro a flck parl ANNEX iam t, th ANNEX en ecoun cilm ay, acting unan ANNEX imou ly, ANNEX s o fat cion, atta ANNEX chtoth ecou to ANNEX r fjusticeacourtwith ju ANNEX risdi ANNEX cion ANNEX t ANNEX toh ea ANNEX randd e ANNEX termineatf irs ANNEX tinstance,sub ANNEX jecttoa - thee conomic and soc ia ldeve lopm entof th ANNEX e righto ANNEX fappea ltoth ecour ANNEX to fjus ANNEX ticeonpo in ANNEX tso flaw commun i ty a s a who l e and theba ANNEX lan ANNEX ced onlyandina cco ANNEX rdan c ANNEX ewith thecond i ANNEX tionsla ANNEX iddown dev elopm to en fitsreg ion s. ta ANNEX bythes te,ce ANNEX tu rta ANNEX inc fac ANNEX lasseso tiono ANNEX rproceed ANNEX ing ANNEX rough ANNEX b tbyn ANNEX a r ANNEX tualo ANNEX rlega ANNEX lpe ANNEX r s.th ANNEX son a r ANNEX tcoutsha ANNEX ll 4. the communi ty sha lltakeac tionre lat ANNEX ingtothe no ANNEX t be compe ANNEX ten ANNEX t tohea ANNEX r and de ANNEX term ANNEX ine ac ANNEX tion ANNEX s env ironment totheext ent towh ich theobjec ANNEX tive ANNEX s rough ANNEX b t by m ANNEX emb ANNEX e ta ANNEX r s te ANNEX s o ANNEX r by commun ANNEX ity ref err edtoinp aragraph 1 c anbea t ANNEX tainedbet ANNEX t e ANNEX ra t in ANNEX sti ANNEX tut ANNEX ion ANNEX sor ques ANNEX tion ANNEX sre ANNEX fer ANNEX redfo ANNEX ra p ANNEX rel ANNEX imin ANNEX ary community levelth anatth elevelofth eindividua ANNEX l l ANNEX ruingund ANNEX e r ANNEX rat ANNEX icl ANNEX e 150. members t ates. w ithoutp rejudic etoc ert ANNEX ainmeasure ANNEX s of a commun i ty n a ture, th emember s t ANNEX ate ANNEX s sh al ANNEX l f an in ceandimp lem enttheothermea r sues. 2. th ecoun ci ANNEX l,followingthepro cedu ANNEX relaiddownin ANNEX paragraph1,sh a ANNEX lldetrm ANNEX e ineth ecompo s ANNEX it ANNEX iono ftha ANNEX t i 5. wth in the i e rrspc et esph iv e resofcomp e ANNEX tence,the court and adop t then ee ANNEX cssary adjus ANNEX tm ens and ANNEX t communty andth i ememb e r stt aes sha llco-opr ANNEX eat ANNEX e addiion ANNEX t alp rovis ANNEX ion ANNEX stoth estatut ANNEX eo fth ecourtof w ithti hrdc oun tr iesan i dwthter h l eev antin tera ni ANNEX toa ANNEX nl just ANNEX ice. unl ANNEX e s ANNEX s th ecoun ci ANNEX ld e id ANNEX c esotherwie, th ANNEX s e org i anza tions. the arrangem en ts for community provs ANNEX iionso fth ist r ANNEX eaty r e ANNEX latingtoth ecou rtof co-opr eat ionm ay beth esub e jctofagrem e ensb ANNEX t etw ANNEX een jusi ANNEX tce,inp ar ANNEX ticu ANNEX larth eprovi ANNEX sionso fthepro co ANNEX to lon thecommun i tyandth ethirdpari tesconcern ANNEX ed,wh ANNEX ich thestatut ANNEX eo fth ecourto fjusti ANNEX c e,sha ANNEX llapplytotht ANNEX a shal lben egot iat edandcon c ludedina cco ANNEX rdancew ANNEX ith cou ANNEX rt. a rt icl e228. thepr iou ev sp a rag raphsha l i lbew tp thou jud re iceto 3. tem ANNEX h eme ANNEX br ft ANNEX so a ANNEX htcou ANNEX rtsh ANNEX allb ANNEX echo ANNEX se r ANNEX nfom m e embr s tat es' compt eene to n c ego ti ANNEX ate in pe ANNEX r sonswhoseindependenc ANNEX eisbeyonddoubtandwho in tera ntion alboi desandtococ nluei d n tern at ioa ANNEX nl posses ANNEX sth eab ANNEX ii ANNEX ltyrequi ANNEX redforappo tm ANNEX in enttojud ANNEX ic l ANNEX ia ag re e emnt s. of ANNEX fice;theysha ANNEX llbeappo in ANNEX tedbycommona c rdo ANNEX co f ANNEX th ANNEX egov ANNEX er e ANNEX nmnt ANNEX softh ANNEX ememb ANNEX e t ANNEX rsat ANNEX esfrat ANNEX o ermo ANNEX fsix ANNEX years.th ANNEX em emb e ANNEX rship sha ANNEX l a ANNEX lbeprt ANNEX ialyr ANNEX l enewedeve ry a rt ice1 l 3s 0 threeyears. re ANNEX ti ANNEX ring member l ANNEX s shal be e ANNEX l ib ANNEX ig le for ANNEX e ANNEX rappi ANNEX ontm ANNEX ent ANNEX . th ecoun cil,ac tingunan imou slyonapropo salf ANNEX rom ecomm th iss ion and a ftrcon e l sut eeu ingth rop ANNEX ean par liam entandth ee conomic andsoi cal commi ANNEX tte, ANNEX e 4. th ANNEX atcou ANNEX r l ANNEX tshale ANNEX stab ANNEX lshi ANNEX i tsru ANNEX leso ANNEX fp c ANNEX ro r ANNEX eduein l shaldecide wh at at cion is tobe taken by the agre ANNEX em tw ANNEX en ith th ANNEX ecor ANNEX utofjus ANNEX tic ANNEX e.tho ANNEX seru l ANNEX e a ANNEX sshll comm ui nty. requ ANNEX iretheunan ANNEX imousapp ANNEX rov ANNEX alofth c ANNEX ecounil.. ANNEX ' th eco uni cl sh all,und erth econ dit ion sla iddownin th epre ced ingsubp arag raph,de fin ethosema tte ANNEX rs on a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le27 wh ich de cis ion sare to be tak en by a qu ANNEX ali ANNEX fied a mjo ri ty. asecondpar ANNEX agr l ANNEX aphsha ein ANNEX lb ser ANNEX t r ANNEX edinat ANNEX icl ANNEX e 160o ANNEX fth ANNEX e ANNEX eaect re ANNEX atyword ANNEX ed a ANNEX sfol ANNEX low ANNEX s: r at icl e130 t ' ANNEX thecounclm ANNEX i ay,ac ANNEX tingunanimou ANNEX slyatthereque ANNEX sto ANNEX f ANNEX the cou ANNEX rt of ju ANNEX st ANNEX i ce and aft ANNEX er consul ANNEX ting the theprotec tivem e asure s adoptedincommonpu r an ANNEX su t commiss ANNEX ionandth ANNEX eeu ropanp ANNEX e ar ANNEX liam ANNEX ent,am endthe toart icl e 130 ssh a lln o tp reven tanym ember sta ANNEX te p ANNEX rov ANNEX is ANNEX ion ANNEX soft ANNEX it ANNEX lei ANNEX iio ANNEX fth ANNEX est ANNEX atu ANNEX te. ANNEX ' ANNEX . from main t a ining o r introduc ing mor ANNEX e s tr ANNEX ingen ANNEX t pro tec tivem e asure s comp a tiblewi th th istre ANNEX aty. ANNEX '. ANNEX chapteriv chapteri ii ANNEX general prov ANNEX isionsprovis ion ing the treaty e s amend stabl ANNEX ish ANNEX ing theeuropeanatomic energycommun ity ANNEX a ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e28 a ri tce 2 l 6 theprov ANNEX ision ANNEX softhsa ANNEX i ctshal ANNEX lbewithoutprjud ANNEX i ANNEX e cetothe ANNEX prov ANNEX is ANNEX ionsofthein ANNEX strum t ANNEX ensofaccs ANNEX esionofthek ANNEX ingdomth eeaect rea tysha llbesupp lem ent edbyth efo llow ing ofspain andtheportugue ANNEX ser epub ANNEX lict otheeurope ANNEX anproi vs ios: n c ANNEX omm ANNEX uni ANNEX ti ANNEX es. 29. 6. 87 f of ic ljou ANNEX rn ANNEX ia a ANNEX loftheeu e ANNEX rop i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies nol16 1 ANNEX 9/3 r at il ce29 leve ANNEX landsca ANNEX leoffundingofwh l ANNEX ich sha r ANNEX ixedpu ANNEX lbef suant ANNEX toadeci ANNEX sionofthecouncilacingbyaqua ANNEX t i ANNEX lf jo ANNEX iedma ri ANNEX tyin at ril ce 4 (2) o f coun i cl d ei cs ion 85/257/eec, afte ta ANNEX r ob ing theag ANNEX in to ANNEX reemen f themember s te ANNEX ta s reu a tomo f7m ay 1985onthecommun it ANNEX ies'sytemo ANNEX s f con ANNEX cern ANNEX ed' ANNEX .ownre source s,thewords' theleve landsca ANNEX leoffundingof iwhch wil l bef ixedpursuanttoad ei cs ionofthecouncl ANNEX i i ANNEX th en ANNEX endm ANNEX s am tsh ANNEX allno ANNEX taf ANNEX fetth ANNEX elega ANNEX c lna ANNEX tur ANNEX eofth ANNEX eac tingun animously'shal lber epl acedbyth eword ANNEX s' the a ANNEX for ANNEX emen ANNEX tioe ANNEX n e ANNEX ddcs ANNEX iion. ANNEX t ANNEX itlei ANNEX ii i treatyprovsionson euro -o ANNEX peanco perat ANNEX ioninthesphereof fore ANNEX ign ANNEX pol ANNEX icy r at il ce30 3. (a) th ANNEX emin ANNEX is ANNEX tes fo ANNEX r r ANNEX rfoeigna ANNEX ffa ANNEX irsandam ANNEX emb ANNEX ero ANNEX f ANNEX th ANNEX ecomm ANNEX iss ANNEX ionsh ANNEX al e ANNEX lmeta ANNEX tle ANNEX astf ANNEX ourt ANNEX ime ANNEX saeurop eanco e -opra tioninth e esphreoffor eignpo ANNEX licysh ANNEX al ANNEX l ye ANNEX arwth ANNEX i in th ANNEX efram rko ANNEX ewo feurop ANNEX eanpo i ANNEX lt ANNEX icalbegovern edbythefol lowingp rovi sion s: co e ANNEX -oprat ANNEX ion.theymaya ANNEX l i ANNEX sodscu ANNEX ssfore ANNEX ignpo ANNEX licy ANNEX a ANNEX mtt ANNEX ers w ANNEX ith ANNEX in te f ANNEX h r ew ANNEX am o ANNEX rk o ANNEX f pl ANNEX oi ANNEX tic ANNEX al ANNEX co-op ANNEX era ANNEX tion ontheoca ANNEX csiono ANNEX fm et ANNEX eing ANNEX softh ANNEX e 1. th eh t igh conrc at ingp r ai tes,be ingm ember ANNEX so fthe counc ANNEX iloftheeurope ANNEX ancommun i ANNEX tis. ANNEX e eu rop ean communi tie s, sha llendeavourjoin ANNEX tlyto fo rmul ateandimpl ementaeurop eanfo re ANNEX ignpo ANNEX licy. (b)thecommiss ANNEX ionsha ANNEX llbefu ANNEX llyassoc ANNEX iat ANNEX edw ANNEX ithth ANNEX e ANNEX pro ANNEX ce ing ANNEX ed sofpol ANNEX it ANNEX ica ANNEX lco-oper ANNEX ation. 2. (a)th ehighcon tra ct ingp art iesund ert aketoin ANNEX form and con sut each o l th re r on any fo e l ANNEX ignpoicy (c) inord e ANNEX rtoensuretheswi ANNEX ftadoptionofcommon a mtt erso fg e enr t lin a ee rstsoa su stoen et r h ANNEX a e ANNEX tthir posi ANNEX tionsandtheimplementat ANNEX ionofjointat ANNEX cion, combin edin f luenceisexe rcisedase ffec ANNEX t lya ANNEX ive s theh igh cont ANNEX ract ANNEX ing pr ANNEX atis sha ANNEX e l ANNEX l, a ANNEX sf ara s po ssib leth roughco rd -o int aion,theconvergenceof poss ANNEX ible,rf ANNEX erinf ANNEX a romimpedingtheformaiono ANNEX t fa thi erposi tions andth eimp lementt ANNEX aiono fjo t ANNEX in consensusandthejo ta ANNEX in c ANNEX tionwh i ANNEX ch thiscould a ct ion. produce. su (b)con l tation s shal ltakeplace b efo ANNEX re thehigh 4. theh igh cot ANNEX nrac ANNEX tingp art ANNEX ies sha ANNEX llen surethatt h ANNEX e con tra ctingp a rt iesde cid eonth ei rfina ANNEX lpos ANNEX it ANNEX ion. european par ANNEX liament isc lose ANNEX ly a ssoci ANNEX ated wi ANNEX th ANNEX european po ANNEX li ANNEX tic ANNEX al co-opera ANNEX tion. to t hatend the ANNEX pr ANNEX e s ANNEX idency sha ANNEX llr egula ANNEX rly inform th e european (c) in adop ting it spo s itions and in i t ANNEX sn ational ANNEX pa ANNEX rliamentofthefo ANNEX reignpol ANNEX icyi s ANNEX sueswhicha r ANNEX ebeing mea surese achhigh contr acting pa ANNEX rtysh al ANNEX lt ake ex ANNEX amin ANNEX ed w ANNEX ith ANNEX in t ANNEX he f ANNEX ram ANNEX ewo ANNEX rk o ANNEX f po ANNEX li ANNEX tic ANNEX al fu llaccountoftheposi tionso ftheotherpartners ANNEX co ANNEX -op ANNEX era ANNEX tio ANNEX na n a ANNEX dshllen ANNEX sur ANNEX ethtth ANNEX a evi ANNEX ewsofthe andshal lgiveduecon s idera tiontoth edes ANNEX irabi ANNEX lity ANNEX eu ANNEX rop ANNEX ean p a ANNEX rl ANNEX iamen ANNEX t a re du ANNEX ly taken in ANNEX to ofadopt ingandimp lem en tingcommoneu ropean con ANNEX sid ANNEX era ANNEX tion. po st iio ns. inordrtoin e c re a setherc i apai ctyforjoin ANNEX ta t ANNEX cion eex ANNEX 5. th trn ANNEX e a l ANNEX lpoic ANNEX ieso ANNEX fth eeurop ANNEX e i ANNEX ancommuntyand intheforignpo e l icyfie ld,thehigh conr ANNEX tacing ANNEX t th l ANNEX epoii ANNEX cesage ANNEX redineuropeanpol ANNEX it ANNEX ica ANNEX lco ANNEX -op ANNEX ert ANNEX aion pr ai tessh l alensureth tcommonp a rinc ANNEX iplesand mu ANNEX stb ANNEX ecos ANNEX nis ANNEX tet ANNEX n. ob ject ive sa reg r adua llydeve lopedandd ef ANNEX ined. ANNEX thep re ANNEX sidencyandthecomm is ANNEX sion,ea ANNEX chwithin it ANNEX s thed et erm inat f common po ion o i ANNEX st s sh ANNEX ion l ANNEX al own sph er eof comp t ANNEX e c ANNEX ene, shal ANNEX lh av ANNEX e sp e ANNEX cia ANNEX l cons ti tut eapo intofref erenc rth ANNEX epo efo l ANNEX ice ANNEX iso ANNEX f responib ANNEX s l ANNEX iityforensu ANNEX ringt a ANNEX htsuchconi ANNEX sstencyis th igh c eh ot nraci tngpar ties. soughtandm ain ANNEX tain ANNEX ed. (d)thehigh con tra ct ing p art iessha llend ANNEX eavou ANNEX rto 6. (a)theh igh contr ANNEX act ANNEX ingp a ANNEX rt ANNEX iesconside ANNEX rt h ANNEX atcloser avo idanya ct iono s rpoi tionwhi ch impar ANNEX isthi ANNEX er co-opera ANNEX tionon qu s ANNEX etionsofeu ropean scu ANNEX e i ANNEX rty e ffe cti ven essa sacoe hsiv efo rceinin ter ANNEX nat ANNEX ioa ANNEX nl would con t ANNEX ribue in an e ANNEX t s ANNEX sen ANNEX tialw ay toth e r elt aioso n i rwth inin tern ation alo rgai nzt ANNEX aion ANNEX s. developmento faeu ropean ideni ANNEX ttyinexternal ol1n 69/ 14 o fi fci aljor ANNEX unlo ANNEX a fth ANNEX eeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies 29.6.87 pol icymatt ers.theyarer e -o adytoco rdina ANNEX tether ANNEX i (b)th ANNEX ep reid ANNEX s en ANNEX cyshallber spon ANNEX e ib ANNEX s l rin ANNEX efo ii ANNEX tt ANNEX aing pos ition s more c se lo ly on the po i ANNEX ltc ANNEX ial and ac ANNEX tion and coo ANNEX rdina ANNEX ting and rep ANNEX reen ANNEX s ingth ANNEX t e economicaspe ctsofse r cuty. i po ANNEX si ANNEX tion ANNEX so rs ANNEX fthemembe te ANNEX ta sinre ANNEX lat ANNEX ion ANNEX swi ANNEX th ANNEX th ANNEX irdcoun ANNEX tr ANNEX iesinr ANNEX esp ANNEX ecto ANNEX feu e ANNEX ropan po ANNEX lt ANNEX iic ANNEX al ANNEX co ANNEX -ope ANNEX rat ANNEX ionac t ANNEX ivi ANNEX ties.itshal ANNEX lal ANNEX soberespons ANNEX ible (b)thehigh con trac ting p r at iesaredetermin ANNEX edto rthem ANNEX fo anagemento fpo i ANNEX lica ANNEX t lco e ANNEX -opra ANNEX tion and ma ina tin th e t echnolog ica l and indu st ANNEX ria ANNEX l inpa ANNEX ri ANNEX tcular fo ANNEX rd rawing up thetimetab ANNEX leo f i condt sn ion ec ess aryfo rthers i ecu ri ty. th ANNEX eyshall m ANNEX eet s and fo ANNEX ing r conv ANNEX ening and o ANNEX rgan ANNEX izing wo rktoth atendbo tha tna tion all eve land,wh ANNEX ere m ANNEX eet ANNEX ing ANNEX s. app rop ria te, w ith in thef ramewo rk o ANNEX f th ANNEX e compe ten tins ti tut ion sandbod ies. ANNEX (c) th ANNEX epo li ANNEX tic ANNEX ald i ANNEX rectors sha ANNEX llmee ANNEX tr egu ANNEX larlyinthe ANNEX po ANNEX li ANNEX tic ANNEX alcomm i ANNEX tteeino rdertogivethenecess ANNEX ary (c) no thing in th ist it le sh a ll impedec los ANNEX er impe ANNEX tus,m a ANNEX intain th econ t ANNEX inu ANNEX ity of european co-op era tioninthef ieldofscu e ri tybetw ANNEX eenc e ANNEX rta ANNEX in po ANNEX li ANNEX tic ANNEX al co -oper ANNEX ation and p repa ANNEX rem inist ANNEX ers' of theh igh cont ra c ting p a rt ies wi ANNEX thin the d ANNEX iscu ANNEX ssion ANNEX s. fr am ewo rko fthewe stern europeanun ANNEX iono rthe a tlan tica ll ian ce. ANNEX (d)the poli ANNEX tic ANNEX al comm it ANNEX tee or, i ANNEX fn c ANNEX ees ANNEX sary, a ANNEX min ANNEX is ANNEX ter ANNEX ialm et ANNEX eing sh ANNEX al ANNEX lconvenewi ANNEX thin48hou r ANNEX s7. (a)init nera ntion alin si ttt uiosa n nda tin tern ANNEX at ANNEX ioa ANNEX nl .attherequeto ANNEX s fa ANNEX tl a ANNEX estth ANNEX reemembe ANNEX rs a ANNEX ttes. con fer en c es which they att end, th e h ANNEX igh t conrat cing par tie s sh al l ende r toa avou dop ANNEX t commonpo s it ionsonth j esubet cscoveedbyth ANNEX r s ANNEX i (e) the european co r ANNEX respondents'group shalb ANNEX l e t il te. responib ANNEX s e, und ANNEX l erth edie ANNEX r c ANNEX tionofth epolt ANNEX iia ANNEX cl ANNEX comm it ANNEX tee,formonitoing th ANNEX r eimplem t ANNEX enat ANNEX ionof ANNEX europeanpoli ANNEX tic ANNEX alco -oper ANNEX ationandfo rstudy ANNEX ing (b)inin tera ntioa nlin si ttu tion sanda tin tern ANNEX at ANNEX ioa ANNEX nl generlo ANNEX a rganiza ANNEX tionalp l ANNEX robem s. conf erence sinwhi ta ch no lltheh igh con ANNEX trac ANNEX ting par tie sp ar tic ipa te,thos ewho dop a rt ANNEX icip ANNEX atesh a ANNEX ll takeful laccoun to fpoi st ionsage redineuropean (f) wo ANNEX rking g ANNEX roup ANNEX s sh ANNEX allm ANNEX eet a ANNEX sdi ANNEX ret ANNEX ced by th ANNEX e ANNEX po ANNEX li ANNEX tia ANNEX clcomm ANNEX it ANNEX tee. l poi tic alc- oop era tion. ANNEX e ANNEX (g)a scr ANNEX eta ANNEX ria ANNEX tba ANNEX s ru ANNEX ed inb s ANNEX sel ANNEX s sh ANNEX ala ANNEX l s ANNEX sis ANNEX t th ANNEX e 8. theh ighcont rac tingp a rt iessha llo rgani ANNEX zeapoli ANNEX ti ANNEX cal pre ANNEX sidency inp repa ANNEX ring and imp lement ANNEX ingthe di alogu ew ith th irdcoun tri esandregiona ANNEX lgroup ANNEX ings act ANNEX ivit ANNEX iesofeuropeanpol ANNEX it ANNEX ica ANNEX lco-op era ANNEX tionandin whenevertheydeemitnece ssa ry. administ ANNEX rat ANNEX ivem a ANNEX tte ANNEX rs.itshalc ANNEX l arryou tisdu ANNEX t t ANNEX ies ANNEX underth eautho ANNEX ri ANNEX tyo fthepre ANNEX sid ANNEX en cy. 9. th eh igh con tra ctingpar tie sandthecommission, th roug hmu tua l a ss is tan ce and i nfo rmat ANNEX ion, sha ANNEX ll 11. asr eg ANNEX ardsp ANNEX riv ANNEX ilegesandimmun it ANNEX ies,them ember ANNEX so f in ten sifyco -oper at ionb e tweenthe irrep res ANNEX enta ANNEX tions thee u ANNEX ropean pol ANNEX it ANNEX ica ANNEX l coopert ANNEX aion s e ANNEX cre ANNEX t ar ANNEX iatsha ANNEX ll c acr edi tedtoth irdcoun tr iesandtoit nern ation ANNEX al be trea ANNEX tedinth es am ANNEX ew ay a sm embers of the o rgan iza tion s. dip ANNEX lom a ANNEX ticmi ANNEX ssionso fthehigh contract ANNEX ing p a ANNEX rt ANNEX ies ANNEX basedinthesam epla ANNEX ceasth esecr ANNEX etar ANNEX iat.10. (a)thepres idencyo feuropeanpoli tica ANNEX lco-oper ANNEX ation sh allbeheldbyth ehighc on trac ANNEX tingpartywhich 12. f ANNEX iveyear ANNEX safte ANNEX rth eentryin r ANNEX tofoceo i ANNEX fthsat th ANNEX c e ho lds thep r esidency o f the coun ANNEX cil of the h ANNEX igh con ANNEX tra ANNEX ctingp a ANNEX rt ANNEX iesshallex ANNEX amin ANNEX ewheth ANNEX er any eu ro p eanc omm unt iies. r ANNEX evi ANNEX sionoft ANNEX il ANNEX tei i ANNEX iisrequr ANNEX ied. ANNEX t ANNEX itle v general and f ANNEX inalprov ANNEX isions a ri tce 3 l 1 eu e ANNEX rop an e i ANNEX conom c commun i ANNEX ty and th e tra ANNEX ety ANNEX es ANNEX tabl ANNEX ishing theeurope ANNEX an atomic energy commun ANNEX ityth ep rov is ionsofthetreaty e stab li shingtheeurope ANNEX an conce ANNEX rningth epow e ANNEX rso fthecourto fju s ANNEX ti ANNEX ceofth eco al andstee l commun ity, th et r eaty es tab ANNEX li ANNEX shingthe europ ANNEX e ancommun i ANNEX ties andth ANNEX eex e ANNEX rci ANNEX seo fthos ANNEX epower ANNEX s 29.6.8 7 o ff ic ljou ANNEX rn ia lo ANNEX a rop ANNEX e ANNEX ftheeu i ANNEX ancommuni ANNEX tes nol 1 ANNEX 6 1 ANNEX 9/5 lshal app ly on rov ly tothep i so ion s i ftle ii and to t requ ANNEX iremen ANNEX ts. the ins ANNEX t t ANNEX rumensof ra ANNEX ti ANNEX f t ANNEX icaionwl ANNEX il beat r le 32;th ic eysha l lytotho lapp ep s rov iion sund s rth ANNEX e e depo ANNEX si i ANNEX tedw rnmen ANNEX th thegove tofthei ANNEX tal l ANNEX ianrepubic.samecondi tionsasforth eprov is so ion fthesa idt ANNEX rea ANNEX tie ANNEX s. ANNEX 2. th ANNEX isa ANNEX c i ANNEX twl ANNEX l en ANNEX te tofo ANNEX rin rceonth ANNEX efi ANNEX rs ANNEX tdayo ANNEX fth ANNEX e ANNEX mon ANNEX th fo llow ANNEX ing that in wh ANNEX ich the ins ANNEX trumento f a ri tce 3 l 2 ra ANNEX tf ANNEX iic ANNEX ationisd ANNEX epos ANNEX itedofthelats ANNEX s igna ANNEX to ta ANNEX rys l ANNEX tetofui ANNEX fl ANNEX th ANNEX atfo ANNEX rma ANNEX li ANNEX ty.subje ct toart icl e 3 (1),tot it leiiandtoa rt ANNEX icle 31,noth inginth i sact sha llaf fec tth et ret aieses ANNEX tab ANNEX li ANNEX shingthe a ANNEX rt ANNEX ic ANNEX le3 ANNEX 4european communiti eso ranysub sequen ANNEX ttrea ANNEX ties andac ts modi fying orsupplemen tingthem. th ANNEX isa c ANNEX t,d rawnup inas ingleorig ANNEX inal inth edanish, ANNEX du ANNEX tch, engl ANNEX ish, f ANNEX rench, germ an,g reek,i r ANNEX ish,ita ANNEX lian ANNEX , ANNEX por ANNEX tugu ANNEX ese andspanish langu ages,thet extsineacho f a ri tce 3 l 3 the ANNEX selanguagesbingequ ANNEX e allyau thent ANNEX ic,w i ANNEX ll bedepos ANNEX ited ANNEX inthea ANNEX rchivesofthegovernm ento fth eital ANNEX ianrepubl ANNEX ic, i1. ths ac twill be r ati fiedby th eh igh cont ANNEX racing ANNEX t wh ANNEX ich w l ANNEX il r emi ANNEX ta c r ANNEX etif ANNEX ied copy to e ach of thepa rt iesinacco rdancewi th thei rrespe ct iv econ ANNEX st ANNEX itu ANNEX tiona ANNEX l gove ANNEX rnmentso ftheoth ANNEX ers ignatorysta ANNEX t es. nol 169/16 o fic f ia ljou rnlo ANNEX a rop ANNEX ftheeu e i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies 29.6.87 t il bek raef tel seh era fha rund ert egn edebe ANNEX fu t ANNEX ldmaegigedeund ANNEX ersk ANNEX r e ANNEX ev ropae ANNEX tdenneeu i efae ANNEX sk lle ANNEX s a kt. zu urkund d essenh ab endieun terze ANNEX i chn ANNEX etenb ANNEX evo ANNEX llm ANNEX ach ANNEX t t ANNEX igen ih ANNEX r t ANNEX euner ANNEX sch ANNEX ri ANNEX ften un ANNEX terd ANNEX ies ANNEX e einh eil tich eeuropi ascheak tegese ANNEX tzt. επ σ ίσ τωσητωνανωτ έρω,ο ιυπο γεγ ρ αμμ ANNEX ένο ANNEX ιπ ρ ANNEX ληεξο ANNEX ύσιο ANNEX ιυπ ANNEX έγραψα ANNEX ντη ANNEX νπαρο ANNEX ύσαε ANNEX νια ANNEX ία ε υ ρωπα ϊκήπ ρ ά ξη. i inwtn ess wh ereo ftheund ers ign edp len t ANNEX ipo t ANNEX enia ANNEX rie ignedth ANNEX shaves iss ANNEX ing ANNEX leeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eanac ANNEX t. enfedelocua llo spl enipo ten cia r sab io a i ANNEX jofrm ANNEX ant ANNEX essu ANNEX scr ANNEX ib r ANNEX enlapes ANNEX enea ANNEX t c ANNEX ta un ANNEX ica eu ANNEX rop ANNEX ea. enfo idequo i,lesp len ipo ten tia ire ssou ANNEX ssign ANNEX eson ANNEX tappo ANNEX sel ANNEX eur ANNEX ssign ANNEX atu ANNEX resaub ANNEX asdup ANNEX res ANNEX entac ANNEX te un iqu eeurop een. i da fhanus in,chu irnal an a chumh t cha io ANNEX ighth s ANNEX -sin ANNEX ith ANNEX eal ANNEX amhle ANNEX isanion ANNEX st ANNEX raimeo ANNEX rpa ANNEX chaon ANNEX air s eo. infeded iche,ip l ipo en ten zia riso tto ANNEX scr ANNEX it ANNEX tih ANNEX annoappo ANNEX s rof ANNEX tolelo irm ANNEX einca lp ANNEX lcea e ANNEX rs t ANNEX enea ANNEX tto i uncoer uop eo. t enb li jkew aa an deond rv erg etek end eg lm ANNEX evo ch ANNEX a t ANNEX igd ANNEX enhunh ANNEX and ANNEX t en ANNEX ek ingond ANNEX erdezeeu ANNEX rop ANNEX ese t akeh ebb e engst eld. sp em fedoqueo l enipo ten cia rio sab aixoa ANNEX ss ado ANNEX in sapu ANNEX ser ssua ANNEX ama sas ANNEX sin ANNEX atu ANNEX rasnof ANNEX ina ANNEX ldo p resen teac to un ico eu ropeu. udfaerdig et ilux embourg d ensyt ANNEX tend ANNEX efebrurn ANNEX a itt r ANNEX enhunded ANNEX eogs ANNEX eksog ANNEX fi ANNEX rsogih ANNEX aag d ANNEX en ot teogtyvend efebru arn itt enhund redeogs ANNEX eksog ANNEX fir ANNEX s. g esch ehen zuluxembu rgamsiebz ehn ANNEX tenfeb ANNEX ruarneunzehnhunde ANNEX rts ANNEX echsund ANNEX ach ANNEX tzigundind ANNEX en h aag amachtund zwanz igs tenf ebru arneun ANNEX zehnhund ANNEX ert ANNEX sechsunda ANNEX chtz ANNEX ig. έγ ινεστολο υξεμβο ύ ρ γο,στι ςδέκαεπ ANNEX τ άφ ANNEX εβρουαρ ANNEX ίουχίλ ANNEX ιαε ν ANNEX νιακ όσ ANNEX ιαο ANNEX γδό ANNEX νταέ ANNEX ξικα ANNEX ιστη γη σ χά τιςε ίκοσιοκτώφεβρο υαρ ίο ί υχλιαενι ANNEX νακόσ ANNEX ι αο ANNEX γδόνταέξι. doneatlux rgonth embou esev ANNEX ent ANNEX een ANNEX thdayoff eb ANNEX ruryinth ANNEX a eyea ANNEX ronet hos ANNEX uandn ANNEX inehund ANNEX red andeigh ty- sixanda tthehague onthetwen ANNEX ty- ANNEX eigh ANNEX thdayo ANNEX ffebru ANNEX aryintheyea ANNEX ronethous ANNEX and nin eh und redande igh ty- six. h echo enlux emburgo,e ldieci sie tedefeb ANNEX rerodem ANNEX il nov ANNEX eci ANNEX ento ANNEX soch ANNEX ent ANNEX ayse ANNEX isyenlah ANNEX ayae ANNEX l en v t iochodef r eberodem il novec ien ANNEX tosoch ANNEX e n ANNEX taysei ANNEX s. a fitalux embou rgledix -septf ev rie ANNEX rmi ANNEX lneu ANNEX fcen a ANNEX tqutr ANNEX e-v t ANNEX ing- ANNEX sixe ANNEX talah ANNEX ayelev ANNEX ing ANNEX t-hu ANNEX i ev ANNEX tf r ANNEX ier m ilneufcen tqu atr e-v ing t-six. a rnadhean amhilucs amburganseach ANNEX tulade ANNEX agdemh ANNEX ifeabh ANNEX rasabhl ANNEX iainmi ANNEX lenao ANNEX igc ANNEX eado ANNEX chto aseagu ssaha ig ant-o cht ulaisf ichedemh ANNEX if e ANNEX abh ANNEX rami ANNEX lenao c ANNEX igeado ch ANNEX toase. f attoalu ssembu rgo,add idi cia sse tt ebb ANNEX ef raiom ANNEX il ANNEX l e ANNEX enovcen ANNEX tot ANNEX tan ANNEX tae ANNEX s l ANNEX i,eal ANNEX 'aa,add ANNEX i iven ANNEX tot ANNEX to e fbb raiom il lenoe vcen tot tan tas ei. g edaan t elux emburg, z even tienfebru ANNEX arinegen ANNEX tienhond ANNEX erdz ANNEX esen ANNEX tach ANNEX tigent ANNEX e's ANNEX -gr ANNEX avenh ANNEX age a cht entw int igf ebru arin egent ienhond ANNEX erdzesen ANNEX tach ANNEX tig. f ei tonolux embu rgo,ao sde zas set edef eve ANNEX rei ANNEX rodem ANNEX il nov ANNEX ecen ANNEX toseo ANNEX iten ANNEX taese ANNEX iseemh ANNEX aiaao ANNEX s v ineeo t itod efe ver eirod emln i ov ecen to i ANNEX seoten ANNEX taes ANNEX eis. 29.6. 87 o ff ici a rn ljou a ANNEX lo eeu ANNEX fth e ANNEX rop i ANNEX ancommunt ANNEX ies nol 16 1 ANNEX 9/7 rsam pou a jet se lero ide sbe lge s rz voo i jnemajs ete i ing d t dekon e ANNEX rbe ANNEX lgen fo rhend esm aje sta etd anm ark sdronn ing rd fu enp ras iden tend e e rbundsr epub ANNEX l eu ANNEX ikd t ANNEX sch ANNEX land ιατ γ ο νπρο εδροτη ςελ λ ν ηική ςδημοκρα ANNEX τία ANNEX ς po rsum aje stad e lreyd eesp ana rlep pou res iden tdelar l epubiqu efr ANNEX anc ANNEX ais ANNEX e ol1n 69/18 f of ica iljou rna lo eeu fth rop ANNEX eancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies 29.6.87 h tarc eannu act har ann i ahere ann p eri lpr esid ent ede llar epubb lic aia tl ian a pou rsona lt ess e roy aleleg rand -du cdelux ANNEX embou ANNEX rg v oorh ar a emje ste i ekon td ing e in drn edr eland ANNEX en e plop res iden t ar ed l epubic r apotugu esa rh fo e rma jes equ ty th een o fth eun it ed k ingdom o ANNEX fgr ANNEX eatb ANNEX ri ANNEX tain andno ANNEX rth ANNEX erni ANNEX rel ANNEX and 29. 6. 87 o ff ic ljou ANNEX rn ANNEX ia lo ANNEX a eeu ANNEX rop ANNEX fth eancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies nol1 ANNEX 69/19 de t bek rae fte s, atfo rans taendetek s ANNEX ter i ove ANNEX renss ANNEX temmelse med or ANNEX igina ANNEX leksemp ANNEX laretafden europaei skefae l lesak tunder sk t i luxembou ANNEX reve rg den syt ANNEX tendefebruarni ANNEX tten hund ANNEX rede og seksog fi rsogih a ag denotteog ANNEX tyvendefeb rn ANNEX rua i ANNEX ttenhundredeogsek sogf ANNEX irsogdeponere ANNEX ti a rkiv e efo rn rreg er enfo ing rden i ANNEX tal ANNEX i sk ANNEX en er ANNEX epub ANNEX lik. dervorstehend et ts ex t immtmitd e ANNEX rams iebehn ANNEX z t ANNEX enf eb ANNEX ruarn eunzehnhund ANNEX ert ANNEX sechsund ANNEX ach ANNEX tzigin luxembu rgundama ch tundzwanz ANNEX igst ANNEX enf eb ANNEX ruarneunzehnhund e ANNEX rts ANNEX echsund ANNEX achtz ANNEX iginden h a ANNEX ag unte rzi echn e tenundima rch ANNEX ivd e ANNEX rr eg ANNEX ierungd e ANNEX ritai ANNEX leni ANNEX schenr l ANNEX epubikhint ANNEX erl ANNEX egtenurs ANNEX chr ANNEX if ANNEX td er einh eil ticheneuropa ischenake ub ANNEX t ere ANNEX in. τοανω τ έρω κε ίμενοείναια κρ ANNEX ιβέςα ντ ANNEX ίγραφοτ ουμ ο ANNEX ναδικο ANNEX ύπ ρωτο ANNEX τύπουτ ηςε ν ANNEX ιαία ANNEX ς ευρωπα ϊκήςπράξςπ η ουυπεγράφησ τολουξεμβο ANNEX ύ ρ ANNEX γο, σ ANNEX τιςδέκαε π ANNEX τ άφεβρο ANNEX υαρίο ANNEX υχ ίλια ε ννιακόσ ιαογδό νταέξικαιστηχάγησ τ ANNEX ιςείκοσιοκτώφεβρο ANNEX υαρίουχίλ ANNEX ιαενν ANNEX ιακό σ ANNEX ιαογδόντα έ ξικαικατε τέθηστοα ρ χείοτηςκ υβ ANNEX έρνησηςτηςιτ αλ ANNEX ική ANNEX ςδ ημοκρα ANNEX τία ANNEX ς. thepr e ced ingtex tisacer ti fiedtruecopyofth es ing ANNEX leo ANNEX rig ANNEX inalofthes ANNEX ing ANNEX leeuropeana c ANNEX ts igneda ANNEX t luxembourg ontheseven teenthdayo ff ebruaryinth ey ea ANNEX ron ethous ANNEX andn inehundr edand eigh ty-s ixandatthehague onth etwenty ANNEX - e ANNEX igh thdayoff eb ANNEX ruaryintheye ANNEX aron ethous andnin ANNEX e hundredande ty igh - sixandd s ANNEX epoi ANNEX tedinth ea rchiveso ANNEX fth egovernm ANNEX entofth eita ANNEX li ANNEX anr epubl ANNEX ic. e ltex toquep iace recedeescop rt ANNEX if fo ANNEX icadacon le ANNEX rmede jemp ANNEX la icode ANNEX run lac ANNEX ta un ANNEX ica eu ANNEX ropea, f irmadoenluxembu rgo,e ldiec ANNEX is ANNEX ietedefeb ANNEX rerodem ANNEX i ien ANNEX l novec to tayse ANNEX sochen isyenlah ANNEX ayae ANNEX l en v t iochodef eb rerodemil nov ANNEX eci ANNEX ento ANNEX so en ANNEX ch t ANNEX ayse ANNEX i epo ANNEX syd si ANNEX t sa ANNEX adoenlo ch ANNEX r ivo lgob ANNEX sde ierno elar d epub liai c t alian a. letext equip recedees tcert ANNEX ifiecon formeal'ex ANNEX emplai ANNEX reuniqu ANNEX edel 'acteun ANNEX iqueeu rop ANNEX een,s ANNEX ignea luxembou rgled ix- sep tfevriermiln eufcen ANNEX tquate ANNEX r-v ANNEX ingt ANNEX -sixetalah ayeleving ANNEX t-hui ANNEX tfevie ANNEX r rm ANNEX il f cen neu t quatre-v ing t-ix e s t depose dan ANNEX s lesarch ANNEX ives du gouvernement de larepubl ANNEX ique i tal ienn e. iscoipdhi li sdh eimhni theeanteac ssinroimheseodaon ANNEX ' ipnah ANNEX cho ions ANNEX trim ANNEX a eeo rpaiaona ANNEX ir,a sinodhilucsamburganseachtuladeagdemhi feabh ANNEX rasabh ia ANNEX l inm ANNEX ile nao ANNEX igceado chtoaseagus sah a igant -och tulaisf ichedemhif eabh ANNEX ramile n ANNEX aoigceadochtoaseagusatais ANNEX ce adhig ANNEX car ANNEX tlann i ral tasph oba lch tnah lod ail e. sice rt if icacheilte stochep recedeecon ANNEX formea ANNEX ll ANNEX 'esemp ANNEX la icode ANNEX reun ll ANNEX 'atoun ANNEX t icoeu ANNEX ropeo,f ANNEX irma ANNEX to alu ssembu rgo,add idi cia sse tt efebb ANNEX raiom ANNEX il ANNEX lenov ANNEX ecen ANNEX tot ANNEX tan ANNEX tas ANNEX ei ea ANNEX ll ANNEX 'ai ANNEX a,add ANNEX iven ANNEX tot ANNEX tof ANNEX ebb ANNEX raio i ml lenov ecen tot t t anae si,d epo st iatoneg ANNEX lia iv ANNEX rch ide ANNEX lgove ANNEX rnode ANNEX llarepubb ANNEX l t ANNEX icaiai ANNEX lan ANNEX a. devoorg aandetektishe s teen ANNEX sluidendaf ANNEX schi ANNEX rf ANNEX tvanhe torig ANNEX ine ANNEX leex emplaa ANNEX rvandeeu ropeseakte ond ert ekendteluxemburg,zevent ANNEX ienfebrua ANNEX rinegen ANNEX tienhonde ANNEX rdze sen ANNEX tach ANNEX tigente's ANNEX -g ravenhage ach ten twint igfebrua rin en eg t ANNEX ienhonderd ze ANNEX sentach ANNEX tigen nederge ANNEX legd inde arch ANNEX ievenvan de t ia lian a s erepub liek. ex ot recedeeumacop toquep iaau ANNEX ten ANNEX t la ANNEX icadadoexemp icodoac ANNEX run to un ropeua ANNEX icoeu ssinado noluxemburgo,aosd ezas set ed efeve ANNEX rei ANNEX rodemi ANNEX l nove ANNEX cen ANNEX toseoi ANNEX ten ANNEX taesei ANNEX seemh a ANNEX iaaosvin ANNEX tee oi todef ev ererodem i i l novec ANNEX entoseo t ANNEX i t ANNEX enaeseisedepo ANNEX st ANNEX iadonosarqu sdogov ANNEX ivo erno da repub lic ait a li ana. i lcapode rv lse iz iode lcon ANNEX t z ANNEX en sod ANNEX io ip a ANNEX lomti ANNEX co,de ANNEX itr ANNEX att ANNEX atiedeg ANNEX lia ANNEX ffa ANNEX rileg ANNEX is ANNEX lat ANNEX ivi ol 1n 6 2 9/0 o ff ica i rn ljou a ANNEX lofth rop ANNEX eeu eancommun ANNEX ii ANNEX tes 29.6.87 ANNEX f ANNEX inalact theconference o ftherepresenta ANNEX tive ANNEX so fthegovernmen ANNEX tso fthemembe ANNEX rs ta ANNEX tesconvenedat luxembourgon9sep tembe r1985,wh ich c ANNEX arr ANNEX iedonit ANNEX sdiscu ANNEX ssion ANNEX sinlux ANNEX embourgandbrusse ANNEX ls hasadopt edthefo low l ingtext : ANNEX i ANNEX . s ingleeuropeanact ANNEX i ANNEX i. t th a et eo im fs ign ingth i ex st t ,th econ fer enc ANNEX e adop ANNEX t ed ANNEX edth e ANNEX cla ANNEX rat ANNEX ion ANNEX sli ANNEX stedh ANNEX ere ANNEX ina ANNEX fte ANNEX rand ann exedtoth isf ina lac t: e 1. dcl ara tion onth epow er fimp so l en ANNEX em t ANNEX at fth ANNEX iono ecomm ANNEX iss ANNEX ion 2. d eca lra t ecou ion onth rto fju st ice 3. d ecl ara tion ona rt il ce 8ao eeect fth rea ANNEX ty e 4. dcl ara tion ona ri tcl e 100 ao eeect fth rea ANNEX ty 5. d ecl ara tion ona rt icl e 100bo eeect fth rea ANNEX ty en 6. g e ra e ldcl ara tion ona rt icle ANNEX s 13to19o ANNEX fth ANNEX esing ANNEX leeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eanac ANNEX t 7. d ecl ara tion ona rt ic a(2)o le 118 fth r ANNEX eeectea ANNEX ty 8. d eca lra t r ion onaic t le 130do r ANNEX ftheeectea ANNEX ty e 9. dcl ara tion ona ri tcl e 130 ro eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty 10. d ecl ara tion byth ehigh con tra ctingp ANNEX art ANNEX iesont ANNEX it ANNEX lei ANNEX iio ANNEX fth ANNEX esing ANNEX leeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eanac ANNEX t e 11. dcl ara tion ona ri tcl e 30(10)(g)o ANNEX fth ANNEX esing ANNEX leeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eanac ANNEX t. th econ fer enc eal son ote sth ede cla rat ion sli stedh ANNEX ere ANNEX ina ANNEX fte ANNEX ran n ANNEX dane ANNEX xedtoti ANNEX hsf ANNEX ina ANNEX lac ANNEX t: la 1. dec ra tionbythep res idencyonthet ANNEX imel ANNEX imi ANNEX twth ANNEX i ich thecounc ANNEX inwh ilw ANNEX ilg ANNEX l ivei ANNEX tsop ANNEX inion fo llow ingaf irs tre ading(a ric t le 149(2)o eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty) l 2. poi tc iald ecl ara t egov ion byth ernm ANNEX ent ANNEX softh ANNEX ememb ANNEX ers ANNEX ta ANNEX tes onth ANNEX efr ANNEX eemov ANNEX emen ANNEX tof p erson s e 3. dcl ara tion bythegov ernm ento l fthehe ic repub ANNEX len licona ANNEX ric ANNEX t le 8ao ANNEX ftheeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty 4. d ecl ara tion bythecomm iss ionona ANNEX rt ANNEX icle 28o eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty 5. d ecl ara tion bythegov ernm ento fire ANNEX landona ANNEX rt ANNEX icle 57(2)o ANNEX ftheeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty e 6. dcl ara tion bythegov ernm ento r fthepo serepub ANNEX tugue licona ANNEX rtle ANNEX ic s59,secondp ANNEX arag ANNEX raph, and84o fth eeect rea ty 7. d ecl art aion byth egov ernm ento ek fth fd ANNEX ingdom o enm ANNEX ark ona ANNEX ri ANNEX tcl ANNEX e 100 ANNEX aofth ANNEX eeec t rea ty e 8. dcl ara tion by thep reidency and thecomm s iss ANNEX ion on themon ANNEX eta ANNEX ry capac ANNEX ity o ANNEX f the commun ity e 9. dcl ara tion by thegov ernm en f thek t o ingdom o ANNEX fdenm ANNEX ark on eu ANNEX rop ANNEX ean po ANNEX li ANNEX tica ANNEX l co -op era tion. 29. 6. 87 o ff ic ljou ANNEX rn ia lo ANNEX a rop ANNEX e ANNEX ftheeu i ANNEX ancommuni ANNEX tes nol16 2 ANNEX 9/1 fae ud rd ige t iluxembou rg densy ANNEX t rua ANNEX tendefeb rni ANNEX ttenhund ANNEX redeogseksog ANNEX fi ANNEX rsogihaag den t oteog tyvendefeb rua rnt itenhund ANNEX redeogsek ANNEX sog ANNEX fi ANNEX rs. g esch ehen zuluxembu rgamsiebz ANNEX ehn ANNEX tenfeb ANNEX ruarneunzehnhunde ANNEX rts ANNEX echsund ANNEX ach ANNEX tz ANNEX igundind ANNEX en h aag amachtund zwanz igs tenf ebru ANNEX arneun ANNEX zehnhund ANNEX ert ANNEX sechsunda ANNEX chtz ANNEX ig. έγ ινεσ τολουξεμβο ύ ρ γο,στι ςδέκαεπ ANNEX τάφεβρο ANNEX υα ρ ANNEX ίουχίλ ANNEX ιαε ν ANNEX νιακ όσ ANNEX ιαο ANNEX γδό ANNEX νταέ ANNEX ξικα ANNEX ιστη χά γηστι ςείκοσιοκτώφεβρο υαρ ANNEX ίουχ ANNEX ίλιαε ANNEX ννιακ ι ANNEX όσ αο ANNEX γδόνταέξι. doneatlux embou rgonth es en ANNEX ev t ANNEX een ANNEX thdayoff eb ANNEX rua ANNEX ryinth ANNEX eyea ANNEX ronethous ANNEX andnin ANNEX ehundred andeigh ty- sixanda tthehague onthetwen ANNEX ty- ANNEX eigh ANNEX thdayoff ANNEX ebru ANNEX a ey ANNEX ryinth earonethou ANNEX sand nin ehundredande igh ty- six. he cho enlux emburgo,e ldieci ANNEX sie ANNEX tedefebre i ANNEX rodem ien ANNEX l novec toso ANNEX ch t ANNEX enayse ANNEX isyenlah ANNEX ayae ANNEX l v ent iochodefeb rerodem il novec ANNEX ien ANNEX tosochen ANNEX taysei ANNEX s. fa italux rgled embou ix -septfev ANNEX rie ANNEX rmi ANNEX lneu ANNEX fcen t ANNEX tqua -v ANNEX re ing ANNEX t-s ANNEX ixe ing ANNEX talahayelev t-hu ANNEX itfev ANNEX rie ANNEX r mi lneufcen tqu atr e-v ing t-six. rn a adhean amhilucs ambu rganseach ANNEX tuladagdemh ANNEX e ifeabh ANNEX rasabhl ANNEX iainmi ANNEX le n ANNEX aoigceado ANNEX chto aseagu ssaha ig ant ch -o tulaisf ANNEX ichedemh ANNEX if e r ANNEX abhami ANNEX le n ANNEX ao c ANNEX igeado ch ANNEX toase. f at toalu ssembu rgo,add idi cia sse ANNEX tt ebb ANNEX ef raiom ANNEX il ANNEX l e ANNEX enovcen ANNEX tot ANNEX tan ANNEX tae ANNEX s l ANNEX i,eal ANNEX 'aa,add ANNEX i iven ANNEX tot ANNEX to e fbb raiom il lenoe vcen tot tan tas ei. g edaan telux emburg, zeven ANNEX tienfebru ANNEX arinegen ANNEX tienhond ANNEX erdze ANNEX sen ANNEX tach ANNEX tigente' ANNEX s-g ANNEX ravenhage a cht entw intigf ebru arin eg ent ienhond ANNEX erdzesen ANNEX tach ANNEX tig. f eitonolx uemb urgo,ao sde zas set ANNEX edef ANNEX evr ANNEX eei ANNEX rod ANNEX eml nov ANNEX i ecen ANNEX to i ANNEX seoten ANNEX t i ANNEX aeseseemh ANNEX aiaao ANNEX s i vnt eeo itod efev ere irod emln i ov ece ANNEX nto i ANNEX seoten ANNEX taes ANNEX eis. rsam pou a jet se lero id esbe lge ANNEX s rz voo i jnemajs ete i ingd t dekon e ANNEX rbe ANNEX lgen rh fo end esm ajs etae tdanm ark sdronn ANNEX ing rd fu enp ras iden tend e e rbundsr epub ANNEX l eu ANNEX ikd t ANNEX sch ANNEX land nol16 2 9/2 o ff ica iljou rna lo eeu fth rop ANNEX eancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies 29.6.87 ιατ γ ο νπρό εδροτη ςελ λ ν ηική ςδημοκρα τία ANNEX ς po rsum aje stad e lrev dee span a rlep pou res iden tdelar l epubiqu efr anc ais ANNEX e th arc eannu act har ann i ahere ann p eri lpr esid ent ede ll arepubb lic ait al ian a pou rsona lte sse roy aleleg rand -du cdelux ANNEX embou ANNEX rg 29.6.87 o fi fci a rn ljou lo ANNEX a fth ANNEX eeu e ANNEX rop i ANNEX ancommuni ANNEX tes ol1 ANNEX 6 ANNEX n 2 ANNEX 9/3 rh voo a re ma jete s i t dekon ing in de ANNEX rnede ANNEX rlanden lop pe reid s en ted arepub lic apo rtugu esa fo rhe rma jety th s equ een o fth eun ited k fg ANNEX ingdom o e ANNEX ra r ANNEX tbi ANNEX tain andno ANNEX rth ANNEX ern i ANNEX rel ANNEX and nol 16 2 9/4 o ff ica i rn ljou a ANNEX lofth rop ANNEX eeu eancommun ANNEX ii ANNEX tes 29.6.87 e dcl ara tion onthepowe ANNEX rso l ANNEX fimpem ANNEX ent ANNEX ationo ANNEX fthecomm ANNEX iss ANNEX ion theconference ask i sthecommunty au ANNEX thor ANNEX itie ANNEX stoadopt,befo ANNEX retheac te ANNEX t en r ANNEX sintoforce,the pr inc iple sandru lesonthebas isofwhich thecomm ANNEX ission'spowe ANNEX rsofimplemen ANNEX tat ANNEX ionwill be e dfin e ne di a chc ase. i inthsconnec tionthecon ferencereque ANNEX st i ANNEX sthecounc ivetheadv ANNEX ltog iso i ANNEX rycommt ANNEX teep ANNEX rocedu ANNEX re inpart icu larap redominan tp te laceinthein res ANNEX tso ANNEX fspeedande f ANNEX fic ANNEX iencyinthedec ANNEX is ANNEX ion ANNEX -making procs es,fortheexe rci seofthepowersofimp ANNEX l emen ANNEX tat ANNEX ioncon ANNEX fer ANNEX redonth ecommiss ANNEX ionwi ANNEX thinthe fie ldofart icl e 100ao ftheeect r ANNEX eaty. d eca ANNEX lra ANNEX t ecou ANNEX ion onth rto ANNEX fju ANNEX st ANNEX ice econ th fer enc eag ree sth atth eprov is so ion fa ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e32d(1)o ANNEX fth ANNEX eecsct ANNEX rea ANNEX ty,a ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 168 ANNEX a(1) o ftheeec t rea r tyandat ic le 140a(1)o rea ANNEX ftheeaect tydono ANNEX tpre ANNEX judgeanycon ANNEX fer ANNEX ralo ANNEX f jud ica ilcomp eten cel ike lyto^bep rov idedfo ANNEX rinth t ANNEX econ to ANNEX ex fag ANNEX reem ANNEX enscon ANNEX t clud ANNEX edb ANNEX etw ANNEX eenth ANNEX e em m b e t rsat es. e dcl ara tion ona ANNEX ri ANNEX tcl ANNEX e8ao eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty theconferencewishesbymeanso ftheprov ANNEX isionsinaric ANNEX tle8atoexp s ANNEX resitsfi l ANNEX rmpoitica ANNEX lwi ANNEX llto takebe fore1j anuary1993thedec ANNEX is ANNEX ionsnecessarytocomple ANNEX tethein ANNEX terna ANNEX lm a ANNEX rke ANNEX tdefinedinthos ANNEX e prov is ions, and mo r e p a rt icula ANNEX rly thed e ANNEX cisionsn e ANNEX cess ANNEX ary toimp l ANNEX em entthecomm iss ANNEX ion's prog ramm ed esc ribedinthewhi tep aperonth ein ANNEX terna ANNEX lmarke ANNEX t. se tt ingthed ateo f31decembe r 1992doe ANNEX sno ANNEX tcrea ANNEX teanau a ANNEX tomtclega ANNEX i lef ANNEX fec ANNEX t. e dcl ara tion ona ANNEX ri ANNEX tcl ANNEX e 100 ANNEX ao eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty t inispropos alspu rsuan ttoa rti cle 100 ecomm ANNEX a(1)th iss l ANNEX ionshalgiveprc ANNEX eedencetotheu ANNEX seofthe ins trumento fad i rec tiv eifh armonizat ANNEX ioninvolve ANNEX sth ANNEX eam en ANNEX endm to fleg ANNEX ila ANNEX s t ANNEX iveprov ANNEX is ANNEX ionsinon ANNEX e rm o o rem eme brs tat es. d ecl ara tion ona ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 100bo eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty theconf eren ceconid s er stht a,s incea ANNEX ric ANNEX t le 8coftheeectrea ANNEX tyisofgene ANNEX ralappl ANNEX ica ANNEX tion,i ANNEX tal ANNEX so l appie stothepropo sal swhi ch thecomm i ANNEX ss equ ANNEX ion isr r ANNEX iedtom e und ANNEX ak erart ANNEX icl ANNEX e 100bo fthat t rea ty. 29.6. 87 o fi fci a rn ANNEX ljou lo ANNEX a fth ANNEX eeu e ANNEX rop i ANNEX ancommuni ANNEX tes ol1 ANNEX n 9/ ANNEX 6 25 en g e ra e ldcl ara tion ona ANNEX ric ANNEX t le ANNEX s 13to19o ing ANNEX fthes leeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eanac ANNEX t noth ingintheseprov is ionssha ANNEX lla ANNEX ffec ANNEX ttherigh ANNEX tofmembe ANNEX rs tate ANNEX stotakesuchmeasu ANNEX resasthey cons ide rnece ssaryforthepu rpo ANNEX seofcont ANNEX rol ANNEX lingimmig ANNEX rat ANNEX ionfromth ANNEX irdcoun ANNEX trie ANNEX s,andtocombat t er r roism ,cr ime,th etr aff icind sandi rug ll ANNEX ici ANNEX ttr ANNEX adinginwo ANNEX rkso ANNEX far ANNEX tandan ANNEX tiqu ANNEX es. e dcl ara tionona ANNEX ri ANNEX tcl ANNEX e 118 ANNEX a(2)o eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty th econ fe rencenote a sthtinthediscu ANNEX ss sona ANNEX ion rt ANNEX icle 118a(2)oftheeect rea ANNEX tyitwa ANNEX sag reed th atthecommunitydoesnotintend,inlayingdownminimum r equi ANNEX rementsfo ANNEX rth ro ANNEX ep te ANNEX ct ANNEX iono f th esafe tyandh e a l thofemployees,todisc ANNEX rimina ANNEX teinam ann ANNEX er unjus ANNEX ti ANNEX fiedbytheci ANNEX rcumst ANNEX ances a agin stemp e loyesinsm allandm edium ANNEX -si ANNEX zed un ANNEX ter ANNEX tak ANNEX ing ANNEX s. d ecl ara ANNEX tion ona ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX e 130do eeect ANNEX fth rea ANNEX ty inth iscon tex tthecon fer enc e re fer ANNEX stothecon ANNEX clu ANNEX s so ANNEX ion fth ANNEX eeu ANNEX rop ANNEX e c ANNEX ancouni ANNEX l inb ANNEX rus ANNEX sel ANNEX s in a mrch 1984,wh i e ch rada sfo llow ANNEX s: th ' efinanc ialr esource sal c ANNEX loat ANNEX edtoaidfromthefunds,h ingr ANNEX av ega ANNEX rdtoth s,w ANNEX eimp il ANNEX l be ign s iican f t lyinc reasedinrea ANNEX lterm ANNEX swi ANNEX thin thel ANNEX imi ANNEX tsoffinanc ANNEX ingpos ANNEX s i ANNEX ibl ANNEX it ANNEX ies. ANNEX ' ANNEX . d eca lra ANNEX t r ANNEX ion onat ANNEX icle 130 ANNEX roftheeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty r epa rag raph1,t hir dind ent th econ fe renceconf irmsth a tthecommunity'sact ANNEX ivi ANNEX tie ANNEX sinthesphereoftheenvi ANNEX ronmen ANNEX tmayno ANNEX t in ter fer ewith na tion alpol iciesrega ANNEX rdingtheexplo ANNEX ita ANNEX tionofenergyr e ANNEX sou ANNEX rces. r epa rag raph5,s econds ubp arag raph thecon fer en c e conid s e rsthatth ANNEX eprovis ANNEX ion ANNEX so far ANNEX tic ANNEX le 130 ANNEX r(5) ANNEX ,se ANNEX condsubp ANNEX a rag ANNEX raphdonot af fec tth eprinc iple sresu lt ingf romthejudgmen ANNEX thand ANNEX eddownbythecour ANNEX tofjus ANNEX ticeintheaetr c ase. d ecl ara tion byth ehigh con ANNEX tra ANNEX ct ANNEX ingp ANNEX art ANNEX iesont ANNEX it ANNEX lei ANNEX iio ANNEX fth ANNEX esing ANNEX leeu ANNEX rop ANNEX eanac ANNEX t th ehigh con tra ct r ing pat ies tot ANNEX it ANNEX lei ANNEX iioneu e ANNEX ropan po ANNEX li ANNEX tica ANNEX l co ANNEX -op ANNEX era ANNEX tion rea ANNEX ff ANNEX irmth ANNEX eir openne sstoothereurop eann ation ANNEX swhich sh ANNEX arethes ameid e ANNEX alsandobje ANNEX ctive ANNEX s. th ANNEX eyag re ANNEX ein par ticu lartos treng thenthei rlinksw ANNEX ith th ANNEX emember count ANNEX rie ANNEX so fthecounc ANNEX ilo feuropeandw i ANNEX th othe rd emocr at i c eu ropean countr ANNEX ieswith wh ANNEX ich th eyh avef r ANNEX iend ANNEX ly r e ANNEX lat ANNEX ions and c ANNEX lose co -op era tio n. nol16 2 9/6 o ff ica i rn ljou a ANNEX lofth rop ANNEX eeu eancommun ANNEX ii ANNEX tes 29.6.87 d ecl ara tion ona rt ic fth ANNEX le 30(10)(g)o es leeu ANNEX ing rop ANNEX eanac ANNEX t thecon fe renceconsider sthatthep ANNEX rov ANNEX i s ANNEX ionsofar ANNEX tic ANNEX le 30(10)(g)dono ANNEX ta f ANNEX fec ANNEX tthep rov ANNEX ision ANNEX sof thedeci sion oftherep sen re tat ivesofthegovernmen ANNEX tso fthemembersta so ANNEX te f8ap ril 1965on theprovis iona llocationofce rta ininsi ANNEX ttu ANNEX tionsanddepa ANNEX rtmentsofthecommunit ANNEX ies. d ecl art aion bythep res idencyonthetimelim ANNEX i i ANNEX twthin wh ANNEX ich thecoun ANNEX ci i ANNEX lwl ANNEX lgivei ANNEX tsop ANNEX inion ANNEX l folow ANNEX ingafr ANNEX istread ANNEX ing r (at ice 149(2)o ANNEX l fth ANNEX eeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty) asr eg ardsthede clara tionbytheeu rop ANNEX eancoun c ANNEX ilinmil ANNEX an,toth eeffec ANNEX tthatth ANNEX ecounc ANNEX ilmus ANNEX t seekwayso fimp ingi rov tsdeci sion-mak ANNEX ingprocedur ANNEX es, th ANNEX epre ANNEX sidency st ANNEX atesi ANNEX tsint ANNEX ent ANNEX ionof comple tingtheworkinqu e stionassoona spo ANNEX ssib ANNEX le. po li tica lde cla rat ionbythegov ernm ent so emb ANNEX fthem ers ANNEX tate reemov ANNEX sonthef emen ANNEX tofpe ANNEX rson ANNEX s inordertopromoteth efreemovem en ANNEX to fperson ANNEX s,th ememb ANNEX ers tate ANNEX ssha l ANNEX lco-oper ANNEX ate,w ANNEX ithout pr ejudicetothepow ersofth ecommun ity, inpat ANNEX ricu ANNEX larasregardstheentry,movement and res idenceofnat iona lso fthirdcount ANNEX rie ANNEX s.theyshallal ANNEX soco-op ANNEX era ANNEX teinth ecomb a ANNEX tingofter ANNEX rori ANNEX sm , cr im e,thetr aff icindrugsandi lic ANNEX l i ANNEX ttrad ANNEX inginworkso far ANNEX tandantiques. e dca lra tion byth egov ernm ento fthehe ANNEX llen ANNEX icr ANNEX epub ANNEX licona ANNEX rt ANNEX icle 8 ANNEX aoftheeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty g reece con sid erstha tthedeve lopm entofcommunitypol ANNEX icie ANNEX sanda c ANNEX tions,andth ANNEX eadop ANNEX tionof m easur es onthebas isofa rt icl es70(1)and84,mu ANNEX st bo ANNEX thtakepl ANNEX aceinsuchaw aya ANNEX snottoha ANNEX rm e sni st ives ecto rso fmemb e t rsat es c 'eonom ies. e dcl ara tion byth ecomm ANNEX isionona ANNEX s ri ANNEX tcl fth ANNEX e 28o eeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty w ith r eg a rdtoitsownin ternalp rocedu ANNEX res,thecommis ANNEX sionwi ANNEX llensur ANNEX ethatthechange ANNEX sr e ANNEX sul ANNEX ting romtheam f endm en tofart icle 28oftheeect e ANNEX ratywil tleadtode ANNEX l no lay ANNEX sinr e ANNEX spond ANNEX ingto u rgen tr eque stsforth eal tera tionorsuspen ANNEX sionofcommoncu stomstar ANNEX if ANNEX fdu t ANNEX ies. 29. 6. 8 7 o ff ic ljou ANNEX rn ANNEX ia lo ANNEX a eeu ANNEX rop ANNEX fth eancommun ANNEX it ANNEX ies nol1 ANNEX 6 2 ANNEX 9/7 la dec ra tion bythegove ANNEX rnmen ANNEX to re ANNEX fi landona ANNEX rt ANNEX icle 57(2)o ANNEX ftheeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty ireland,inconf irmingi tsag ANNEX reementtoquali ANNEX fiedmajo ANNEX rty vo ANNEX i t ANNEX ingundera t ANNEX ric ANNEX le 57(2),wishe ANNEX s to recallthatthein suranceindust ANNEX ryini re ANNEX landisapa rt ANNEX icularly sen ANNEX st ANNEX iiveone andth a ANNEX tspecial arrangementshavehadtobemade bythegove rnmen ANNEX to firelandforthep rotec ANNEX tionofin su ANNEX rance policyholder sandth i rdpart ANNEX ies. inre ANNEX laiontoha ANNEX t rmoniza ANNEX tiono flegisla ANNEX tiononin surance ANNEX ,the gov ernmen to fi relandwould expecttobe ab letorelyon a sympa the t ANNEX icatti ANNEX tudef romthe commi ssionandfromtheothermembe ANNEX rs tate ANNEX softhecommun ANNEX ityshou ANNEX ldir ANNEX elandlat ANNEX erf ANNEX indi ANNEX tse ANNEX lfin asi tua tionwherethegove rnm en ANNEX tofirel ANNEX andcons e ANNEX idrsi ANNEX tnc ANNEX ees ANNEX sa av ANNEX rytoh especia ANNEX lp i ANNEX rovs ANNEX ionmade fo rtheposi tionoftheindus tryini ANNEX rel ANNEX and. d ecl ara tionbyth egov ernm ento fth epor ANNEX tugu ANNEX eserepub ANNEX li ANNEX cona ANNEX rt ANNEX icl ANNEX es 59,s ANNEX econdp ANNEX arag ANNEX raph,and ANNEX 84oftheeectrea ANNEX ty portugalcons iderstha tasth echangefromun an ANNEX imou stoqu a ANNEX li ANNEX fiedm a ANNEX jor ANNEX ity vot ANNEX ingina r ANNEX tic ANNEX l es59, secondp ar agraph,and84w sno ANNEX a tcontempla ANNEX tedinth enegot ANNEX iat ANNEX ionsfortheacces ANNEX sionofportugalto thecommun i tyandsub st antia ANNEX llyalt ANNEX ersthecommun ity acqu ANNEX is,itmus ANNEX t notd am ag ANNEX esen s ANNEX itiveand vi tal secto rso fth epo rtuguesee conomy, and, wher ANNEX ever neces ANNEX sary, approp ANNEX riat ANNEX eandspec if ANNEX ic transi tiona lme a sure s shouldbeintroducedtofores ANNEX ta ANNEX llth eadve ANNEX rseconsequence ANNEX sth atcou ANNEX lden sue fo rth es e escto rs. e dcl ara tionbythegov ernm ento ingdom o fthek fdenm ANNEX ark ona ANNEX rt ANNEX icle 100 ANNEX aoftheeect ANNEX rea ANNEX ty thedan ishgove rnmentnote sth a ANNEX tinca ANNEX seswhereamembe ANNEX rs ta ANNEX teisoftheop ANNEX inionth ANNEX atmea ANNEX sures adop tedunde ra t ric le 100a do no ANNEX t safegua ighe ANNEX rdh r requ ANNEX iremen ANNEX t rn ANNEX sconce ingtheworking envi ronm ent, th ep rot ect ion o ftheenvi ANNEX ronmentorth ene edsref ANNEX err ANNEX edtoina rt ANNEX icle 36,the prov isionso fart ic le 100 a(4) gua ANNEX ran ANNEX teethatthemembers tateinques ANNEX tioncanapplyn a ANNEX tion ANNEX al prov isions.suchn t aiona lp rov ANNEX is sa ANNEX ion retobetakentofu ANNEX lf ANNEX iltheabovement ANNEX ioneda ANNEX imandmay no t enta ilhiddenp ro tect ioni sm. e dcl ara tion bythep res i idencyandthecommss ANNEX iononthemon ANNEX etry capac ANNEX a ityo ANNEX fthecommun ANNEX ity thep re sidencyandthecomm is ANNEX sioncons ANNEX ide ANNEX rth attheprovi ANNEX sionsinse ANNEX rtedinth ANNEX eeect r ANNEX eatyw ANNEX ith ref erencetothecommun i ty'smoneta ANNEX ry c ANNEX apa ANNEX cityarewithoutp r ANNEX ejud ANNEX icetotheposs ANNEX ibi ANNEX li ANNEX tyoffur ANNEX the ANNEX r deve lopm entwi thin thef ramewo rkofth ANNEX eexi ANNEX stingpow er ANNEX s. la dec ra tion by the gove rnmen ANNEX t o indgom o ANNEX f the k f denma ANNEX rk on eu ANNEX ropean po ANNEX li ANNEX tica ANNEX l ANNEX co ANNEX -op ANNEX era ANNEX tion thedanishgove rnmentstate stha ANNEX ttheconclus ANNEX ionofti ANNEX tleiiioneuropeanpol ANNEX it ANNEX ica ANNEX lco -ope ANNEX ration inthesphe reoffore ignpo licydoe ANNEX snotaffectdenmark'spa ANNEX rtic ANNEX ipa ANNEX tioninnord ANNEX icco -opera ANNEX tionin esph th ereo r ffoeignpo licy. nol16 2 9/8 o ff ica i rn ljou a ANNEX lofth rop ANNEX eeu eancommun ANNEX ii ANNEX tes 29.6.87 detbekraef tes,atfo ran sta endeteks terioveren ANNEX sstemmel ANNEX semed or ANNEX igin a ANNEX leks ANNEX empla ANNEX reta fdens ANNEX lut ANNEX akt, dere runde r reve sk tiluxembourgdensyttendefebrua ANNEX rnit ANNEX tenhund redeogseksogf ANNEX irsogihaag denotteog tyvendefeb rn rua it tenhundredeogsek f ANNEX sogi ANNEX rsianledninga funde ANNEX rtegnel ANNEX senafden ropae eu iskefae llesak togdepone retia rk rnefo ANNEX ive rrege ANNEX ringenfo ANNEX rden i ANNEX tal ANNEX ien ANNEX skerepub ANNEX lik. der vors tehendet ex ts t immtmit deme inzigenexemplarderams iebzehntenfebrua ANNEX rneunzehn- hundert s e chsundacht ziginluxembu rg undama ch zw ANNEX tund anz ANNEX igs ANNEX tenf ebruarn eunzehnhund e ANNEX rt- sechsundach tzigind en h aag an lassl ANNEX ichd erun te ANNEX rze ANNEX ichnung dereinhe ANNEX it ANNEX licheneu ropa ANNEX ischenak te unte rzeichne tenundima rch iv de ANNEX rreg ierungde rital ANNEX ien ANNEX ischenrepub ANNEX likh inte ANNEX rleg ANNEX tensch lussak ANNEX te ub ere in. τοανωτέρωκ ε ίμενοε ίναιακριβέςαντ ANNEX ίγραφοτουμοναδ ANNEX ικούα ν ANNEX τιτύπο ANNEX υτ ηςτε ANNEX λική ANNEX ςπ ράξεω ANNEX ς πουυπεγράφηστολ ουξ εμβού ρ γο,στ ANNEX ιςδέκαεπτάφεβρο ANNEX υαρίουχίλιαενν ANNEX ιακόσ ANNEX ιαογ δόν ANNEX ταέξι κα ισ τηχά γη σ τιςε ίκοσιοκτώφ εβρουα ANNEX ρίο ANNEX υχίλιαεννιακόσ ANNEX ιαο γ ANNEX δ ό ANNEX νταέξιεπ'ευκα ANNEX ιρίατης υπογ ραφή ςτηςε ν ιαίαςε υ ρω παϊκή ANNEX ςπ ράξη ικα ANNEX ς κα τετέ ANNEX θησ τοα ρχ ANNEX είοτηςκυβέρνησηςτης ιταλ ικήςδ ημοκρα τίας. thep recedingtextisa c e rt if iedt ru ANNEX ecopyo fth esing ANNEX leo r ANNEX igin ANNEX alofth efin ANNEX al ac ANNEX tsign ANNEX eda t luxembou rg onthes ev enteen thd ayo ffebruaryinth eyearon ethous ANNEX andninehund ANNEX redand eigh ty-s ixanda tthehague onth etw en ANNEX ty-e ANNEX ighthdayo ffebrua ANNEX ryinth eye ANNEX aronethous ANNEX andnine hundredande igh ty- sixontheo cca ANNEX sionofthes igna ANNEX tur ANNEX eo fthesing ANNEX leeurop ANNEX eanact andd ANNEX epos ANNEX ited inthearchivesofthegovernmento ftheit ANNEX alianrepub ANNEX lic. eltex toqu r epeced ee scop iacer tif icad ANNEX aconformede ANNEX lejemp ANNEX la i ANNEX run lac ANNEX code ta f l,f ANNEX ina i ANNEX rm ad ANNEX aen embu lux rgoe ldiec is tedef ie eb rerodemi ANNEX l nov ANNEX eci ANNEX ento ANNEX sochen ANNEX tayse ANNEX isyenlahayaelven ANNEX tio ANNEX chode re feb rodem il novec ien tosochen isconoca tayse siondelaf ANNEX irmade ANNEX lac ANNEX ta un ANNEX ica eu ANNEX ropeayque e stad epo st iadoenlo sar chivo sde i lgoberno delar ANNEX epub ANNEX lic ANNEX ait ANNEX al ANNEX ian ANNEX a. let ex tequiprecedees tcert if iecon fo ANNEX rmeal 'exemp lai ANNEX reuniquedel tef ANNEX 'ac inalquiae tes ANNEX ignea luxembourgledix-s eptfev rie rmiln eu ANNEX fcentquatre-v ANNEX ingt-s ANNEX ixetalah ayelev ing ANNEX t-hu ANNEX itfevr ANNEX ierm ANNEX il neufcentqua tre -ving t-s ixal s 'occaiondelasigna ANNEX tu redel'acteun ANNEX iqueeurop ANNEX e enetdeposedansles arch ivesdugouv e rnementdelarepubliqu ANNEX ei ta ANNEX lienne. sco i ipdh il is dh eimhn ith ee ant eac ss imh inro es es ANNEX eod c ANNEX ribh ANNEX innbhun ANNEX a ah ANNEX idhn ion ANNEX str ANNEX aim ANNEX e c riochn aith ias iniodhiluc samburganseachtuladeagdemhif e ANNEX abhrasabhl ANNEX iainmi ANNEX le n ANNEX aoigcead o chtoaseagu ssah a ig ant-och tu1aisf ANNEX ichedemh if e ANNEX abhrami ANNEX le naoigc ANNEX eado ch ANNEX toase,t ra ANNEX th s ini then ah ions traime eo rpai aona ANNEX ir, agusat ai ANNEX sceadhi gc ANNEX art ANNEX lann r ANNEX ial ANNEX t a ANNEX s phob ANNEX lach ANNEX tn a l hoa dil e. sic e rt if icachei lt es tochep r ecedeecon formeall ANNEX 'esemp ANNEX lareun ANNEX icod el ANNEX l ANNEX 'attofinal ANNEX e,firm a ANNEX toa lus s emburgo,add id icia sse ttefebbr ANNEX aiomil ANNEX lenovc ANNEX eento ANNEX tt t ANNEX anas ANNEX ei,eal'a ANNEX l ia,addiventot ANNEX tof ebbr ANNEX aio mi llenovecen tot tan tasei,inocca sionedelaf ANNEX l irmadel ANNEX l ANNEX 'attounicoeu ANNEX ropeoed epo ANNEX si ANNEX tatonegl ANNEX ia rch ANNEX ivi de lgov ernodel lar epubb lic ai ta liana ANNEX . de voorgaandeteks tish e te en slu ANNEX idenda f ANNEX s ch ANNEX ri ANNEX ftvanh etor ANNEX igine ANNEX leex emplaarvandes lo ANNEX takt ANNEX e, onder tekendteluxemburgopzevent ANNEX ienf eb ANNEX ru a ANNEX rinegen ANNEX tienhonderdzes ANNEX entacht ANNEX igente's ANNEX -gravenha ANNEX - geopa cht tw en int igfeb a rurin egent ANNEX ienhonderdz s ANNEX eenta ANNEX chtig,terge ANNEX leg ANNEX enheidv andeondr ANNEX eteken ANNEX ing van de europes e akte en nede rge ANNEX legd inde a rchi ANNEX ev en van de reg ANNEX ering v t ANNEX an de ial ANNEX iaans ANNEX e repub liek. ot ex toquepreced eeum acopi aau t ANNEX ent ANNEX icadadoex empl ANNEX aruni ANNEX codaa c ANNEX taf ANNEX ina ANNEX lassinadano embu lux rgo,ao sd eza sst eedefev ere irodemil nov ANNEX ecen ANNEX toseoi ANNEX ten ANNEX taese ANNEX iseemha ANNEX ia aosvin ANNEX tee o itodefeve rerodem i il novecen toseo ANNEX i taese ANNEX ten ispo ANNEX roca ANNEX siaodaa ANNEX ssina ANNEX turadoac ANNEX to un ANNEX ico rop eu eued epo st iadono sarqu ivo sdogov erno d ANNEX ar l ANNEX epubic ANNEX aia ANNEX tl ANNEX ian ANNEX a.. i lcapode lse ANNEX rvi ANNEX ziod ANNEX elcon ANNEX tenz ANNEX iosod lom ANNEX ip a ANNEX ti ANNEX co, d eitr ANNEX at ANNEX tat ANNEX iedeg ANNEX l f ANNEX iafa ANNEX rileg ANNEX is ANNEX l a ANNEX tiv ANNEX i
