MainText:
COOPERATION AGREEMENT between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Tunisia HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE BELGIANS, HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF DENMARK, THE PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY, THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, THE PRESIDENT OF IRELAND, THE PRESIDENT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC, HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE GRAND DUKE OF LUXEMBOURG, HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF THE NETHERLANDS, HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, _ and THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, of the one part, and THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA, of the other part, PREAMBLE WISHING to demonstrate their common desire to maintain and strengthen their friendly relations in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter, RESOLVED to establish wide-ranging cooperation which will contribute to Tunisia's economic and social development and help to strengthen relations between the Community and Tunisia, RESOLVED to promote, having regard to their respective levels of development, economic and trade cooperation between Tunisia and the Community and to provide a sound basis therefor in conformity with their international obligations, RESOLVED to establish a new model for relations between developed and developing States, compatible with the aspirations of the international community towards a more just and more balanced economic order, NOTING that Article 14 of the Association Agreement signed in Tunis on 28 March 1969 provides for the conclusion on a wider basis of a new Agreement, HAVE DECIDED to conclude this Agreement, and to this end have designated as their Plenipotentiaries: ARTICLE 1 The aim of this Agreement between the European Economic Community and Tunisia is to promote overall cooperation between the Contracting Parties with a view to contributing to the economic and social development of Tunisia and helping to strengthen relations between the Parties. To this end provisions and measures will be adopted and implemented in the field of economic, technical and financial cooperation, and in the trade and social fields. TITLE I ECONOMIC, TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL COOPERATION ARTICLE 2 The Community and Tunisia shall institute cooperation with the aim of contributing to the development of Tunisia by efforts complementary to those made by Tunisia itself, and of strengthening existing economic links on as broad a basis as possible for the mutual benefit of the Parties. ARTICLE 3 In order to achieve the cooperation referred to in Article 2, account shall be taken, in particular, of the following : — the objectives and priorities of Tunisia's development plans and programmes;the importance of schemes into which different operations are integrated ; the importance of promoting regional cooperation between Tunisia and other States. ARTICLE 4 1 . The purpose of cooperation between the Community and Tunisia shall be to promote, in particular: ' — participation by the Community in the efforts made by Tunisia to develop its production and economic infrastructure in order to diversify its economic structure. Such participation should be connected, in particular,, with the industrialization of Tunisia and the modernization of its agriculture; — the marketing and sales promotion of products exported by Tunisia ; industrial cooperation aimed at boosting the industrial production of Tunisia through measures: to encourage participation by the Community in the implementation of Tunisia's industrial development programmes, to foster the organization of contacts and meetings between Tunisian and Community industrial policy-makers, promoters and firms in order to promote the establishment of new relations in the industrial field in conformity with the objectives of the Agreement, to facilitate the acquisition on favourable terms of patents and other industrial property by means of financing in conformity with Protocol 1 and/or by other appropriate arrangements with undertakings and institutions in the Community, — to permit the removal of non-tariff and nonquota barriers likely to impede access to either market; — cooperation in the fields of science, technology and the protection of the environment; — as regards energy, the participation by Community operators in programmes for the exploration, production and processing of Tunisia's energy resources and any activities which would develop these resources on the spot, and the proper performance of long-term contracts for the delivery of oil, gas or petroleum products between their operators; — cooperation in the fisheries sector; — the encouragement of private investments which are in the mutual interest of both Parties; — exchange of information on the economic and financial situation, and on the trend thereof, as required for the proper functioning of the Agreement. 2. The Contracting Parties may decide on further areas of cooperation. ARTICLE 5 1 . The Cooperation Council shall periodically define the guidelines of cooperation for the purpose of attaining the aims set out in the Agreement. 2. The Cooperation Council shall be responsible for seeking ways and means of establishing cooperation in the areas defined in Article 4. To that end it is empowered to make decisions. ARTICLE 6 The Community shall participate in the financing of any measures to promote the development of Tunisia under the conditions laid down in Protocol 1 on technical and financial cooperation ARTICLE 7 The Contracting Parties shall facilitate the proper performance of cooperation and investment contracts which are of interest to bot)h Parties and come within the framework of the Agreement. TITLE II TRADE COOPERATION ARTICLE 8 In the field of trade, the object of this Agreement is to promote trade between the Contracting Parties, taking account of their respective levels of development and of the need to ensure a better balance in their trade, with a view to increasing the rate of growth of Tunisia's trade and improving the conditions of access for its products to the Community market. A. Industrial products ARTICLE 9 1 . Subject to the special provisions of Articles 11 , 12 and 14, products originating in Tunisia which are not listed in Annex II to the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community shall be imported into the Community free of quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect, and of customs duties and charges having equivalent effect. 2. The new Member States shall apply the provisions of paragraph 1 , it being understood that in no case may they apply more favourable treatment to Tunisia than to the Community as originally constituted . ARTICLE 10 1 . In the case of customs duties comprising a protective element and a fiscal element, Article 9 shall apply to the protective element. 2. The United Kingdom shall replace the fiscal element of the customs duties referred to in paragraph 1 by an internal tax in accordance with Article 38 of the Act concerning the conditions of accession and the adjustments to the Treaties of 22 January 1972. ARTICLE 11 The measures provided for in Article 1 of Protocol 7 to the Act concerning the conditions of accession and the adjustments to the Treaties referred to in Article 10 on imports of motor vehicles and the motor vehicle assembly industry in Ireland shall apply to Tunisia. ARTICLE 12 1 . Imports of the following products shall be subject to annual ceilings above which the customs duties actually applied in respect of third countries may be reintroduced in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 5, the ceiling fixed for the year of the entry into force of the Agreement being indicated in each case. 2. As from the second year after the entry into force of the Agreement, the ceilings shown in paragraph 1 shall be increased annually by 3% for heading Nos 45.02, 45.03 and 45.04 and by 5% for the other tariff headings. 3 . When a ceiling fixed for imports of a product referred to in paragraph 1 is reached, the customs duties actually applied in respect of third countries may be reimposed on imports of the product in question until the end of the calendar year. When imports into the Community of a product subject to ceilings reach 75% of the level fixed, the Community shall inform the Cooperation Council. 4. After 1 July 1977 the Contracting Parties shall examine within the Cooperation Council the possibility of increasing the percentage by which the ceilings for articles of cork of heading No 45.02, 45.03 or 45.04 are raised. 5. The ceilings provided for in this Article shall be abolished by 31 December 1979 at the latest. ARTICLE 13 1 . The Community reserves the right to modify the arrangements applicable to the petroleum products falling within subheadings and heading Nos 27.10, 27.11 A and B I, 27.12, 27.13 B or 27.14 of the Common Customs Tariff: — upon adoption of a common definition of origin for petroleum products, — upon adoption of decisions under a common commercial policy, or — upon establishment of a common energy policy. 2. In that event the Community shall ensure that imports of these products will enjoy advantages equivalent to those provided for in this Agreement. For the application of this paragraph consultations shall be held within the Cooperation Council at the request of the other Party. 3 . Subject to paragraph 1 , this Agreement shall not affect the non-tariff rules applied to imports of petroleum products. ARTICLE 14 For goods resulting from the processing of agricultural products listed in Annex A, the reductions specified in Article 9 shall apply to the fixed component of the charge levied on imports of these products into the Community. B. Agricultural products ARTICLE 15 1 . Customs duties on imports into the Community of the products originating in Tunisia which are listed below shall be reduced by the rates indicated for each of them. 2. As from the implementation of Community rules on potatoes, the tariff reduction provided for in paragraph 1 for the products of subheading 07.01 A II ex a) shall be 50% and shall be applicable for the period from 1 January to 15 April. 3 . Paragraph 1 shall apply to fresh lemons of subheading 08.02 ex C of the Common Customs Tariff on condition that on the internal Community market the prices of lemons imported from Tunisia are, after customs clearance and deduction of import charges other than customs duties, not less than the reference price plus the incidence on that reference price of the customs duties actually applied in respect of third countries and a fixed amount of 1-20 units of account per 100 kilograms.4. The import chargcs other than customs duties referred to in paragraph 3 shall be those laid down for calculating the entry prices referred to in Regulation (EEC) No 1035/72 on the common organization of the market in fruit and vegetables. However, the Community shall be entitled to calculate the amount to be deducted in respect of the import charges other than customs duties referred to in paragraph 3 in such a way, according to origin, as to avoid difficulties which may arise from the incidence of those charges on entry prices. Articles 23 to 28 of Regulation (EEC) No 1035/72 shall continue to apply. ARTICLE 16 1 . Provided that Tunisia levies a special charge on exports of olive oil, other than olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A II of the Common Customs Tariff and provided also that this special charge is reflected in the import price, the Community shall take the necessary measures to ensure that: (a) the levy on imports into the Community of the said olive oil, wholly obtained in Tunisia and transported direct from that country to the Community, is the import levy calculated in accordance with Article 13 of Regulation No 136/66/ EEC on the establishment of a common organization of the market in oils and fats, less 0-5 unit of account per 100 kilograms; (b) the amount of the levy calculated in the manner described under a) is reduced by an amount equal to that of the special charge paid but not exceeding 10 units of account per 100 kilograms. 2. If Tunisia does not levy the charge referred to in paragraph 1 , the Community shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the levy on imports into the Community of olive oil, other than olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A II of the Common Customs Tariff, is the import levy calculated in accordance with Article 13 of Regulation No 136/66/EEC on the establishment of a common organization of the market in oils and fats, less 0-5 unit of account per 100 kilograms. 3 . Each Contracting Party shall take the measures necessary for implementation of paragraph 1 and, in the event of difficulties and at the request of the other Contracting party, shall supply the information required for the proper operation of the system. 4. Consultations on the functioning of the system provided for in this Article shall take place within the Cooperation Council at the request of one of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 17 Without prejudice to the collection of the variable component of the levy calculated in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation No 136/66/EEC, the fixed component shall not be imposed on imports into the Community of olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A I of the Common Customs Tariff, wholly obtained in Tunisia and transported direct from that country to the Community. ARTICLE 18 1 . From 1 July 1976 prepared and preserved sardines falling within subheading 16.04 D of the Common Customs Tariff originating in Tunisia may be imported into the Community free of customs duties subject to observance of the minimum prices fixed in accordance with the following paragraphs. 2. For the period 1 July 1976 to 30 June 1978 the minimum prices referred to in paragraph 1 shall be those specified in Annex C. The prices for the period beginning 1 July 1978 shall be not lower than those specified in the said Annex as updated by exchange of letters between the Contracting Parties in order to take account of the trend of costs for the products in question. 3 . From 1 July 1979 the minimum prices referred to in paragraph 1 shall be agreed by annual exchanges of letters between the Contracting Parties. 4. Exemption from the customs duties referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply only from the date and for the periods determined by the exchanges of letters laying down the technical rules for applying this Article. ARTICLE 19 1 . Customs duties on imports into the Community of the products originating in Tunisia which are listed below shall be reduced by the following rates: 2. The tariff reduction referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply only from the date and for the periods determined by exchanges of letters to be concluded annually between the Contracting Parties for the purpose of establishing the conditions and detailed rules for such reduction. ARTICLE 20 1 . Customs duties on imports into the Community of wine of fresh grapes falling within heading No ex 22.05 of the Common Customs Tariff originating in Tunisia shall be reduced by 80% , provided that the import prices of such wine plus the customs duties actually levied are not less at any given time than the Community reference prices for such wine. 2. "Wine referred to in paragraph 1 which is entitled to a designation of origin under Tunisian law, is listed in an exchange of letters to be concluded between the Contracting Parties, and put up in bottles, shall be exempt from customs duties on importation into the Community within the limit of an annual Community tariff quota of 50 000 hectolitres. In order to qualify for the treatment specified in the first subparagraph the wine must be put up in containers holding two litres or less. For the purposes of applying this paragraph, Tunisia shall be responsible for verifying the identity of the above wine in accordance with its national rules, particularly as regards analysis criteria. To this end, all the wine concerned shall be accompanied by a certificate of designation of origin issued by the relevant Tunisian authority, .in accordance with the model given in Annex D to this Agreement. 3 . The tariff reduction provided for in paragraph 2 shall be applicable once the exchange of letters referred to in paragraph 2 has been concluded following verification of the equivalence of Tunisian and Community legislation with regard to wine entitled to a designation of origin; it shall be applied from the date fixed in that exchange of letters. ARTICLE 21 1 . Customs duties on imports into the Community of the following products originating in Tunisia shall be reduced by 30% within the limits of an annual Community tariff quota of 4 300 tonnes. 2. If paragraph 1 does not apply to a full calendar year, the tariff quota shall be opened pro rata. ARTICLE 22 1 . The Community shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the levy on imports into the Community of bran, sharps and other residues derived from the sifting, milling or other working of cereals, other than of maize and rice, falling within subheading 23.02 A II of the Common Customs Tariff and originating in Tunisia, is the import levy calculated in accordance with Article 2 of Regulation (EEC) No 1052/68 on the import and export system for products processed from cereals and from rice, less a fixed amount equivalent to 60 % of the variable component of the levy, and that the fixed component is not imposed. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply provided that Tunisia levies on exports of the products referred to therein a special charge equal to the amount by which the levy is reduced and that this charge is reflected in the Community import price. 3 . Detailed rules for the application of this Article shall be laid down in an exchange of letters between the Community and Tunisia. 4. Consultations on the functioning of the arrangement provided for in this Article shall take place within the Cooperation Council at the request of one of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 23 1 . The rates of reduction specified in Articles 15, 18, 19, 20 and 21 shall apply to the customs duties actually applied in respect of third countries. 2. However, the duties resulting from the reductions made by Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom may in no case be lower than those applied by the said countries to the Community as originally constituted. 3 . In derogation from paragraph 1 , should the application thereof temporarily result in tariff movements away from alignment on the final duty, Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom may maintain their duties until the level of these duties has been reached on the occasion of a subsequent alignment, or they may apply the duty resulting from a subsequent alignment as soon as a tariff movement reaches or passes the said level. 4. The reduced duties calculated in accordance with Articles 15, 18 , 19, 20 and 21 shall be rounded off to the first decimal place. However, subject to the application by the Community of Article 39 (5 ) of the Act concerning the conditions of accession and the adjustments to the Treaties referred to in Article 10 as regards the specific duties or the specific part of the mixed duties in the customs tariffs of Ireland and of the United Kingdom the reduced duties shall be rounded of to the fourth decimal place. 5 . In the new Member States the variable component of the levy referred to in Article 22 shall be calculated taking into account the rates actually applied in respect of third countries. ARTICLE 24 1 . Should specific rules be introduced as a result of implementation of its agricultural policy or modification of the existing rules, or should the provisions on the implementation of its agricultural policy be modified or developed, the Community may modify the arrangements laid down in the Agreement in respect of the products concerned. In such cases the Community shall take appropriate account of the interests of Tunisia. 2. If the Community, in applying paragraph 1 , modifies the arrangements made by this Agreement for products covered by Annex II to the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, it shall accord imports originating in Tunisia an advantage comparable to that provided for in this Agreement. 3 . Any modification of the arrangements made by this Agreement shall be the subject, at the request of the other Contracting Party, of consultations within the Cooperation Council. C. Common provisions ARTICLE 25 1 . The products originating in Tunisia referred to in this Agreement may not enjoy more favourable treatment when imported into the Community than that applied by the Member States of the Community between themselves. 2. For the application of paragraph 1 , account shall not be taken of the customs duties and charges having equivalent effect resulting from the application of Articles 32, 36 and 59 of the Act concerning the conditions of accession and the adjustments to the Treaties referred to in Article 10. ARTICLE 26 1 . Subject to the special provisions relating to frontier-zone trade, Tunisia shall grant the Community in the field of trade treatment no less favourable than most-favoured-nation treatment. 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply in the case of the maintenance or establishment of customs unions or free-trade areas. 3 . Furthermore, Tunisia may derogate from the provisions of paragraph 1 in the case of measures adopted with a view to the economic integration of the Maghreb, or measures benefiting the developing countries. Such measures shall be notified to the Community ARTICLE 27 1 . The Contracting Parties shall inform each other within three months of the date of signature of this Agreement of the provisions relating to the trade arrangements they apply. 2. Tunisia shall be entitled to introduce into its trade arrangements with the Community new customs duties or charges having equivalent effect and new quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect and to increase the duties or charges and the quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect applied to products originating in or going to the Community, where such measures are necessitated by Tunisia's industrialization and development requirements. Such measures shall be notified to the Community. For the application of these measures consultations shall be held within the Cooperation Council at the request of the other Contracting Party. ARTICLE 28 Where Tunisia applies quantitative restrictions in the form of quotas to a given product in accordance with its own legislation it shall treat the Community as a single entity. ARTICLE 29 On the occasion of the reviews provided for in Article 54 of the Agreement the Contracting Parties shall seek opportunities to make progress towards the removal of obstacles to trade, while having regard to Tunisia's essential development requirements. ARTICLE 30 The concept of 'originating products' for the purposes of implementing this title and the methods of administrative cooperation relating thereto are laid down in Protocol 2. ARTICLE 31 In the event of modifications to the nomenclature of the customs tariffs of the Contracting Parties affecting products referred to in this Agreement, the Cooperation Council may adapt the tariff nomenclature of these products to conform with such modifications, subject to the maintenance of the real advantages resulting from the Agreement. ARTICLE 32 The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products df one Contracting Party and like products originating in the territory of the other Contracting Party. Products exported to the territory of one of the Contracting Parties may not benefit from repayment of internal taxation in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxation imposed on them. ARTICLE 33 Payments relating to commercial transactions carried out in accordance with foreign trade and exchange regulations and the transfer of such payments to the Member State of the Community in which the creditor is resident or to Tunisia shall be free from any restrictions. ARTICLE 34 The Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value ; the protection of industrial and commercial property, or rules relating to gold or silver. Such prohibitions or restrictions must not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 35 1 . If one of the Contracting Parties finds that dumping is taking place in trade with the other Contracting Party, it may take appropriate measures against this practice in accordance with the Agreement on implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on tariffs and trade, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 37. 2. In the event of measures being directed against bounties or subsidies the Contracting Parties undertake to respect the provisions of Article VI of the General Agreement on tariffs and trade. ARTICLE 36 If serious disturbances arise in any sector of the economy or if difficulties arise which migfat bring about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region, the Contracting Party concerned may take the necessary safeguard measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 37. ARTICLE 37 1 . In the event of a Contracting Party subjecting imports of products liable to give rise to the difficulties referred to in Article 36 to an administrative procedure, the purpose of which is to provide rapid information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other Contracting Party. 2. In the cases specified in Articles 35 and 36, before taking the measures provided for therein or, in the cases to which paragraph 3 b) applies, as soon as possible, the Contracting Party in question shall supply the Cooperation Council with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Contracting Parties.In the selection of measures, priority must be ' given to those which least disturb the functioning of the Agreement. Such measures must not exceed the limits of what is strictly necessary to counteract the difficulties which have arisen. The safeguard measures shall be notified immediately to the Cooperation Council and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within the Cooperation Council, particularly with a view to their abolition as soon as circumstances permit. 3 . For the implementation of paragraph 2, the following provisions shall apply: ( a) as regards articles 35 and 36, consultation in the Cooperation Council shall take place before the Contracting Party concerned takes the appropriate measures; (b) where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may, in the situations specified in Articles 35 and 36, apply forthwith such precautionary measures as are strictly necessary to remedy the situation. ARTICLE 38 Where one or more Member States of the Community or Tunisia is in serious difficulties or is seriously threatened with difficulties as regards its balance of payments, the Contracting Party concerned may take the necessary safeguard measures. In the selection of measures, priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the Agreement. They shall be notified immediately to the other Contracting Party and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within the Cooperation Council, particulary with a view to their abolition as soon as circumstances permit. TITLE III COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF LABOUR ARTICLE 39 The treatment accorded by each Member State to workers of Tunisian nationality employed in its territory shall be free from any discrimination based on nationality, as regards working conditions or remuneration, in relation to its own nationals.Tunisia shall accord the same treatment to workers who are nationals of a Member State and employed in its territory. ARTICLE 40 1 . Subject to the provisions of the following paragraphs, workers of Tunisian nationality and any members of their families living with them shall enjoy, in the field of social security, treatment free from any discrimination based on nationality in relation to nationals of the Member States in which they are employed. 2. All periods of insurance, employment or residence completed by such workers in the various Member States shall be added together for the purpose of pensions and annuities in respect of old age, death and invalidity, and also for that of medical care for the workers and for members of their families resident in the Community. 3 . The workers in question shall receive family allowances for members of their families who are resident in the Community. 4. The workers in question shall be able to transfer freely to Tunisia, at the rates applied by virtue of the law of the debtor Member State or States, any pensions or annuities in respect of industrial accident, occupational disease, old age or death, or of invalidity resulting from industrial accident or occupational disease. 5. Tunisia shall accord to workers who are nationals of a Member State and employed in its territory, and to the members of their families, treatment similar to that specified in paragraphs 1 , 3 and 4. ARTICLE 41 1 . Before the end of the first year following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Cooperation Council shall adopt provisions to implement the principles set out in Article 40. 2. The Cooperation Council shall adopt detailed rules for administrative cooperation providing the necessary management and control guarantees for the application of the provisions referred to in paragraph 1 . ARTICLE 42 The provisions adopted by the Cooperation Council in accordance with Article 41 shall not affect any rights or obligations arising from bilateral agreements linking Tunisia and the Member States where those agreements provide for more favourable treatment of nationals of Tunisia or of the Member States. TITLE IV GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 43 1 . A Cooperation Council is hereby established which shall have the power, for the purpose of attaining the objectives set out in the Agreement, to take decisions in the cases provided for in the Agreement. The decisions taken shall be binding on the Contracting Parties, which shall take such measures as are required to implement them. 2. The Cooperation Council may also formulate any resolutions, recommendations or opinions which it considers desirable for the attainment of the common objectives and the smooth functioning of the Agreement. 3 . The Cooperation Council shall adopt its rules of procedure. ARTICLE 44 1 . The Cooperation Council shall be composed, on the one hand, of the members of the Council of the European Communities and of members of the Commission of the European Communities and, on the other hand, of members of the Government of the Republic of Tunisia. 2. Members of the Cooperation Council may be represented as laid down in the rules of procedure. 3. The Cooperation 'Council shall act by mutual agreement between the European Economic Community on the one hand and Tunisia on the other. ARTICLE 45 1 . The office of President of the Cooperation Council shall be held alternately by a member of the Council of the European Communities and a member of the Government of the Republic of Tunisia. 2. Meetings of the Cooperation Council shall be called once a year by its President. The Cooperation Council shall, in addition, meet whenever necessary, at the request of either Contracting Party, in accordance with the conditions to be laid down in its rules of procedure. ARTICLE 46 1 . The Cooperation Council shall be assisted in the performance of its duties by a Cooperation Committee composed, on the one hand, of one representative of each Member State and one representative of the Commission of the European Communities and, on the other, of representatives of the Republic of Tunisia. 2. The Cooperation Council may decide to set up any other committee that can assist it in carrying out its duties. 3 . In its rules of procedure, the Cooperation Council shall determine the composition and duties of such committees and how they shall function. ARTICLE 47 The Cooperation Council shall take any appropriate measures to facilitate the necessary cooperation and contacts between the European parliamentary assembly and t)he Chamber of Representatives of the Republic of Tunisia. ARTICLE 48 Either Contracting Party shall, if so requested by the other Contracting Party, provide all relevant information on any agreements it concludes involving tariff or trade provisions, and on any amendments to its customs tariff or external trade arrangements. Where such amendments or agreements have a direct and particular incidence on the functioning of the Agreement, appropriate consultations shall be held within the Cooperation Council at the request of the other Contracting Party so that the interests of the Contracting Parties may be taken into consideration. ARTICLE 49 1 . When the Community concludes an Association Agreement having a direct and particular incidence on the functioning of the Agreement appropriate consultations shall be held within the Cooperation Council so that the Community may take into consideration the interests of the Contracting Parties as defined by this Agreement. 2. In the event of a third State acceding to the Community, appropriate consultations shall be held within the Cooperation Council so that the interests of the Contracting Parties as defined by this Agreement may be taken into consideration. ARTICLE 50 1 . The Contracting Parties shall taike any general or specific measures required to fulfil their obligations under the Agreement. They shall see to it that the objectives set out in the Agreement are attained. 2. If either Contracting Party considers that the other Contracting Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under the Agreement, it may take appropriate measures. Before so doing, it shall supply the Cooperation Council with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Contracting Parties. In the selection of measures, priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the Agreement. These measures shall be notified immediately to the Cooperation Council and shall be the subject of consultations within the Cooperation Council if the other Contracting Party so requests. ARTICLE 51 1 . Any dispute which arises between the Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation of the Agreement may be placed before the Cooperation Council. 2. If the Cooperation Council (fails to settle the dispute at its next meeting, either Party may notify the other of the appointment of an arbitrator; the other Party must then appoint a second arbitrator within two months. For the application of this procedure, the Community and the Member States shall be deemed to be one Party to 'the dispute. The Cooperation Council shall appoint a third arbitrator. The decisions of the arbitrators shall be taken by majority vote. Each Party to the dispute must take the measures required for the implementation of the arbitrators' decision. ARTICLE 52 Nothing in the Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking any measures: (a) which it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests; (b) which relate to trade in arms, munitions or war materials or to research, development or production indispensable for defence purposes, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military purposes; ( c) which it considers essential to its security in time of war or serious international tension. ARTICLE 53 In the fields covered by the Agreement: — the arrangements applied to Tunisia in respect of the Community shall not give rise to any discrimination 'between the Member States, their nationals, or their companies or firms, — the arrangements applied by the 'Community in respect of Tunisia shall not give rise to any discrimination between Tunisian nationals, companies or firms. ARTICLE 54 The Contracting Parties shall review, in accordance with the procedure adopted for negotiating the Agreement itself, in the first place from the beginning of 1978 and again from the beginning of 1983, the results of the Agreement and any improvements which could be made by either side as from 1 January 1979 and 1 January 1984, on the basis of the experience gained during the functioning of the Agreement and of the objectives defined therein. ARTICLE 55 Protocols 1 and 2 and Annexes A, B, C and D shall form an integral part of the Agreement. The declarations and exchanges of letters shall appear in the Final Act, which shall form an integral part of the Agreement. ARTICLE 56 Either Contracting Party may denounce this Agreement by notifying the other Contracting Party. The Agreement shall cease to apply six months after the date of such notification. ARTICLE 57 This Agreement shall apply, on the one hand, to the territories to which the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community applies under the conditions laid down in that Treaty and, on ARTICLE 58 This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Italian and Arabic languages, each of these texts being equally authentic. ARTICLE 59 This Agreement will be approved by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their own procedures. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following notification that the procedures referred to in the first paragraph have been completed.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX A relating to the products referred to in Article 14 ANNEX B concerning olive oil, other than olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A II of the Common Customs Tariff 1 . In order to take account of : — the importance of olive oil for the Tunisian economy, — the programmes and efforts undertaken by Tunisia to rationalize and improve the conditions on its olive-oil market, — the traditional trade flows in this product between Tunisia and the European Economic Community, the amount to be deducted from the amount of the levy in accordance with Article 16 ( 1 ) (b) of the Agreement concerning olive oil, other than olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A II of the Common Customs Tariff may be increased by an additional amount under the same conditions and arrangements as laid down for the appl - cation of Article 16(1) (b) of the Agreement. 2. The additional amount provided for in paragraph 1 , if any, shall be fixed for each year of application by an exchange of letters between the Contracting Parties in the light of conditions on the olive-oil market. 3 . In view of the exceptional conditions currently affecting the olive-oil market, the additional amount shall be fixed at 10 units of account for the period ending 31 October 1977. ANNEX C (1) from 1 July 1976 to 30 June 1977 ANNEX C (2) from 1 July 1977 to 30 June 1978 ANNEX C (3) from 1 July 1978 to 30 June 1979 ANNEX D PROTOCOL 1 on technical and financial cooperation ARTICLE 1 The Community shall participate, within the framework of financial and technical cooperation, in the financing of measures such as to contribute to the economic and social development of Tunisia. ARTICLE 2 1 . For the purposes specified in Article 1 , and for a period expiring on 31 October 1981, an aggregate amount of 95 million units of account may be committed as follows: ( a) 41 million units of account in the form of loans from the European Investment Bank, hereinafter called 'the Bank', granted from its own resources on the terms set out in its Statute; (b) 39 million units of account in the form of loans on special terms; ( c) 15 million units of account in the iform of grants. Provision may 'be made for contributions to risk capital formation, to be charged against the amount shown in (b). 2. The loans referred to in paragraph 1 ( a) shall generally be combined with 2% interest rate subsidies financed by means of the funds shown in paragraph 1 (c). ARTICLE 3 1 . The amount fixed in Article 2 shall 'be used for the financing or part-financing of: capital projects in the fields of production and economic infrastructure, aimed in particular at diversifying die economic structure of Tunisia and, especially, at promoting its industrialization and modernizing its agriculture; technical cooperation as a preliminary or complement to capital projects drawn up by Tunisia; technical cooperation in the field of training. 2. Community aids sihall be used to cover costs necessarily incurred in carrying out approved projects or measures. They may not be used to cover current administrative, maintenance or operational expenditure. ARTICLE 4 1 . Capital projects shall be eligible for financing either by loans from the Bank, combined with interest rate subsidies on the terms set out in Article 2, or by loans on special terms, or by a combination of these two means. 2. Technical cooperation shall normally be financed by grants. ARTICLE 5 1 . The amounts to be oommitted each year for each of the various forms of aid shall be distributed as evenly as possible throughout the period' of application of this Protocol. During the initial period of application, however, a proportionately higher amount may, within reasonable limits, be oommitted. 2. Any funds not committed by 'the end of the fifth year following the entry into force of the Agreement shall be used, until exhausted, in accordance with the same arrangements as provided for in this Protocol. ARTICLE 6 1 . Loans granted by the Bank from its own resources shall be subject to terms as to duration established on the basis of the economic and financial characteristics of the projects for which such loans are intended. The interest rate shall be that applied by the Bank at the time of signature of each loan contract, subject to the interest rate subsidy referred to in Article 2 (2). 2. Loans on special (terms shall 'be granted for 40 years with an amortization period of 10 years. The interest rate shall be fixed at 1% . 3 . The loans may be granted through the intermediary of the State or appropriate Tunisian bodies, on condition that they onlend the amounts to the recipients on terms decided, by agreement with the Community, on die basis of the economic and financial characteristics of the projects. ARTICLE 7 Aid contributed by the Community for the execution of certain projects may, with the agreement of Tunisia, take the form of co-financing in which, in particular, credit and development bodies and institutions of Tunisia, of Member States or of third States or international finance organizations would take part. ARTICLE 8 The following shall be eligible for financial and technical cooperation: ( a) in general: — the Tunisian State ; (b ) with the agreement of the Tunisian State, for projects or measures approved by it: — Tunisian official development agencies, — private agencies working in Tunisia for economic and social development, — undertakings carrying on their activities in accordance with the methods of industrial and business management which are set up as companies or firms under Tunisian law, — groups of producers who are nationals of Tunisia, and exceptionally, where no such groups exist, the producers themselves, — scholarship holders and trainees sent by Tunisia under the training schemes referred to in Article 3 . ARTICLE 9 1 . Upon the entry into force of the Agreement the Community and Tunisia shall establish by mutual agreement the specific objectives of financial and technical cooperation, by reference to the priorities set by Tunisia's development plan. These objectives may be reviewed by mutual agreement to take account of changes in Tunisia's economic situation or in the objectives and priorities set by its development plan. 2. Within the framework established pursuant to paragraph 1 , financial and technical cooperation shall apply to projects and measures drawn up by Tunisia or by other beneficiaries approved by that country. ARTICLE 10 1 . For each request for financial aid under this Protocol, a dossier shall be submitted to the Community by the beneficiary referred to in Article 8 ( a) or, with the agreement of Tunisia, by those referred to in Article 8 (b). 2. The Community shall appraise the requests for financing in collaboration with the Tunisian State and the beneficiaries in accordance with the objectives set out in Article 9 ( 1 ), and shall inform them of the decisions taken on such requests. ARTICLE 11 The execution, management and maintenance of schemes that are the subject of financing under this Protocol shall be the responsibility of Tunisia or tihe other beneficiaries referred to in Article 8 of this Protocol. The Community shall make sure that this financial aid is expended in accordance with the agreed allocations and to the best economic advantage. ARTICLE 12 1 . As regards projects and measures financed by the Community, participation in tendering procedures and other procedures for the award of contracts shall be open, on equal terms, to all natural or legal persons of Tunisia and of the Member States. 2. To promote participation by Tunisian undertakings in the performance of works contracts, an accelerated procedure for issuing invitations to tender involving shorter time limits for the submission of tenders may be used at the proposal of the relevant Community body where the works in question, because of their scale, are mainly of interest to Tunisian undertakings. This accelerated procedure may be used for invitations to tender whose value is estimated at less than one million units of account. 3 . Participation by other countries in contracts financed by the Community may be decided by mutual agreement in exceptional cases. Participation by third countries may also be decided, in the same circumstances, where the Community participates in the financing of schemes together with other sources of funds. ARTICLE 13 Under its national law in force, Tunisia shall apply to contracts awarded for the execution of projects or measures financed by the Community fiscal and customs arrangements as favourable as those applied in respect of other international organizations. ARTICLE 14 Where a loan is accorded to a beneficiary other than the Tunisian State, the provision of a guarantee by the latter or of other adequate guarantees may be required by the Community as a condition of the grant of the loan. ARTICLE 15 Throughout the duration of the loans accorded pursuant to this Protocol, Tunisia shall undertake to make available to debtors enjoying such loans the foreign currency necessary for the payment of interest and commission and the repayment of principal. ARTICLE 16 The results of financial and technical cooperation shall be examined annually by the Cooperation Council. The latter shall define, where appropriate, the general guidelines of such cooperation. ARTICLE 17 Before the end of the fifth year following the entry into force of the Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall examine what arrangements could be made for financial and technical cooperation during a possible further period. PROTOCOL 2 concerning the definition of the concept of 'originating products' and methods of administrative cooperation TITLE I Definition of the concept of 'originating products' ARTICLE 1 1 . For the purpose of implementing the Agreement and without prejudice to paragraphs 2 and 3, on condition that they were transported in conformity with Article 5, the following shall be considered as: ( a) products originating in Tunisia: — products wholly obtained in Tunisia, — products obtained in Tunisia, in the manufacture of which products other than those wholly obtained in Tunisia are used, provided that the said products have undergone sufficient working or processing within the meaning of Article 3 ; (b) products originating in the Community: — products wholly obtained in the Community, — products obtained in the Community, in the manufacture of which products other than those wholly obtained in the Community are used, provided that the said products have undergone sufficient working or processing within the meaning of Article 3 . 2. For the purpose of implementing the first indent of paragraph 1 ( a), when products wholly obtained in Algeria, in Morocco or in the Community undergo working or processing in Tunisia, they shall be considered as having been wholly obtained in Tunisia For the purpose of implementing the second indent of paragraph 1 ( a), working or processing carried out in Algeria, in Morocco or in the Community shall be considered as having been carried out in Tunisia, when the products obtained undergo subsequent working or processing in Morocco.This paragraph shall apply subject to the condition that the products concerned are transported in conformity with Article 5 . 3 . For the purpose of implementing the first indent of paragraph 1 (b), when products wholly obtained in Tunisia undergo working or processing in the Community, they shall be considered as having been wholly obtained in the Community. For the purposes of implementing the second indent of paragraph 1 (b), working or processing carried out in Tunisia shall be considered as having been carried out in the Community, when the products obtained undergo subsequent working or processing in the Community. This paragraph shall apply subject to the condition that the products concerned are transported in conformity with Article 5 . 4. In derogation from paragraph 1 where, pursuant to the provisions of the above paragraphs, and provided that all the conditions laid down in those paragraphs are fulfilled, the 'originating products are obtained in two or more of the States referred to in these provisions or in the Community, they shall be considered as originating products of the State or the Community according to where the last working or processing took place. For this purpose the working or processing referred to in Article 3 (3 ) shall not be considered as working or processing. 5. The products in List C in Annex IV shall be temporarily excluded from the scope of this Protocol. 6. The provisions contained in paragraph 2 shall only be applicable to Algeria and Morocco in so far as the rules governing trade between Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco, in the field of these provisions, are identical to the provisions of this Protocol, and on condition that the necessary administrative cooperation between Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco for the control of these provisions is established. ARTICLE 2 The following shall be considered as 'wholly obtained' in Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco or the Community within the meaning of Article 1 ( 1 ), (2) and (3): ( a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed; (b) vegetable products harvested there; (c) live animals born and raised there; (d) products from live animals raised there; (e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there; (f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea by their vessels; (g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in subparagraph (f); (h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials; (i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there; (j) goods produced there exclusively from products specified in subparagraphs (a) to (i). ARTICLE 3 1 . For the purpose of implementing Article 1 , the following shall be considered as sufficient working or processing: ( a) working or processing as a result of which the goods obtained receive a classification under a heading other than chat covering each of the products worked or processed, except, however, working or processing specified in List A in Annex II, where the special provisions of that list apply; (b) working or processing specified in List B in Annex III. 'Sections', 'chapters' and 'headings' shall mean the sections, chapters and headings in the Brussels Nomenclature for the classification of goods in customs tariffs. 2. When, for a given product obtained, a percentage rule limits in Lists A and B the value of the materials and parts which can be used, the total value of these materials and parts, Whether or notthey have changed heading in the course of the working, processing or assembly within the limits and under the conditions laid down in each of chose two lists, may not exceed, in relation to the value of the product obtained, the value corresponding either to the common rate, if the rates are identical in both lists, or to the higher of the two if they are different. 3 . For the purpose of implementing Article 1 , the following shall always be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating product, whether or not there is a change of heading: ( a) operations to ensure the preservation of merchandise in good condition during transport and storage (ventilation, spreading out, drying, dulling, placing in salt, sulphur dioxide or other aqueous solutions, removal of damaged parts, and like operations); (b) simple operations consisting of removal of dust, sifting or screening, sorting, classifying, matching (including the making up of sets of articles), washing, painting, cutting up; ( c) (i) changes of packaging and breaking up and assembly of consignments, (ii) simple placing in bottles, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards, etc., and all other simple packaging operations; (d) affixing marks, labels or other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging; (e) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds, where one or more components of the mixture do not meet the conditions laid down in this Protocol to enable them to be considered as originating in Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco or the Community; (f) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article; (g) a combination of two or more operations specified in subparagraphs ( a) to (f); (h) slaughter of animals. ARTICLE 4 Where Lists A and B referred to in Article 3 provide that goods obtained in Tunisia or in the Community shall be considered as originating therein only if the value of the products worked or processed does not exceed a given percentage of the value of the goods obtained, the values to be taken into consideration for such a percentage shall be : — on the one hand, as regards products whose importation can be proved : their customs value at the time of importation; as regards products of undetermined origin : the earliest ascertainable price paid for such products in the territory of the Contracting Party where manufacture takes place; — and on the other hand, the ex-works price of the goods obtained, less internal taxes refunded or refundable on exportation. ARTICLE 5 1 . For the purpose of implementing Article 1 ( 1 ), (2) and (3 ), originating products whose transport is effected without entering into territory other than that of Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco or the Community shall be considered as transported directly from Tunisia to the Community or from the Community to Tunisia. However, goods originating in Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco or the Community and constituting one single consignment which is not split up may be transported through territory other than that of these countries or the Community with, should the occasion arise, transhipment or temporary warehousing in such territory, provided that the crossing of the latter territory is justified for geographical reasons and that the goods have remained under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or warehousing, that they have not entered into commerce of such countries nor been delivered for home use there and have not undergone operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to maintain them in good condition. / 2. Evidence that the conditions referred to in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the responsible customs authorities in the Community or in Tunisia by the production of: ( a) a through bill of lading issued in the exporting beneficiary country covering the passage through the country of transit; or (b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit: — giving an exact description of the goods, stating the dates of unloading and re-loading of the goods or of their embarkation or disembarkation, identifying the ships used, — certifying the conditions under which the goods remained in the transit country; ( c) or failing these, any substantiating documents. TITLE II Arrangements for administrative cooperation ARTICLE 6 1 . Evidence of originating status of products, within the meaning of this Protocol, is given by a movement certificate EUR. 1 of which a specimen is given in Annex V to this Protocol. However, the evidence of originating status, within the meaning of this Protocol, of products which form the subject of postal consignments (including parcels), provided that they consist only of originating products and that the value does not exceed 1 000 units of account per consignment, may be given by a form EUR. 2, of which a specimen is given in Annex VI to this Protocol. The unit of account (u.a.) has a value of 0-88867088 gram of fine gold. Should the unit of account be changed, the Contracting Parties shall make contact with each other at the level of the Cooperation Council to redefine the value in terms of gold. 2. Without prejudice to Article 3 (3 ), where, at the request of the person declaring the goods at the customs, a dismantled or non-assembled article falling within Chapter 84 or 85 of the Brussels Nomenclature is imported by instalments on the conditions laid down by the competent authorities, it shall be considered to be a single article and a movement certificate may be submitted for the whole article upon importation of the first instalment. 3. Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle wihich are part of the normal equipment and included in the. price thereof or are not separately invoiced shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question. ARTICLE 7 1 . A movement certificate EUR. 1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting State when the goods to which it relates are exported. It shall be made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured. 2. In exceptional circumstances a movement certificate EUR. 1 may also be issued after exportation of the goods to which it relates if it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances. In this case, the certificate shall bear a special reference to the conditions in which it was issued. 3 . A movement certificate EUR. 1 shall be issued only on application having been made in writing by the exporter. Such application shall be made on a form, of which a specimen is given in Annex V to this Protocol, which shall be completed in accordance with this Protocol. 4. A movement certificate EUR. 1 may be issued only where it can serve as the documentary evidence required for the purpose of implementing the Agreement. 5 . Applications for movement certificates EUR. 1 must be preserved for at least two years by the customs authorities of the exporting State. ARTICLE 8 1 . The movement certificate EUR. 1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting State, if the goods can be considered 'originating products' within the meaning of the Agreement. 2. For the purpose of verifying whether the conditions stated in paragraph 1 have been met, the customs authorities shall have the right to call for any documentary evidence or to carry out any check which they consider appropriate. 3 . It shall be the responsibility of the customs authorities of the exporting State to ensure that the forms referred to in Article 9 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the goods has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions. To this end, the description of the goods must be indicated without leaving any blank lines. Where the space is not completely filled a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through. 4. The date of issue of the movement certificate must be indicated in the part of the certificate reserved for the customs authorities. ARTICLE 9 Movement certificates EUR. 1 shall be made out on the form of which a specimen is given in Annex V to this Protocol. This form shall be printed in one or more of the languages in which the Agreement is drawn up. Certificates shall be made out in one of these languages and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting State; if they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink and in capital letters.Each certificate shall measure 210 X 297 mm, a tolerance of up to plus 8 or minus 5 mm in the length being allowed. The paper used must be white, sized writing paper not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 25 g/m2 . It shall have a printed green guilloche-pattern background making any falsification by mechanical or chemical means apparent to the eye. The exporting States may reserve the right to print the certificates themselves or may have them printed by approved printers. In the latter case, each certificate must include a reference to such approval. Each certificate must bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified. It shall also 'bear a serial number, either printed or not, by which it can be identified. ARTICLE 10 1 Under the responsibility of the exporter, he or his authorized representative shall request the issue of a movement certificate EUR. 1 . 2. The exporter or his representative shall submit with his request any appropriate supporting document proving that the goods to be exported are such as to qualify for the issue of a movement certificate EUR. 1 . ARTICLE 11 A movement certificate EUR. 1 must be submitted, within five months of the date of issue by the customs authorities of the exporting State, to the customs authorities of the importing State where the goods are entered. ARTICLE 12 Movement certificates EUR. 1 shall be submitted to customs authorities in the importing State, in accordance with the procedures laid down by jthat State. The said authorities may require a translation of a certificate. They may also require the import declaration to be accompanied (by a statement from the importer to the effect that the goods meet the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement. ARTICLE 13 1 . A movement certificate EUR. 1 which is submitted to the customs authorities of the importing State after the final date for presentation specified in Article 11 may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit the certificate by the final date set is due to reasons of force majeure or exceptional circumstances. 2. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing State may accept the certificates where the goods have been submitted to them before the said final date. ARTICLE 14 The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the movement certificate EUR. 1 and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the goods shall not ipso facto render the certificate null and void if it is duly established that the certificate does correspond to the goods submitted. ARTICLE 15 It shall always be possible to replace one or more movement certificates by one or more certificates, provided that this is done at the customs office where the goods are located. ARTICLE 16 Form EUR. 2, a specimen of which is given in Annex VI, shall be completed by the exporter or, under his responsibility, by his authorized representative. It shall be made out in one of the languages in which the Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting State. If it is handwritten it must be completed in ink and in capital letters. If the (goods contained in the consignment have already been subject to verification in the exporting State by reference to the definition of the concept of 'originating products' the exporter may refer to this check in the 'Remarks' box of form EUR. 2. Form EUR. 2 shall measure 210 X 148 mm, a tolerance of up to plus 8 or minus 5 mm in the length being allowed. The paper used shall be white, sized writing paper not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 64 g/m2. The exporting States may reserve the right to print the forms themselves or may have them printed by approved printers. In the latter case eadh form must include a reference to such approval. In addition, each form must bear the distinctive sign attributed to the approved printer and a serial number, either printed or not, by which it can be identified. A form EUR. 2 shall be completed for each postal consignment. These provisions do not exempt exporters from complying with any other formalities required by customs or postal regulations. ARTICLE 17 1 . Goods sent as small packages to private persons or forming part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the production of a movement certificate EUR. 1 or the completion of a form EUR. 2, provided that such goods are not imported by way of trade and have been 'declared as meeting the conditions required for the application of these provisions, and where there is no 'doubt as to the veracity of such declaration. 2. Importations which are occasional and consist solely of goods for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as importations by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the goods that no commercial purpose is in view. Furthermore, the total value of these goods must not exceed 60 units of account in the case of small packages or 200 units of account in the case of the contents of travellers' personal luggage. ARTICLE 18 1 . Goods sent from the Community or from Tunisia for exhibition in a country other than Algeria and Morocco and sold after the exhibition for importation into Tunisia or into the Community shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement on condition that the goods meet the requirements of this Protocol entitling them to be recognized as originating in the Community or in Tunisia and provided that it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that: ( a) an exporter has consigned these goods from the Community or from Tunisia to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there ; (b) the goods have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to someone in Tunisia or in the Community; (c) the goods have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter to Tunisia or to the Community in the state in which they were sent for exhibition ; (d) the goods have not, since they • were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition. 2. A movement certificate EUR. 1 must be produced to the customs authorities in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the nature of the goods and the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required. 3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organized for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign goods, and during which the goods remain under customs control. ARTICLE 19 1 . When a certificate is issued within the meaning of Article 7 (2) of this Protocol after the goods to which it relates have actually been exported, the exporter must in the application referred to in Article 7 ( 3 ) of this Protocol: — indicate the place and date of exportation of the goods to which the certificate relates; — certify that no movement certificate EUR. 1 was issued at the time of exportation of the good's in question, and state the reasons. 2. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR. 1 retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the corresponding file. ARTICLE 20 In the event of the theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR. 1 , the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with one of the following words: 'DUPLIKAT', 'DUPLICATA', 'DUPLICATO', 'DUPLICAAT', 'DUPLICATE', ' ARTICLE 21 1 . When paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Article 1 are applied for the issue of a movement certificate EUR. 1 the competent customs office in the State requested to issue the certificate for products in the manufacture of which products coming from Algeria, Morocco or the Community are used, shall take into consideration the declaration, of which a specimen is given in Annex VII, given by the exporter in the State from which it came, either on the commercial invoice applicable to these products, or on a supporting document to that invoice. 2. The submission of the information certificate, issued under the conditions set out in Article 22 and of which a specimen is given in Annex VIII, may however be requested of the exporter by the Customs office concerned, either for checking the authenticity and accuracy of information given on the declaration provided for in paragraph 1 , or for obtaining additional information. ARTICLE 22 The information certificate concerning the products taken into use shall be issued at the request of the exporter of these products, either in the circumstances envisaged in Article 21 (2), or at the initiative of this exporter, by the competent customs office in the State from which these goods were exported. It shall be made out in duplicate. One copy shall be given to the exporter who has requested it, who shall send it either to the exporter of the final products or to the customs office where the issue of the movement certificate EUR. 1 for these products has been requested. The second copy shall be preserved by the office which has issued it for at least two years. ARTICLE 23 Tunisia and the Community shall take all necessary steps to ensure that goods traded under cover of a movement certificate EUR. 1 , and! which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory, are not replaced by other goods and that they do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration. ARTICLE 24 In order to ensure the proper application of this title, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco and the Community shall assist each other, through their respective customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of movement certificates EUR. 1 and the accuracy of the information concerning the actual origin of the products concerned and the declarations by exporters on forms EUR. 2 and the authenticity and accuracy of the information certificates referred to in Article 21. ARTICLE 25 Penalties shall be imposed on any person who, in order to enable goods to be accepted as eligible for preferential treatment, draws up or causes to be drawn up, either a document which contains incorrect particulars for the purpose of obtaining a movement certificate EUR. 1 or a form EUR. 2 containing incorrect particulars. ARTICLE 26 1 . Subsequent verifications of movement certificates EUR. 1 and of forms EUR. 2 shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing State have reasonable doubt as to the authenticity of the document or the accuracy of the information regarding the true origin of the goods in question. 2. For the purpose of implementing paragraph 1 , the customs authorities of the importing State shall return the movement certificate EUR. 1 or the form EUR. 2, or a photocopy thereof, to the customs authorities of the exporting State, giving, where appropriate, the reasons of form or substance for an inquiry. The invoice, if it has been submitted, or a copy thereof shall be attached to the form EUR. 2 and the customs authorities shall forward any information that has 'been obtained suggesting that the particulars given on the said certificate or the said form are inaccurate. If the customs authorities of the importing State decide to suspend execution of the Agreement while awaiting the results of the verification, they shall offer to release the goods to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary. 3 . The customs authorities of the importing State shall be informed of the results of the verification as soon as possible. These results must be such as to make it possible to determiine whether the disputed movement certificate EUR. 1 or form EUR. 2 applies to the goods actually exported, and whether these goods can, in fact, qualify for the application of the preferential arrangements. When stich disputes cannot !be settled between the customs authorities of the importing State and those of the exporting State, or when they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Customs Cooperation Committee provided for in Article 29. In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the importing State shall be under the legislation of the said State. ARTICLE 27 The subsequent verification of the information certificate referred to in Article 21 shall be carried out in the circumstances envisaged in Article 26 following a similar procedure to that envisaged in that Article ARTICLE 28 The Cooperation Council shall examine annually the application of the provisions of this Protocol and their economic effect with a view to making any necessary changes. This examination may be carried out at more frequent intervals at the request either of the Community or Tunisia. ARTICLE 29 1 . A Customs Cooperation Committee shall be set up, charged with carrying out administrative cooperation with a view to the correct and uniform application of this Protocol and with carrying out any other task in the customs field which may be entrusted to it. 2. The Committee shall be composed on the one hand of customs experts of the Member States and of officials of the departments of the Commission of the European Communities who are responsible for customs questions, and on the other hand of Tunisian customs experts. ARTICLE 30 1 . The Community and Tunisia shall take any measures necessary to enable movement certificates EUR. 1 as well as forms EUR. 2 to be submitted, in accordance with Articles 11 and 12 of this Protocol, from the day on which the Agreement enters into force. 2. The certificates of type A.TN.1 as well as forms A.TN.2 may be used until stocks are exhausted and at the latest up to and including 30 June 1977, under the conditions laid down by this Protocol. 3 . The movement certificates EUR.1 and 'the forms EUR.2 printed in the Member States before the date of the entry into force of the Agreement, and which do not conform to the models in Annexes V and VI to this Protocol, may continue to be used until stocks are exhausted, under the conditions laid down by this Protocol. ARTICLE 31 The Community and Tunisia shall each take the steps necessary to implement this Protocol. ARTICLE 32 The Annexes to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof. ARTICLE 33 The provisions of the Agreement may be applied to goods which comply with the provisions of Tide I and which on the date of the entry into force of the Agreement are either in transit or are in the Community or in Tunisia in temporary storage in bonded warehouses or in free zones subject to the submission to the customs authorities of the importing State within four months of that date of a certificate A.TN.1 issued under the conditions of Article 30 (2) or of a certificate EUR.1 endorsed retrospectively by the competent authorities of the exporting State together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly. ARTICLE 34 The endorsements referred to in Articles 19 and 20 shall be inserted in the 'Remarks' box of the certificate. ANNEX 1 EXPLANATORY NOTES Note 1 — Articles 1 and 2 The terms 'the Community' or 'Tunisia' shall also cover the territorial waters of the Member States of the Community or of Tunisia respectively. Vessels operating on the high seas, including factory ships, on which fish caught is worked or processed, shall be considered as part of the territory of the State to which they belong provided that they satisfy the conditions set out in Explanatory Note 6. Note 2 — Article 1 In order to determine whether goods originate in the Community, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco, it shall not be necessary to establish whether the power and fuel, plant and equipment, and machines and tools used to obtain such goods originate in third countries or not. Note 3 — Article 1 Where a percentage rule is applied in determining originating status of a product obtained in a Member State, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco, the value added by the working or processing referred to in Article 1 shall correspond to the ex-works price of the product obtained less the customs value of third products imported into the 'Community, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco. Note 4 — Articles 3 (1 ), (2) and 4 The percentage rule constitutes, where the product obtained appears in List A, a criterion additional to that of change of heading for any non-originating product used. Note 5 — Article 1 Packing shall be considered as forming a whole with the goods contained therein. This provision, however, shall not apply to packing which is not of the normal type for the article packed and which has intrinsic utilization value and is of a durable nature, apart from its function as packing. Note 6 — Article 2 (f) The term 'their vessels' shall apply only to vessels: — which are registered or recorded in a Member State, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco, — which sail under the flag of a Member State, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco, — which are owned to an extent of at least 50°/o by nationals of the Member States, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco or by a company with its head office in a Member State, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco, of which the manager, managers, chairman of the board of directors or of the supervisory board, and the majority of the members of such board are nationals of the Member States, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco, of which, in addition in the case of partnerships or limited companies, at least half the capital belongs to the Member States, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco or to public bodies or nationals of the Member States, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco, — of which at least 50 % of the crew, captain and officers included, are nationals of the Member States, Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco. Note 7 — Article 4 'Ex-works price' shall mean the price paid to the manufacturer in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the products used in manufacture. 'Customs value' shall be understood as meaning the customs value laid down in the Convention concerning the valuation of goods for customs purposes signed in Brussels on 15 December 1950. Note 8 — Article 5 For the purposes of applying Article 5, the ports of embarkation of products originating in Tunisia for destination in the Community are for example: Algiers — Al-Hoceima — Agadir — Annaba — Arzew — Azilah — Bajaia — Beni-Saf — Bizerta — Casablanca — Ceuta — Constantine — Dellys — El Jadida — Essaouira — Gabès — Ghazaouet — Ifni - Kenitra — Larache — Melilla — Mohammedia — Oran — Rabat — Safi — Sfax — Sikda — Sousse — Tangier — Tarfaya — Ténès — Tunis. Note 9 — Article 24 The authorities consulted shall furnish any information concerning the conditions under which the product has been made, indicating especially the conditions in which the rules of origin have been respected in the various Member States and in Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco. ANNEX II LIST A List of working or processing operations which result in a change of tariff heading without conferring the status of/originating products' on the products undergoing such operations, or conferring this status only subject to certain conditions ANNEX III LIST B List of working or processing operations which do not result in a change of tariff heading, but which do confer the status of 'originating products' on the products undergoing such operations ANNEX IV LIST C List of products excluded from the scope of this Protocol ANNEX V MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE ANNEX VII SPECIMEN OF DECLARATION ANNEX VIII ANNEX IX Joint declaration For the implementation of Article 28 of this Protocol, the Community is prepared to examine any request from Tunisia for derogations to the rules of origin after the signature of the Agreement. FINAL ACT The Plenipotentiaries of His Majesty the King of the Belgians, Her Majesty the Queen of Denmark, The President of the Federal Republic of Germany, The President of the French Republic, The President of Ireland, The President of the Italian Republic, His Royal Highness the Grand Duke of Luxembourg, Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands, Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Council of the European Communities, bf the one part, and of The President of the Republic of Tunisia of the other part, meeting at Tunis this twenty-fifth day of April in the year one thousand nine hundred and seventy-six for the purpose of signing the Cooperation Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Tunisia, and the Agreement between the Member States of the European Coal and Steel Community and the Republic of Tunisia, have, on signing these Agreements, — adopted the following joint declarations by the Contracting Parties: 1 . Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on Article 12 ( 1 ) of the Agreement, 2. Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on Article 15 of the Agreement, 3 . Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on the provisions of Article 15 of the Agreement in respect of certain products falling within subheadings 08.02 ex A, ex B, ex C and D of the Common Customs Tariff, 4. Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on Annex B concerning olive oil, other than olive oil having undergone a refining process, falling within subheading 15.07 A II of the Common Customs Tariff, 5. Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on olive oil, 6. Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on wines entitled to a designation of origin, 7. Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on agricultural products, 8. Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on the consultations provided for in Articles 13, 24, 27, 48 and 49 of the Agreement, 9. Joint declaration by the Contracting Parties on the presentation of the Agreement to GATT by the Community, 10. Declaration by the Contracting Parties on the interpretation of the term 'Contracting Parties' as used in the Agreement; — taken note of the following declarations: 1 . Declaration by the European Economic Community on Article 20 (2) of the Agreement, 2. Declaration by the European Economic Community on the regional application of certain provisions of the Agreement, 3. Declaration by the European Economic Community on the unit of account referred to in Article 2 of Protocol 1 , * 4. Declaration by the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany on the definition of German nationality, 5. Declaration by the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany on the application of the Agreement to Berlin ; — and taken note of the following exchanges of letters: 1 . Exchange of letters on scientific and technological cooperation and the protection of the environment, 2. Exchange of letters on the provisions of Article 15 of the Agreement in respect of products falling within subheadings 08.02 ex A, ex B, ex C and D of the Common Customs Tariff, 3. Exchange of letters on Articles 15 and 49 of the Agreement, 4. Exchange of letters on Tunisian labour employed in the Community, 5. Exchange of letters on implementation of the Agreement before its entry into force in respect of economic, technical and financial cooperation, 6. Exchange of letters on goods originating in and coming from certain countries and enjoying special treatment when imported into a Member State, 7. Exchange of letters on Articles 34 and 53 of the Agreement. The declarations and exchanges of letters listed above are annexed to this Final Act. The Plenipotentiaries have agreed that the declarations and exchanges of letters shall be subjected, in the same manner as the Cooperation Agreement, to any procedures that may be necessary to ensure their validity.
