MainText:
Agreement establishing an Association between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND ("the United Kingdom") and THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN ("Jordan") (hereinafter referred to as "the Parties"), RECOGNISING that the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an Association between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, of the other part, done at Brussels on 24 November 1997 ("the EU-Jordan Association Agreement") and the Agreement in the form of a Protocol between the European Union and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan establishing a dispute settlement mechanism applicable to disputes under the trade provisions of the EU-Jordan Association Agreement, done at Brussels on 11 February 2011 ("the EU-Jordan Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol") will cease to apply to the United Kingdom when it ceases to be a Member State of the European Union, or at the end of any transitional arrangement during which the rights and obligations under these Agreements continue to apply to the United Kingdom, DESIRING that the rights and obligations between the Parties as provided for by the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and the EU-Jordan Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol should continue; HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: ARTICLE 1. Objectives 1. The overriding objective of this Agreement is to preserve the links between the Parties established by the association created in Article 1 of the EU-Jordan Association Agreement. 2. In particular, the Parties agree to preserve the preferential conditions relating to trade between the Parties which resulted from the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and to provide a platform for further trade liberalisation between the Parties. 3. For the avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that the Parties establish an association as well as a free trade area in goods and associated rules in accordance with this Agreement and affirm the objectives in Article 1 of the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and Article 1 of the EU-Jordan Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol. ARTICLE 2. Definitions and Interpretation 1. Throughout this Instrument: (a) the "EU-Jordan Agreements" means the Agreements defined in Article 3; (b) the "Incorporated Agreements" means the provisions of the EU-Jordan Agreements as incorporated into this Agreement (and related expressions are to be read accordingly); and (c) "mutatis mutandis" means with the technical changes necessary to apply the EU-Jordan Agreements as if they had been concluded between the United Kingdom and Jordan, taking into account the object and purpose of this Agreement. 2. Throughout the Incorporated Agreements and this Instrument, "this Agreement" means this Instrument and the Incorporated Agreements. 3. Throughout the Incorporated Agreements references to financial cooperation cover a range of forms of such cooperation and means by which it may occur, including cooperation through multilateral and regional organisations. ARTICLE 3. Incorporation of the EU-Jordan Agreements The provisions of the following agreements (together referred to as the "EU-Jordan Agreements") in effect immediately before they cease to apply to the United Kingdom are incorporated into this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, subject to the provisions of this Instrument: (a) the EU-Jordan Association Agreement; and (b) the EU-Jordan Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol. ARTICLE 4. References to European Union Law 1. Except as otherwise provided, references in this Agreement to European Union law are to be read as references to that European Union law in force as incorporated or implemented in United Kingdom law as retained European Union law on the day after the United Kingdom ceases to be bound by the relevant European Union law. 2. In this Article "United Kingdom law" includes the law of the territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible to whom this Agreement extends, as set out in Article 6. ARTICLE 5. References to the Euro Notwithstanding Article 3, references to the euro (including "EUR" and "€") in the Incorporated Agreements shall continue to be read as such in this Agreement. ARTICLE 6. Territorial Application 1. For the avoidance of doubt in relation to incorporated Article 105, this Agreement shall apply, in respect of the United Kingdom, to the extent that and under the conditions which the EU-Jordan Agreements applied immediately before they ceased to apply to the United Kingdom, to the United Kingdom and the following territories for whose international relations it is responsible: (a) Gibraltar; and (b) the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, and Article 11 of this Instrument, this Agreement shall apply to those territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible from the date of written notification by the United Kingdom to Jordan of application of this Agreement to those territories. ARTICLE 7. Continuation of Time Periods 1. Unless this Instrument provides otherwise: (a) if a period in the EU-Jordan Agreements has not yet ended, the remainder of that period shall be incorporated into this Agreement; and (b) if a period in the EU-Jordan Agreements has ended, any ongoing right or obligation in the EU-Jordan Agreements shall apply between the Parties and that period shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a reference in the Incorporated Agreements to a period relating to a procedure or other administrative matter (such as a review, committee procedure or notification) shall not be affected. ARTICLE 8. Further Provision In Relation to the Association Council and the Association Committee 1. The Association Committee which the Parties establish under incorporated Article 92 shall ensure that this Agreement operates properly. 2. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, any decisions adopted by the Association Council or the Association Committee established by the EU-Jordan Association Agreement before the EU-Jordan Agreements ceased to apply to the United Kingdom shall, to the extent those decisions relate to the Parties to this Agreement, be deemed to have been adopted, mutatis mutandis, and subject to the provisions of this Instrument, by the Association Council or the Association Committee established under incorporated Articles 89 and 92 of the EU-Jordan Association Agreement, respectively. 3. Nothing in paragraph 2 prevents the Association Council or the Association Committee making decisions which modify, are different to, revoke or supersede the decisions deemed to have been adopted by it under that paragraph. ARTICLE 9. Integral Parts of this Agreement The Annexes and Footnotes to this Instrument are integral to this Agreement. ARTICLE 10. Amendments 1. The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. An amendment shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date of receipt of the later of the Parties' notifications that they have completed their internal procedures, or on such date as the Parties may agree. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Association Council (or the Committee insofar as such powers are delegated to it by the Council under incorporated Article 92) may decide that the Annexes, Appendices, Protocols, Joint Decisions, Declarations, or Notes to this Agreement, should be amended. The Parties may adopt the Association Council or the Association Committee's decision subject to their internal procedures. ARTICLE 11. Entry Into Force 1. Article 107 of the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and Article 23 of the EU- Jordan Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. Each of the Parties shall notify the other in writing, through diplomatic channels, of the completion of the procedures required by its law for the entry into force of this Agreement. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date of the later of these notifications, provided that is a date after which the EU-Jordan Agreements cease to apply to the United Kingdom. 3. The United Kingdom shall submit notifications under this Article to the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation of Jordan or its successor. Jordan shall submit notifications under this Article to the United Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office or its successor. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement. Done in duplicate at Amman this Fifth day of November 2019 in the English and Arabic languages, both texts being equally authoritative.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX I The incorporation of the provisions of the EU-Jordan Association Agreement into this Agreement is further modified as follows and as set out in ANNEX II: 1. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLEI POLITICAL DIALOGUE (a) In Article 5(2) for the word "shall" substitute "may". 2. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE II FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS (a) In Article 17(1): i. for the words "From 1 January 2009" substitute "Three years after the entry into force of this Agreement,"; and ii. the words "with effect from 1 January 2010" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) Article 20 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In Article 22(2) the final sentence shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 3. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE I RIGHT OF ESTABLISHMENT AND SERVICES (a) Article 40(3) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 4. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE IV PAYMENTS, CAPITAL MOVEMENTS AND OTHER ECONOMIC MATTERS (a) In Article 53: i. paragraph (2) (including any reference to it) and the second bullet point in paragraph (5) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement; and ii. in paragraph (3) for the words "the Agreement" substitute "this Agreement". 5. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE V ECONOMIC COOPERATION (a) In Article 64(a) the first and second bullet points shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In Article 66 in the first bullet point the words "and to networks created in the context of decentralised cooperation" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) Article 68(a) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) Article 69 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (e) In Article 70 the words "to the approximation of their standards and rules" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (f) In Article 72: i. the words "linked to the main trans-European communication routes"; and ii. the second and third bullet points, shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (g) In the fourth bullet point in Article 74 the words "and for their link-up to Community networks" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (h) In Article 78(2) the words "Community and other" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (i) In the third bullet point in Article 79(3) the words "the Community and" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 6. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VII FINANCIAL COOPERATION (a) In Article 87 the words "In the framework of the existing Community Financial Instruments aimed at supporting the structural adjustment programmes in the Mediterranean countries, and" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 7. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VIII INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS (a) In the first paragraph of Article 97(4) the second sentence shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) Article 103 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In the second paragraph of Article 104 immediately after the words "other Party" insert "in writing". (d) Article 106 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 8. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNEX VII INTELLECTUAL, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTY REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 56 (a) In paragraph (1) for the words "the Agreement" substitute "this Agreement". 9. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL 1 CONCERNING THE ARRANGEMENTS APPLICABLE TO THE IMPORTATION INTO THE COMMUNITY OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS ORIGINATING IN JORDAN [not included] 10. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL 4 ON MUTUAL ASSISTANCE BETWEEN ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES IN CUSTOMS MATTERS [not included] 11. MODIFICATIONS TO JOINT DECLARATIONS [not included] ANNEX III The incorporation of the provisions of the EU-Jordan Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol into this Agreement is further modified as follows: 1. MODIFICATIONS TO CHAPTER IV GENERAL PROVISIONS (a) For the avoidance of doubt, in incorporated Article 19(1), the Parties shall, no later than 6 months after the entry into force of this Agreement, establish a new list of at least 15 individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators following the same rules established under incorporated Article 19(1) Done in duplicate at Amman this Fifth day of November 2019 in the English and Arabic languages, both texts having equal validity. In the event of any inconsistencies between the texts, the English language text will prevail. For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland: EDWARD OAKDEN For the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan: TARIQ HAMMOURI
