MainText:
Agreement establishing an Association between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Republic of Tunisia THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND ("the United Kingdom") and THE REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA ("Tunisia") (hereinafter referred to as "the Parties"), RECOGNISING that the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Tunisia, of the other part, done at Brussels on 17 July 1995 ("the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement") and the Protocol between the European Union and the Republic of Tunisia establishing a Dispute Settlement Mechanism applicable to disputes under the trade provisions of the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement, done at Brussels on 9 December 2009 ("the EU-Tunisia Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol") will cease to apply to the United Kingdom when it ceases to be a Member State of the European Union, or at the end of any transitional arrangement during which the rights and obligations under those agreements continue to apply to the United Kingdom; DESIRING that the rights and obligations between the Parties as provided for by the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement and the EU-Tunisia Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol should continue; TAKING ACCOUNT of the Protocol establishing a Forum for Political, Economic and Cultural Dialogue between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Tunisia and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, done at Tunis on 25 February 2009 ("the Tunisia- United Kingdom Bilateral Forum Protocol"); HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: ARTICLE 1. Objectives 1. The overriding objective of this Agreement is to preserve the links between the Parties established by the association created in Article 1 of the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement. 2. In particular, the Parties agree to preserve the preferential conditions relating to trade between the Parties which resulted from the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement and to provide a platform for further trade liberalisation between the Parties. 3, For the avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that the Parties establish an association as well as a free trade area in goods and associated rules in accordance with this Agreement and affirm the objectives in Article 1 of the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement and Article 1 of the EU-Tunisia Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol. ARTICLE 2. Definitions and Interpretation 1. Throughout this Instrument: (a) the "EU-Tunisia Agreements" means the Agreements defined in Article 3; (b) the "Incorporated Agreements" means the provisions of the EU- Tunisia Agreements as incorporated into this Agreement (and related expressions are to be read accordingly); (c) "mutatis mutandis" means with the technical changes necessary to apply the EU-Tunisia Agreements as if they had been concluded between the United Kingdom and Tunisia, taking into account the object and purpose of this Agreement. 2. Throughout the Incorporated Agreements and this Instrument, "this Agreement" means this Instrument and the Incorporated Agreements. 3. Throughout the Incorporated Agreements references to financial cooperation cover a range of forms of such cooperation and means by which it may occur, including cooperation through multilateral and regional organisations. ARTICLE 3. Incorporation of the EU-Tunisia Agreements The provisions of the following agreements (together referred to as the "EU-Tunisia Agreements") in effect immediately before they cease to apply to the United Kingdom are incorporated into this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, subject to the provisions of this Instrument: (a) the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement; and (b) the EU-Tunisia Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol. ARTICLE 4. References to European Union Law Except as otherwise provided, references in this Agreement to European Union law are to be read as references to that European Union law in force as incorporated or implemented in United Kingdom law as retained European Union law on the day after the United Kingdom ceases to be bound by the relevant European Union law. ARTICLE 5. References to the Euro Notwithstanding Article 3 any references to the euro (including "EUR" and "€") in the Incorporated Agreements shall continue to be read as such in this Agreement. ARTICLE 6. Territorial Application 1. For the avoidance of doubt in relation to incorporated Article 94, this Agreement shall apply, in respect of the United Kingdom, to the extent that and under the conditions which the EU-Tunisia Agreements applied immediately before they ceased to apply to the United Kingdom, to the United Kingdom and the following territories for whose international relations it is responsible: (a) Gibraltar; and (b) the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 and Article 11 of this Instrument, this Agreement shall apply to those territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible from the date of written notification by the United Kingdom to Tunisia of the application of this Agreement to those territories. ARTICLE 7. Continuation of Time Periods 1. The Parties agree that unless this Instrument provides otherwise: (a) if a period in the EU-Tunisia Agreements has not yet ended, the remainder of that period shall be incorporated into this Agreement; and (b) if a period in the EU-Tunisia Agreements has ended, any ongoing right or obligation in the EU-Tunisia Agreements shall apply between the Parties and that period shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a reference in the Incorporated Agreements to a period relating to a procedure or other administrative matter (such as a review, committee procedure or notification) shall not be affected. ARTICLE 8. Further Provision In Relation to the Association Council and the Association Committee 1. The Association Committee which the Parties establish under incorporated Article 81 shall ensure that this Agreement operates properly. 2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, any decisions adopted by the Association Council or the Association Committee established by the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement before the EU-Tunisia Agreements ceased to apply to the United Kingdom shall, to the extent those decisions relate to the Parties to this Agreement, be deemed to have been adopted, mutatis mutandis, and subject to the provisions of this Instrument, by the Association Council or the Association Committee established under incorporated Articles 78 and 81, respectively. 3. Nothing in paragraph 2 prevents the Association Council or the Association Committee making decisions which modify, are different to, revoke or supersede the decisions deemed to have been adopted by it under that paragraph. ARTICLE 9. Integral Parts of this Agreement The Annexes and Footnotes to this Instrument are integral to this Agreement. ARTICLE 10. Amendments 1. The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. An amendment shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the later of the notifications by which the Parties notify each other that they have completed their internal procedures, or on such date as the Parties may agree. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Association Council (or the Association Committee insofar as such powers are delegated to it by the Council under incorporated Article 81) may decide that the Annexes, Appendices, Protocols, Joint Decisions or Declarations and Notes to this Agreement should be amended. The Parties may adopt the Association Council or the Association Committeeâs decision subject to their internal procedures. ARTICLE 11. Entry Into Force 1. Article 96 of the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement and Article 23 of the EU-Tunisia Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. Each of the Parties shall notify the other in writing, through diplomatic channels, of the completion of the procedures required by its law for the entry into force of this Agreement. 3. This Agreement shall enter into force on the later of: (a) the date on which the EU-Tunisia Agreements cease to apply to the United Kingdom; and (b) the date of the later of the notifications by which the Parties notify each other that they have completed their respective legal procedures. 4. The United Kingdom shall submit notifications under this Article to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Tunisia or its successor. Tunisia shall submit notifications under this Article to the United Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office or its successor. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement. DONE in duplicate at LONDON this fourth day of October 2019 in the English, Arabic and French languages, all texts being equally authoritative. For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland: LOUISE DE SOUSA For the Government of the Republic of Tunisia: NABIL BEN KHEDHER

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX I The incorporation of the provisions of the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement into this Agreement is further modified as follows, and as set out in Annex II: 1. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE I POLITICAL DIALOGUE (a) In Article 1(2) in the first bullet point: (i) before the words "political dialogue", insert "continued"; and (ii) before the word "development", insert "further". (b) In Article 3(1) for the words "be established between the Parties" substitute "continue between the Parties under the Tunisia-United Kingdom Bilateral Forum Protocol". (c) In Article 5 for the words "be established at regular intervals and whenever necessary" substitute "continue at regular intervals". 2. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE II FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS (a) In Article 18(1): (i) for the words "From 1 January 2000" substitute "Three years after the entry into force of this Agreement,"; and (ii) the words "with effect from 1 January 2001" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) Article 21 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In Article 23(2) the final sentence shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 3. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE IV PAYMENTS, CAPITAL, COMPETITION AND OTHER ECONOMIC PROVISIONS (a) In Article 36 the following shall not be incorporated into this Agreement: (i) in paragraph 1(c), the words ", with the exception of cases in which a derogation is allowed under the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community"; (ii) paragraph 2 (including any reference to it); and (iii) the second bullet point in paragraph 5. (b) Notwithstanding Article 7 of this Instrument, the obligation set out in the first sentence of Article 36(3) shall apply between the Parties from the entry into force of this Agreement. (c) Article 40(1) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) In Article 40(2) the words "Using the principles set out in paragraph 1 as a basis," shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE V ECONOMIC COOPERATION (a) In Article 47(a) the first and second bullet points shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In Article 49(a) the words ", including cooperation in the context of access for Tunisia to Community business networks and decentralised cooperation networks" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) Article 51(a) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) Article 52 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (e) In Article 55(a) the words ", in correlation with major trans-European communication routes" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (f) Article 55(b) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (g) In Article 55(c) for the word "Community" substitute "international". (h) In Article 57(d) the words "and the interconnection of such networks with Community networks" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (i) In Article 61(2) the words "the Community and" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (j) In Article 62(3)(c) the words "the Community and" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VI COOPERATION IN SOCIAL AND CULTURAL MATTERS (a) In the first paragraph of Article 65(1) after the words "the following paragraphs", insert "and Article 67". (b) In Article 65(2) for the words "various Member States" substitute "United Kingdom and the various Member States of the European Union". (c) In Article 67(1): (i) the words "Before the end of the first year following the entry into force of this Agreement," shall not be incorporated into this Agreement; and ii) after the first sentence, insert: "However, paragraph 2 of Article 65 shall not apply unless and until the Association Council: (a) determines that appropriate data sharing arrangements are in place to enable the United Kingdom to implement paragraph 2 of Article 65; and (b) having done so, decides to apply the provision, with or without modifications, or to replace it." (d) In Article 67(2): (i) at the start of the paragraph, insert: "After entry into force of this Agreement, the Association Council shall examine any developments in data sharing arrangements between the United Kingdom and the European Union and consider whether these are appropriate to enable implementation of paragraph 2 of Article 65."; and (ii) before the words "adopt detailed", insert "also". MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VII FINANCIAL COOPERATION (a) In Article 76 the words "Within the framework of Community instruments intended to buttress structural adjustment programmes in the Mediterranean countries - and" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VII INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS (a) At the end of Article 78, insert as a new paragraph: "The Association Council shall replace the Tunisia-United Kingdom Bilateral Forum established under the Tunisia-United Kingdom Bilateral Forum Protocol." (b) In Article 79(4) for the words "chaired in turn" substitute "co- chaired". (c) In Article 82(1) for the words from "representatives of members" to the end of the paragraph substitute "representatives of the Government of the United Kingdom and representatives of the Government of Tunisia". (d) In Article 82(3) for the words "chaired in turn" substitute "co- chaired". (e) In Article 85 the words ", and between the Economic and Social Committee of the Community and the Economic and Social Council of the Republic of Tunisia" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (f) In Article 86(4) the words "For the application of this procedure, the Community and the Member States shall be deemed to be one party to the dispute." shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (g) Article 92 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (h) In the second paragraph of Article 93 after the words "other Party", insert "in writing". (i) Article 95 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 8. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNEX 7 RELATING TO INTELLECTUAL, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTY (a) In paragraph 1 the words "By the end of the fourth year after the entry into force of the Agreement," shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 9. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL NO 1 ON THE ARRANGEMENTS APPLYING TO IMPORTS INTO THE COMMUNITY OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS, ORIGINATING IN TUNISIA (a) In Article 3(1) for the words "from 1 January 2001, up to a maximum of 50 000 tonnes. An annual quantity of 700 tonnes shall be added as of 1 May 2004" substitute "at an annual quantity of 7 723 tonnes". (b) Article 3(2) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In Annex I directly above the table of tariff quotas insert: "Except where otherwise provided, the administration period for tariff quotas applied under this Protocol and Protocol No 2 shall be 1 January to 31 December for each year this Agreement is in force. If this Agreement enters into force part way through an administration period, the quantities of the applicable tariff quotas shall be re-sized and applied on a pro-rata basis from the date of entry into force of this Agreement to 31 December of the same year." (d) In Annex I, in column b of the table of tariff quotas: (i) each tariff quota volume shall be resized to 2.72% of the corresponding quota volume referred to in the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement when it ceases to apply to the United Kingdom, rounded to the nearest whole number using common arithmetical principles; (1) (ii) notwithstanding subparagraph (i), the tariff quota volume for "HS 1509 10 Olive oil and its fractions, virgin" shall be resized to 7 723 tonnes. (1) For the avoidance of doubt, rounding using common arithmetical principles means that all figures which have less than 50 after the decimal point shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number and all figures which have more than 50 (included) after the decimal point shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 10. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL NO 2 ON THE ARRANGEMENTS APPLYING TO IMPORTS INTO THE COMMUNITY OF FISHERY PRODUCTS ORIGINATING IN TUNISIA (a) In footnote (1) for "100" substitute "3". 11. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL NO 3 ON THE ARRANGEMENTS APPLYING TO IMPORTS INTO TUNISIA OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS ORIGINATING IN THE COMMUNITY (a) After the first paragraph, which commences "The customs duties ...", insert: "Except where otherwise provided, the administration period for tariff quotas applied under this Protocol shall be 1 January to 31 December for each year this Agreement is in force. If this Agreement enters into force part way through an administration period, the quantities of the applicable tariff quotas shall be re-sized and applied on a pro-rata basis from the date of entry into force of this Agreement to 31 December of the same year." (b) In column b of the table of tariff quotas: (i) each tariff quota volume shall be resized to 2.72% of the corresponding quota volume referred to in the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement when it ceases to apply to the United Kingdom, rounded to the nearest whole number using common arithmetical principles; (2) (ii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (i), the tariff quota volume for "HS 1702 90 - Sugars, including invert sugar, other than lactose, maple sugar, glucose and fructose, and their syrups" shall be resized to 27 tonnes. (2) For the avoidance of doubt, rounding using common arithmetical principles means that all figures which have less than 50 after the decimal point shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number and all figures which have more than 50 (included) after the decimal point shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 121. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL NO 5 ON MUTUAL ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS BETWEEN THE ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES (a) In Article 10(1) the words "and the corresponding provisions applying to the Community authorities" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In Article 14(1) the words "the competent services of the Commission of the European Communities and, where appropriate," shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In Article 15: (i) for paragraph 1 substitute: "1. The provisions of this Protocol shall take precedence over the provisions of any bilateral agreement on mutual assistance which has been concluded between the United Kingdom and Tunisia prior to the date this Agreement is signed insofar as the provisions of the latter are incompatible with those of this Protocol."; and (ii) paragraph 2 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 13. MODIFICATIONS TO JOINT DECLARATIONS AND DECLARATIONS (a) In the second paragraph of the Joint Declaration relating to Article 5 for the word "should" substitute "may". (b) In the Joint Declaration relating to Article 10: (i) the first and second paragraphs shall not be incorporated into this Agreement; and (ii) in paragraph 3 for the words "1 January 1995" substitute "when this Agreement enters into force", and for the words "products mentioned above" substitute "products appearing in lists 2 and 3 in Annex 2". (c) In the Joint Declaration relating to Article 39 of the Agreement for the words "Article 10(a)" substitute "Article 10(bis)". (d) The Joint Declaration relating to Article 42 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (e) The Joint Declaration relating to Article 50 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (f) The Joint Declaration relating to textiles shall not be incorporated into this Agreement.
