MainText:
Free Trade and Preferential Exchange Agreement between the Republics of Panama and Honduras The Governments of the Republics of Panama and Honduras, committed to strengthening the traditional ties of fraternal friendship that exist between both countries and empathized with the need to achieve the expansion of their markets, to increase production in such a way as to maximize commercial exchange between the two countries, so that it tends to produce equitable economic benefits and to ensure, as far as possible, that the magnitudes of these benefits are similar to ensure the active, voluntary and permanent participation of both parties, as well as raise the standards of living and employment of their respective peoples, have decided to enter into this Free Trade and Preferential Exchange Agreement. ARTICLE 1 The Contracting States agree to establish a regime of free trade and preferential exchange and adopt measures that regulate transit and transportation between both countries in accordance with what is provided below. ARTICLE 2 Natural or manufactured products originating in the territories of the Contracting Parties, which are included in the lists that will form part of this Treaty, or that are added hereinafter, will enjoy free trade, preferential treatment and will be subject to quantitative controls. . Products that are simply assembled, packaged, packaged, mixed, cut or diluted in the exporting country will not be considered originating products of the Contracting Parties. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when there is doubt about the origin of a merchandise and the problem has not been resolved by direct bilateral management, it will correspond to the "Permanent Mixed Commission" that is established later for the purposes of this Treaty, to decide on the particular. The lists that are negotiated as the additions and modifications to them, will form an integral part of this Agreement and must be codified, at least, with seven digits in accordance with the tariff nomenclatures that are officially used in both countries and these lists will enter into force. once the corresponding exchange of Chancellery Notes has been verified. ARTICLE 3 Merchandise traded under the free trade regime shall be exempt from payment of import duties, and when so agreed by the Parties, from export duties. ARTICLE 4 The goods that are exchanged under the preferential treatment regime will be subject only to the payment of a percentage of the customs duties established in the respective general tariffs. Said percentage will be specified in the lists and their additions. Preferential treatment should be established for each product. ARTICLE 5 The goods that are exchanged under the free trade or preferential treatment regime, will be exempt from the payment of consular rights and all other taxes, surcharges and fiscal contributions that cause the import and export or that are charged accordingly. of them, except for the percentages established based on the fourth article of this instrument. ARTICLE 6 The exemptions referred to in the previous articles do not include the rates or rights of barge, wharfage, storage and handling of merchandise, nor any others that are legally enforceable for port, storage, custody, transport or other services. services of a similar nature. ARTICLE 7 The Contracting Parties undertake to examine, every two years, through the Permanent Mixed Commission, the result of the commercial exchange corresponding to the immediately preceding biennium, with the purpose of evaluating their behavior and revising the lists so that, if necessary , the pertinent measures required to increase reciprocal commercial exchange or to comply with the spirit of equity inspired by this Treaty are adopted. ARTICLE 8 In order to add one or more products to the lists referred to in Article 3, or to modify the preferential treatment previously agreed upon, the interested Contracting Party shall present a written request for consideration of the other, at least thirty days before the be examined by the Permanent Mixed Commission. If the resolution is favourable, the Commission will notify the two Governments of the addition to the lists of approved products or the modification of the preferential treatment, and it will enter into force after the corresponding exchange of notes from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs has been verified. ARTICLE 9 When one of the Signatory States faces serious competition problems for a company or industrial branch, in particular, the affected Party will submit the matter to the attention of the Permanent Mixed Commission, which may agree to the adoption or modification of quantitative measures applied to I produce them products included in the exchange list or the exclusion of articles from it. These agreements will enter into force from the date established by said Commission. At the request of one of the Contracting Parties, the Mixed Commission must meet within a period of no more than 30 calendar days to decide on the adoption of the measures referred to in this Article. If they do not meet within this term, the interested Party will consider that it has not been possible to reach an agreement and may decide on unilateral measures. In the event that the Mixed Commission meets and does not reach an agreement, the affected Party may resort to the establishment of transitory measures, such as the suspension of free trade in the affected product, or the establishment of a quota and other restrictions, until such time as the Mixed Commission take the pertinent measures. In the case of suspension of free trade, the adopted measure will enter into force one year after its adoption. In the case of quotas or other restrictions, they will enter into force 60 calendar days from the date of adoption of said measure. In no case, the adoption of these measures will tend to nullify the exchange that is taking place between the Parties. ARTICLE 10 Originating products from one of the Contracting Parties that are deposited in free zones located in the territory of the other, will enjoy the regime indicated in the lists referred to in Article 3 when entry into the customs territory of the importing country is definitive. ARTICLE 11 The goods that are exchanged in accordance with this Treaty will be covered by a customs form signed by the exporter that must contain the declaration of origin and will be subject to the visa of the customs officials of both the country of dispatch and destinations. ARTICLE 12 With the exception of the provisions of Article 13, natural or manufactured products originating in the territory of one of the Signatory States, which are exchanged in accordance with the lists annexed to this Treaty, shall enjoy national treatment in the territory of the other in regarding taxes, fiscal or municipal contributions on production, sale, trade or consumption. They will not be subject to any type of quantitative measure, with the exception of health, security or police controls applicable in the territories of the Contracting Parties and in cases arising from the application of Article 9 of this Agreement or those specifically established, by the Permanent Mixed Commission. In the case of internal taxes established or established on specific products that are not produced in the importing country, such taxes will be prevented from becoming an import levy that tends to nullify trade. In any case, the importing country must tax, at least in the same amount and for the same concepts, the importation of similar products from third countries. ARTICLE 13 The participation of the Republic of Panama in this Treaty will be subject to the condition that it will be in force throughout the territory of the Republic of Panama, excluding lands and lands covered by water that are subject to jurisdictional limitations. , for the term of the validity of international treaties or agreements entered into with third countries. ARTICLE 14 The Contracting Parties undertake not to grant the concessions that they have mutually agreed or that will be agreed by virtue of this treaty, to non-Central American third countries with which they enter into trade agreements or treaties, based on the clause of the largest nation. favored. Taking into account that unfair trade undermines the purposes for which this Treaty is signed, each of the Contracting Parties will avoid, by the legal means at its disposal, the export of merchandise at a price lower than its normal value, in order to avoid distortions in production and trade in the importing country. When any of the Contracting Parties considers that there is evidence of unfair trade, it will submit the case to the consideration of the Permanent Mixed Commission so that the latter, within five days following the receipt of the request, decides on the matter, being able to authorize, if applicable. , a temporary suspension of free trade or preferential treatment, allowing the exchange only through the deposit of a bond for the amount of customs duties established in the respective general tariffs. The suspension will be authorized for a maximum period of 30 days, during which the Commission will have to issue its final resolution. If the resolution of the Commission has not been obtained within the first five days mentioned, the affected State may demand the deposit of the bond. In the event that the Mixed Commission verifies the existence of unfair trade, the affected Party shall make the guarantee effective. nza and will also collect the value of customs duties retroactively one month from the date on which she filed the complaint. The payment of the tax established in the corresponding tariffs will continue to be required until the Permanent Mixed Commission establishes otherwise. ARTICLE 16 The Contracting States agree to provide the necessary facilities so that the established trade and that which may be established between them, is carried out with the greatest fluidity, avoiding any discriminatory practice of an administrative or customs nature. ARTICLE 17 In order to facilitate the trade operations derived from this Agreement and improve the conditions of competitiveness between the two countries, the Contracting Parties will timely establish the necessary mechanisms to achieve full use of the financial, transportation, storage and free zone facilities. , as well as to implement a payment clearing system. ARTICLE 18 When one of the Parties modifies its current exchange regime, it will notify the other Party in the most expeditious manner possible. If one of the Parties considers that a company or industrial branch would be affected by the adoption of measures of this nature, it will submit the problem to the attention of the Permanent Mixed Commission for the adoption of the pertinent measures to correct such situation. These measures may be of a transitory nature and in no case shall they exceed what is necessary to restore the existing competitive relationship prior to the entry into force of the exchange measures. ARTICLE 19 The Contracting Parties will agree, through the Permanent Mixed Commission, to establish the rules applicable to the transit of their respective merchandise through the territories of said Parties. ARTICLE 20 The Signatory States undertake to improve their communication systems to the extent possible, to facilitate and increase traffic between them; They also agree to negotiate the equalization of transport rates between their respective territories and the legal or regulatory provisions on the matter. ARTICLE 21 Maritime or air vessels, commercial or private, belonging to companies of any of the Contracting Parties, will receive the same treatment in the ports or airports of the other Party as national ships and aircraft. In the same way, land vehicles registered in one of the Signatory States will receive the same treatment in the territory of the other. The cabotage vessels of each Contracting Party will receive national treatment in the ports of the other. For the customs receipt of the cargo, the presentation of a manifest signed by the captain of the ship will suffice, which will be exempt from the consular visa. ARTICLE 22 The provisions of Article 21 do not imply non-compliance with the registration and control formalities that each country applies to the entry, circulation, permanence or exit of vessels, aircraft and vehicles, with regard to health, security, police or protection public and fiscal interests. Nor does it imply that aircraft have the right to make commercial stopovers without the corresponding authorization, nor does it affect the provisions of the International Civil Aviation Agreement, known as the Chicago Agreement. ARTICLE 23 This Treaty and the rules derived from it will be administered by a Permanent Mixed Commission made up of the Ministers of Economy of Honduras and of Commerce and Industry of Panama or their representatives, and by advisers from the public and private sector, business and labor, that each Contracting Party designates and the decisions of said Commission will be binding on the Signatory States. ARTICLE 24 The Permanent Mixed Commission will have the following attributions: Approve the lists of products subject to free trade and their additions; Approve the lists and percentages of the products subject to tariff preferences, their additions and their modifications; Examine and approve quotas or import controls and other quantitative measures, for products that enjoy free trade or tariff preferences; Study and resolve problems and conflicts related to the application of this Treaty, and unfair trade practices that affect the established exchange regime; Propose to the Signatory States: 1) the modification or expansion of this Treaty; 2) approval of the Draft Regulations of this Agreement, previously prepared by this Commission; Meet when called by one of the Parties, but by their own right, every two years, in order to comply with the provisions of Article 7; Set the criteria and standards that will be adopted to determine the origin of the goods; Recommend mechanisms that tend to promote joint investments for the development of new activities of particular interest to both countries. In addition, encourage adoption of industrial complementarity agreements tending to facilitate and increase reciprocal commercial exchange; Promulgate within a period of 90 days from the entry into force of this Treaty, the regulation by which its own organization and operation is regulated; and Carry out the functions, works and studies entrusted to it by the Signatory States, as well as those derived from this Treaty. ARTICLE 25 The Signatory States agree to resolve, within the spirit of this Treaty and in accordance with the provisions of its Regulations, any differences that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of any of its regulations. In the event that an agreement is not reached through the procedure established in the Regulation, the Contracting Parties undertake to appoint and accept the ruling of an Arbitration Commission. As long as the ruling does not occur, the effects of the matter in divergence will be suspended. ARTICLE 26 This Treaty shall take effect upon the exchange of the ratification instruments and shall remain in force until one of the Signatory States denounces it. The complaint will take effect two years after its presentation. ARTICLE 27 The Signatory States agree to review this Treaty every five years. ARTICLE 28 This Treaty shall be submitted for ratification in accordance with the procedures established in each of the Signatory States. The instruments of ratification will be exchanged in Panama City and a certified copy will be sent to the General Secretariat of the United Nations Organization for the purposes of the registry indicated in Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Treaty, in duplicate, in Panama City, on the eighth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-three. FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF PANAMA FERNANDO MANFREDO JR. Minister of Commerce and Industry FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF HONDURAS J. VICENTE DIAZ Undersecretary of Economy

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
