MainText:
Partial Scope Agreement No. 27 Signed Under Article 25 of TM 80 Signed between Venezuela and El Salvador The Plenipotentiaries of the Republic of El Salvador and the Republic of Venezuela, duly authorized by their respective Governments, according to powers presented in good and due form, CONSIDERING That the Republic of Venezuela is a signatory of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, which in its Articles 7, 8 and 9 of Section III refer to Partial Scope Agreements and Article 25 of the same instrument authorizes the conclusion of said Agreements with other countries not members of ALADI, and economic integration areas of Latin America; as well as the provisions of Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers that establishes the general rules for these Agreements; That the Republic of El Salvador is an integral part of the Central American Common Market and that the execution of this Partial Scope Agreement does not contravene the commitments acquired by virtue of the Regional Agreements in force; and That the results of the II Meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Latin American Integration Association addressed the recommendations of the Quito Action Plan, approved during that Latin American Economic Conference on economic cooperation, expansion and diversification of trade, and the elimination of of non-tariff restrictions. AGREE: CHAPTER I Object of the Agreement ARTICLE 1.- The purpose of this Agreement is, taking into account the degree of economic development of both parties, the granting of tariff preferences and the elimination or reduction of non-tariff restrictions that allow strengthening and boosting their trade flows, in a compatible manner. with their respective economic policies, and contribute to the consolidation of the integration process in Latin America. CHAPTER II Definitions ARTICLE 2. - In this Agreement and its respective annexes that form an integral part thereof: 2.1) Taxes will be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether of a fiscal, monetary or exchange nature, that affect imports. Unless otherwise decided by the signatory countries, for the purposes of their negotiation, the rates and analogous surcharges will not be included in this concept when they respond to the approximate cost of the services rendered. 2.2) Preferences will be understood as the advantages granted by the signatory countries, consisting of percentage reductions whose magnitudes are agreed upon in this Agreement and will be applied on the current Tariff level. 2.3) Restrictions shall be understood as any non-tariff measure, of any nature, through which a signatory country unilaterally prevents or hinders imports from another signatory country. CHAPTER III Tariff Preferences and Non-Tariff Restrictions ARTICLE 3.- The signatory countries agree, within the spirit of Article 1, to reduce and eliminate taxes and other restrictions applied to the importation of the products included in this Agreement and its respective annexes in the terms, scope and modalities established therein. . Tariff preferences ARTICLE 4.- The signatory countries agree to grant each other, on the charges in force before third countries, the tariff preferences indicated for the products included in the Annexes. ARTICLE 5.- The Annexes that are part of this Agreement record the preferences agreed by the signatory countries for the importation of negotiated products, originating in and coming from their respective territories, classified in accordance with their respective tariff nomenclatures. ARTICLE 6.-The signatory countries will refrain from modifying the tariff preferences registered in said Annexes, when this means a less favorable situation than the one existing at the entry into force of this Agreement. ARTICLE 7.- In the cases in which validity periods have been established for the tariff preferences, once they have ended, the provisions of the respective national legislations will be applied. Non-tariff restrictions ARTICLE 8.- The signatory countries may negotiate the existing non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 9.- The Annexes record the terms of the conditions agreed upon in the negotiation of non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 10.- The signatory countries will refrain from applying new non-tariff restrictions to the import of negotiated products, or making those declared more restrictive, except for measures aimed at: a) Protection of public morality; b) Application of safety laws and regulations; c) Regulation of imports or exports of arms, ammunition and other war materials and, in exceptional circumstances, of all other military articles; d) Protection of life and health of people, animals and plants; e) Import and export of metallic gold and silver; f) Protection of the national patrimony of artistic, historical or archaeological value; and g) Export, use and consumption of nuclear materials, radioactive products and any other material usable in the development or use of nuclear energy. ARTICLE 11.- The signatory countries will periodically review the non-tariff restrictions applied under the terms of this Agreement in order to proceed by common agreement to their elimination or reduction. Preservation of the Agreed Preferences ARTICLE 12.- The signatory countries undertake to maintain the application of the agreed percentage preference regardless of the level of their current tariff. In the event that one of them raises or lowers its tariff for third countries, it will proceed immediately to adjust the tax for the importation of the negotiated products, in order to maintain the agreed percentage preference. ARTICLE 13.- If a signatory country grants a third country that is not a member of ALADI a higher tariff preference than the one agreed with the other signatory country in a way that affects it, the preference will be readjusted immediately in order to maintain the agreement. ARTICLE 14.-The signatory countries agree that the tariff preferences agreed in this Agreement do not mean consolidation of tariffs against third countries. CHAPTER V Safeguard Clauses ARTICLE 15.- The Safeguard Clauses will only be applicable one year after the entry into force of the tariff and non-tariff preferences in question or their last revision. ARTICLE 16.- The signatory countries of this Agreement may temporarily impose restrictions on the import of negotiated products, when imports occur in quantities or under such conditions that cause or threaten to cause serious damage. It will be considered that there are serious damages whenever imports of the negotiated product or products occur, in amounts or values ​such that they cause or threaten to cause a reduction in the national productive activity, measured by the employment index of the sector in question and by the relative drop in its production for the domestic market compared to the product imported under the preferences granted. ARTICLE 17.- The signatory countries may extend to the importation of negotiated products, temporarily and in a non-discriminatory manner, the general measures that they have adopted in order to correct the imbalances in their Balance of Payments. In the application of the safeguard clause for reasons of Balance of Payments, the different degrees of economic development of the signatories will be taken into account, for which purpose the necessary consultations will be carried out. In said consultations, the amount of the commercial exchange of the products negotiated in this Agreement will be taken into account. ARTICLE 18.- Said restrictions may be adopted, in cases of emergency, unilaterally for a period of one year, upon expiration of which the interested countries will hold consultations in order to achieve definitive solutions if their application were to be extended for more than that period. If the causes that gave rise to its application are overcome before the expiration of the previous term, the country invoking the clause will immediately notify the other signatory country. ARTICLE 19.- The safeguard clauses adopted unilaterally must be immediately communicated to the affected country within a period of 72 hours. Said communication must specify the restrictive measures adopted, as well as the grounds that determined their adoption. The unilateral adoption of safeguard clauses commits the importing country to make efforts to maintain an import quota subject to the agreed preferences. ARTICLE 20.-The consultations referred to in Article 18 must be made to the directly affected country as a prerequisite for obtaining the extension. In its consultation, the importing country must present information that allows for an exhaustive analysis of the situation that motivates it, fundamentally of the imports that cause or threaten to cause serious damage to its national production, indicating the origin and provenance of the same. By agreement, the term will be established during which the adopted measures that have been agreed upon will continue to be applied.- ARTICLE 21.- The measures adopted under the safeguard clauses will expire at the expiration of the agreed term in accordance with the previous article. If at the expiration of the extension period the causes that motivated the adoption of safeguard clauses persist, the importing country must initiate the procedures related to negotiation or withdrawal of the preferences granted to the affected products. For these purposes, you will have a period of thirty (30) days from the aforementioned expiration, maintaining the safeguard clauses until their solution. ARTICLE 22.- The measures set forth in the previous Articles will not be applied to merchandise already shipped abroad within thirty days after its communication. Likewise, those products whose tariff preferences have been agreed with quota conditions or with validity less than the period foreseen for the revision of the Agreement will be exempted from the application of the measures provided for in said provisions. CHAPTER VI Differential Treatments ARTICLE 23.- In this Agreement, differential treatment is understood as the application of a principle of community solidarity, which allows the equitable use of benefits, taking into account the same economic development of the countries, especially those with less relative economic development, to take advantage of the stimuli of integration. ARTICLE 24.-If any of the signatory countries grant an equal or greater tariff preference, on one of the products negotiated in this Agreement, to a non-signatory country with a higher degree of development than the country receiving the preference, it will be adjusted in favor of the country signatory, in such a way as to maintain a differential margin with respect to the country with the highest degree of development that preserves the effectiveness of the preference. The magnitude of said differential margin will be agreed through negotiations between the signatory countries, which will begin within thirty (30) days from the date of the claim by the affected country and will be concluded within sixty (60) days of said date. date. Differential treatment may be established, indistinctly, through negotiation on any other element of the Agreement. ARTICLE 25.- If a more favorable treatment is granted to a non-signatory country of the same development category as the preference beneficiary, negotiations will be carried out between the signatory countries to grant the beneficiary an equivalent treatment within the terms provided in Article former. ARTICLE 26.- If no agreement is reached in the negotiations provided for in the previous articles, the signatory countries will proceed to review this Agreement. CHAPTER VII Withdrawal of preferences ARTICLE 27.- During the term of this Agreement, the withdrawal of agreed tariff and non-tariff preferences is not applicable, except as provided in the previous articles. ARTICLE 28.- The exclusion of a preference that may occur as a consequence of the negotiations for the revision of this Agreement does not constitute withdrawal. Neither does the elimination of the preferences agreed to term constitute withdrawal, if the renewal has not been carried out at the expiration of the respective terms of validity. CHAPTER VIII Accession ARTICLE 29.- This Agreement will be open to the adhesion of any Latin American country after negotiation. ARTICLE 30.- The accession will be formalized, once the terms of the same have been negotiated between the signatory countries and the adhering country, through the signing of a legal instrument of the same nature as the present one. For the purposes of this Agreement and of the additional legal instruments that are signed, the signatory country will be understood as the admitted adherent. CHAPTER IX Validity ARTICLE 31.- This Agreement will enter into force once the legal provisions established in the respective laws of the signatory countries are fulfilled. ARTICLE 32.- This Agreement will have a duration of three (3) years, automatically extendable for equal periods, unless expressly notified to the contrary by one of the signatory countries six (6) months before its expiration. CHAPTER X Review ARTICLE 33.- Every year from the validity of this Agreement and during the course of the last month, the signatory countries will carry out a joint appreciation of the progress of the same, in order to evaluate the results obtained, making them compatible with the objectives set and introducing the adjustments necessary for such purposes. ARTICLE 34.- Without prejudice to what is established in the previous article, at the request of the party and at any time, the signatory countries of this Agreement may make the adjustments they deem appropriate, of all those aspects that contribute to its better functioning and development. CHAPTER XI Complaint ARTICLE 35.- Any of the signatory countries of this Agreement may denounce it after one year has elapsed since its participation in it. For this purpose, it must communicate its decision to the other signatory countries, at least 60 days in advance. Once the denunciation has been formalized, the rights acquired and obligations contracted under this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country, except those referring to preferences received or granted, which will continue in force for a period of one year from the date of the denunciation. deposit of the instrument of denunciation. CHAPTER XII Administration of the Agreement ARTICLE 36.- For the administration and in order to achieve the best functioning of this Agreement, the signatory countries agree to establish a Mixed Commission made up of government representatives from both countries. ARTICLE 37.- The Commission referred to in the previous Article will meet as many times as necessary and will have the following attributions, among others: 1) Propose to the signatory countries the inclusion of new products or the granting of greater preferences on the negotiated products ; 2) Formulate to the governments of the signatory countries the recommendations it deems appropriate to resolve the differences that may arise from the interpretation and application of this Agreement. 3) Proceed in accordance with the provisions of the articles regarding the review of the products granted. 4) Analyze the requirements of origin and other regulations established in this Agreement. 5) Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. 6) Submit to the Governments of the signatory countries a periodic report on the evaluation and operation of this Agreement. 7) Any other attribution that the parties consider necessary and that results from the application of this Agreement. CHAPTER XIII Commercial Promotion ARTICLE 38.- In order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement in the most efficient way, the Parties agree to grant each other the greatest possible facilities for commercial promotion in their respective territories, such as the exchange of commercial missions and delegations, as well as participation in fairs and exhibitions that are held in the territory of the other signatory party. Similarly, both countries will promote business meetings in order to promote and facilitate trade relations between the two countries. Through their competent official institutions, they will make effective the exchange of information on the perspectives offered by the markets of the Parties, in order to strengthen commercial exchange. CHAPTER XIV Final Provisions ARTICLE 39.- Modifications to this Agreement must be formalized by signing additional protocols. ARTICLE 40.- The commitments derived from the revisions and adjustments in the annexes to this Agreement will be made through the exchange of notes from the respective administrative institutions, following the opinion of the Mixed Commission. ARTICLE 41.- With the purpose of establishing a channel of direct information that facilitates the application and the best achievement of the objectives of this Agreement, the Governments of the signatory countries will name a contact body, so that it permanently attends to the consultations of any of the the Parties and administer the provisions of this Agreement. ARTICLE 42.-The tariff preferences granted by the member countries of the Latin American Integration Association in this Agreement, will be automatically extended without the granting of compensation, to Bolivia, Ecuador and Paraguay, regardless of negotiation or adherence to it. ARTICLE 43.- The signatory countries of this Agreement will initiate conversations with the remaining Latin American countries with the purpose of proceeding to the progressive multilateralization of the agreed preferences on a date that they will determine by mutual agreement. Done in El Salvador on the tenth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and eighty-six. (Signed) For the Government of the Republic of Venezuela: Pedro Emilio Coll, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Venezuela in El Salvador; For the Government of the Republic of El Salvador: Rodolfo Antonio Castillo Claramount, Vice President of the Republic and Minister of Foreign Affairs.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX Qualification of origin FIRST.- The following will be considered originating from the signatory countries: a) Products made entirely in the territory of any of them, when exclusively materials originating from the signatory countries of this Agreement are used in their preparation, b) The following shall be considered as produced in the territory of a signatory country: i) The products of the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms, including those of hunting and fishing, extracted, harvested or collected in its territory or in its territorial waters; ii) Sea products extracted outside their territorial waters by ships under their flag or leased by companies established in their territory; Y iii) The products that result from operations or processes carried out in its territory by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed, except when said processes or operations consist only of simple assemblies or assemblies, packaging, fractioning into batches or volumes, selection and classification, marking, composition of merchandise assortments, or other equivalent operations or processes. c) Products in the production of which materials that do not originate from the signatory countries of this Agreement are used, when they result from a transformation process carried out in the territory of one of them, which gives them a new individuality, characterized by the fact that be classified in the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature in a position different from that of said materials. However, the products resulting from operations or processes carried out in the territory of a signatory country by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed will not be considered originating, when in said operations or processes exclusively materials or inputs are used that do not originate from their respective countries and consist solely of assembling or assembling, fractioning into lots of volumes, selection, classification, marking, composition of merchandise assortments or other similar operations or processes; d) Products resulting from assembly and assembly operations carried out in the territory of a signatory country using materials originating from signatory countries and from third countries when the CIF port of destination or CIF seaport value of materials originating from third countries does not exceeds fifty (50) percent of the FOB value of said products; and e) Those goods for which either party uses in its production original inputs from the other party and/or Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua. SECOND.- The signatory countries may establish, by mutual agreement, specific origin requirements for the qualification of the negotiated products. The specific requirements of origin will prevail over the general qualification criteria established in the first article. THIRD.- In determining the origin requirements referred to in the second article, as well as in the revision of those that have been established, the signatory countries will take as a basis, individually or jointly, among others, the following elements: I Materials and other inputs used in production a) Raw materials: i) Preponderant raw material or that gives the product its essential characteristic; Y ii) Main raw materials. b) Parts or pieces: i) Part or piece that gives the product its essential characteristic; ii) Main parts or pieces; and iii) Percentage of the parts or pieces in relation to the total weight c) Other inputs. II. Process of transformation or elaboration carried out. III. Maximum proportion of the value of materials imported from non-signatory countries in relation to the total value of the product, resulting from the valuation procedure agreed upon in each case. FOURTH.- Any of the signatory countries may request the revision of the origin requirements established in accordance with the first article. In your application you must propose and justify the requirements applicable to the product or products in question. FIFTH.-For the purposes of compliance with the origin requirements established in this Agreement, the materials and other inputs originating in the territory of one of the signatory countries incorporated by another of the signatory countries to the elaboration of certain products, will be considered as originating in the territory from the last batch. SIXTH.- The criterion of maximum use of materials or other inputs originating from the signatory countries may not be used to set requirements that imply the imposition of materials or other inputs from said signatory countries, when in their opinion, they do not meet the conditions adequate supply, quality and price SEVENTH.-It will be understood that the expression "materials" includes the raw materials, intermediate products and the parts or pieces used in the manufacture of the products. EIGHTH.- In order for the importation of the products included in this Agreement to be able to benefit from the reductions in taxes and restrictions granted among themselves by the signatory countries, the documentation corresponding to the exportation of said products must include a statement proving compliance of the origin requirements established in accordance with the provisions of the preceding articles. NINETH.-The declaration referred to in the preceding article will be issued by the final producer or exporter of the merchandise and certified by an official institution or entity authorized by the exporting signatory country. TENTH.- In all cases, the form that appears in the annexes of this Agreement will be used. ELEVENTH.- The signatory countries will inform each other of the respective government entities that will authorize the declarations of origin and of the signatures and stamps respectively authorized. Any modification of these conditions, signatures and seals, must be communicated at least thirty (30) days in advance. TWELFTH.-Whenever a signatory country considers that the certificates issued by an institution authorized by the exporting country do not comply with the provisions contained in this regime, it will notify the aforementioned exporting country so that it can adopt the measures it deems necessary to solve the problem. the problems raised. In no case will the importing country stop the import process of the products covered by the certificates referred to in the preceding paragraph, but it may, in addition to requesting additional information that corresponds to the government authorities of the exporting country, adopt the measures it deems necessary. necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest. In case of doubt about the origin of the merchandise, and if the problem has not been resolved by bilateral management, the import of the goods in question will not be prevented, provided that a bond is granted that guarantees the importing country the payment of taxes and other surcharges that may be caused by its importation, as if it originated from third countries. The bond will be effective or not as resolved. ANNEXES PARTIAL SCOPE AGREEMENTS CONSOLIDATED LIST OF PRODUCTS (1) NABANDINA tariff code (2) Product description (3) Current lien (4) Legal regime: Note 2: Import reserved to the National Government Note 5: Health certificate from the country of origin. Note 6: Sanitary permit from the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock of Venezuela. (5) Preference granted (6) Central American countries benefiting from preferences: CR: Costa Rica IS. The Savior G: Guatemala H: Honduras N: Nicaraguan (7) Remarks: (*) Product that will be subject to Note. (¨**) Note 2 will be removed. REO: Specific regime of origin. Quota: A quota will be granted for the importation of the product.
