AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF AFGHANISTAN AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS REGARDING THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST LOCUSTS IN THE TERRITORIES OF THE CONTRACTING PARTIES. SIGNED AT KABUL, MAY 6TH, 1935. THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS and THE GOVERNMENT OF HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF AFGHANISTAN, deeming it necessary to take the measures indispensable for the protection of crops against the damage caused by locusts, have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries : THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS Monsieur Leonidas Nicolaievitch STARK, Minister Plenipotentiary of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in Afghanistan; THE GOVERNMENT OF HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF AFGHANISTAN: Monsieur FAIZ-MOHAMMED Khan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan; Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon the following provisions : ARTICLE 1. The two Contracting Parties shall prepare measures against locusts and put them into effect in their territories and more particularly in the districts bordering on the frontier between the two countries. ARTICLE 2. The two Parties agree that "measures against locusts" shall be held to mean the following measures : (a) Locating and registering in spring of deposits of locusts' eggs; (b) Destructive measures properly so called ; (c) Observation of the flight of locusts and registration in summer of deposits of locusts' eggs ; (d) Training of a special staff for the campaign against locusts, recruiting of workers, provision of means of transport and preparation and despatch of poisonous substances, equipment and other material to the sectors in which work is to be undertaken. ARTICLE 3. The two Parties agree that each year they will take the measures provided for in Article 2 at the following times : In the case of point (a), from February 15th to April 15th; In the case of point (b), immediately after the mass deposit of locusts' eggs (from April 5th-I5th to May 5th-I5th), the essential purpose of the work during that period being to take strong measures to prevent the locusts reaching a stage of development at which they are capable of flight; In the case of point (c), from the time when the locusts start flight (May 15th to 2oth) up to September 1st; In the case of point (d), during all the autumn and winter period, it being understood that the work in question must be finished by March 1st, at the latest. ARTICLE 4. The destruction of locusts shall be carried out by chemical methods and also in case of necessity by mechanical means. ARTICLE 5. Each of the two Governments, immediately after the coming into force of the present Agreement, shall establish on its territory a permanent Board for the campaign against locusts. This Board shall consist of three members. In the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics the permanent seat of this Board shall be at the town of Termez. In Afghanistan the permanent seat of this Board shall be at the town of Mazar-i-Sherif. The respective Boards of the two Parties shall meet every year in December at a place to be appointed by mutual agreement between the two Parties on the territory of one or other of the Parties in an ordinary joint session : (a) To take cognisance of communications concerning the execution and results of the measures taken during the past year against locusts in their territories ; (b) To discuss the plan for the measures against locusts to be taken during the forthcoming year, and to determine the quantity of poisonous substances and oil-cake which the Government of Afghanistan will require during that period for the destruction of locusts ; (c) To discuss jointly and settle all questions connected with the campaign against locusts. ARTICLE 6. The joint sessions of the Boards shall be held alternately in the territory of each Party. If necessary, extraordinary joint meetings of the Boards may be held by agreement between the two Parties ; these meetings shall be held at places determined by joint agreement between the Parties on the territory of one or other of the Parties. ARTICLE 7. Withing a period of ten days from the signature of the present Agreement, the first extraordinary joint session of the two Boards shall be convened in order to organise future work and discuss the plan of measures to be taken for the purpose of the campaign against locusts in 1935. This first extraordinary joint session shall be held in the town of Termez in the territory of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. ARTICLE 8. The Parties agree that in addition to the communications made under point (a) of Article 5 of the present Agreement they shall transmit to each other between April 1st and July 15th of each year information concerning the deposit of locusts' eggs in their territory, the progress of the campaign against locusts and the possibilities of flight of locusts. This information shall be communicated by telegraph twice a month to the Board of the other Party. ARTICLE 9. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics hereby declares that it is prepared to supply to the Government of His Majesty the King of Afghanistan, at a reasonable price and on payment in cash, the necessary quantity of poisonous substances and oil-cake, and apparatus and utensils for the destruction of locusts to be used in carrying out the measures against locusts on Afghan territory. The supply of these articles shall be effected in the manner decided upon during the joint sessions of the Boards. At these joint sessions the Boards shall determine the quantity of poisonous substances and oil-cake necessary for Afghanistan and the time-limit within which, and the manner in which, they are to be delivered on the spot. ARTICLE 10. In virtue of the present Agreement, the Government of His Majesty the King of Afghanistan shall, in case of need and in so far as it may consider it necessary, engage for its own account Soviet specialists in measures against locusts with the status of foreign officials ; the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall assist in the recruiting of such specialists among citizens of the Union. The terms on which these specialists shall be engaged for work in Afghanistan as Afghan officials shall be fixed at the first extraordinary joint meeting of the Boards of the two Parties, as provided for in Article 7 of the present Agreement. ARTICLE 11. The present Agreement is concluded for a term of three years. If one year before the expiry of the period of validity of the present Agreement neither of the two Parties has notified its intention of terminating it or of modifying certain of its provisions, it shall each time be prolonged by tacit consent for a further period of three years. ARTICLE 12. The present Agreement shall come into force on the date of signature. The present Agreement is drawn up in Russian and Persian, both texts being equally authentic. In faith whereof the above-mentioned Plenipotentiaries of the two Parties have signed the present Agreement and have thereto affixed their seals. Done in duplicate at Kabul, the 6th day of May, 1935.
