MainText:
AGREEMENT ON ARGENTINE-BRAZILIAN INTEGRATION The President of the Argentine Nation and The President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, DETERMINED: To convene their people, in a joint effort, to achieve the degree of growth and modernization which are imperative to meet present obstacles and to face the challenges of the twentieth century; That innovating solutions, transcending traditional models, are a prerequisite to be sought and applied; AWARE : Of a shared identity of ideas and values, defining their common essence as Latin-American peoples; Of the importance of this historical moment in the relationship of the two nations, bent upon the consolidation of democracy as a system of life and of government; Of the concomitance of efforts undertaken by the two governments to achieve stable growth and development; ASSURED: That the establishment of a common economic space offers wider prospects for joint growth and welfare, increasing the autonomous capability of each of the two countries; That this program will provide a new impetus for Latin American integration, as well as for peace, democracy, security and development in the region; ENCOURAGED : By the promising proposals formulated by the authorities of the two countries, within the framework of such projects for binational integration, as arise out of the Iguaz? Declaration of November, 1987; AND DETERMINED: To transform the permanent bonds of friendship and cooperation existing between the two countries into a firm degree of integration, thus consolidating their will to grow together; DECIDE: 1. To establish a Program for Economic Integration and Cooperation between the Argentine Republic and the Federative Republic of Brazil. 2. To apply the following principles to the formulation and implementation of the Program: - The Program shall be accomplished gradually, with yearly stages of definition, negotiation, implementation and evaluation; - The Program shall be flexible, making allowances for the adjustment of scope, rhythm and objectives; - Each stage of the Program shall comprise a limited number of integrated projects, providing for the symmetrical harmonization of policies in order to ensure the success of these projects and the credibility of the Program as a whole; - The Program shall be balanced, meaning that it shall abstain from leading to specialization of the respective economies in specific sectors; it shall encourage intrasectorial growth and endeavor to achieve progressive equilibrium, both quantitative and qualitative, with the instruments of reciprocal exchange, both among broad sectors and among segments, by means of the expansion of trade; - The Program is to propitiate technological modernization and greater efficiency in the allocation of resources of the two economies, through preferential treatment vis-?-vis third markets, as well as the progresssive harmonization of economic policies bearing in mind the ultimate objective of increasing the income and raising the standard of living of the inhabitants of both countries; - The implementation of the Program shall provide for the active participation of the business sector, thus assuring effective performance within a context of the incentives to be created by the two Governments. 3. To set up a Program Implementation Committee [hereinafter referred to as the "Implementation Committee" or "Program Implementation Committee"]. 4. To constitute the aforementioned Committee with the following members: on behalf of Argentina, the Minister of External Relations and Worship, the Minister of the Economy, the Secretary General of the Presidency of the Nation, and the Secretary of Industry and Foreign Trade; on behalf of Brazil, the Minister of External Relations, the Treasury Minister, the Minister of Industry and Commerce, and the Secretary General of the National Security Council. Business representatives of both countries shall also be on the Committee. 5. To take the appropriate steps for the Committee to hold working sessions every six months, with a view to evaluating the implementation measures of the Program and to bring to the attention of the two Presidents such measures as might increase the Program's efficiency. 6. To determine that the Ministers of External Relations of the two countries shall coordinate the work of the Implementation Committee as well as that of various working groups, to be established in the future by virtue of the annexed Protocols. 7. To hold Ministerial consultative meetings between the two countries, with the purpose of discussing macroeconomic policies. 8. To incorporate, when necessary, other authorities into the Implementation Committee so that, in the course of its work, this Committee may define and propose more advantageous measures in specific fields. 9. To enact the Protocols annexed to this Agreement which shall comprise the first stage of the Program for Economic Integration and Cooperation between Argentina and Brazil. DONE in the city of Buenos Aires on July 29, 1986, in two original documents in the Portugese and Spanish languages, both of which are equally authentic. PROTOCOL NO. 1: CAPITAL GOODS The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The strategic importance of modernization, expansion and accelerated technological development within the sector of capital goods far the growth of the Argentine and Brazilian economies; The economic, technological and financial features of the capital goods industries in both countries, which make it necessary to provide large and predictable markets in order to insure efficient and competitive production; The importance of purchases by the public sector in the global demand for capital goods; That intrasectorial integration in the field of capital goods is the most appropriate manner of providing for the efficient expansion of industry as well as for technological progress in this domain; The importance of establishing mechanisms for meeting the demand for investment in the respective capital goods industries of both countries; PERSUADED: That the success of the Capital Goods Project is closely linked to the policies of economic growth in both countries; DECIDE: 1. To institute within the framework of the Economic Integration and Cooperation Program an Integrated Project for the production, trade and technological development of capital goods. 2. To agree that for the purpose of this Project the universe of capital goods to be taken into account is that which has designated in Annex I, which may be expanded by mutual consent of both Parties. 3. To agree that, departing from this universe, a common list o products shall be negotiated for the present Protocol. 4. To provide that the products designated in the common lis shall be considered as national products in Argentina and Brazil defined in the following manner: A. Customs duties: 0 (zero); B. Exclusion from all non-tariff restrictions or barriers applicable to imports, whether administrative, quantita or tributary. 5. To establish, for the common list of products, a reference value for global exchanges of 2,000,000,000 (two billion) United States dollars, to be distributed in the following manner over the next four years: in 1987, the equivalent of 300 million U.S. dollars, in 1988, the equivalent of 400 million U.S. dollars, in 1989, the equivalent of 550 million U.S. dollars, in 1990, the equivalent of 750 million U.S. dollars. 6. To establish as an objective which both countries shall strive to achieve by the end of 1990, that the aforementioned common list should represent at least 50% (fifty percent) of the universe of agreed capital goods. To this end, the number of products on this common list shall be increased every six months by the percentage to be determined in paragraph 5, above. This percentage shall be established in proportion to the quantity of products that initially comprise the common list. 7. To determine that the ultimate objective of trade is balanced expansion and that governmental policies in the capital goods sector should endeavor to achieve symmetry and harmony. 8. To establish that the Argentine-Brazilian trade in products on the common list be maintained in dynamic balance whenever the surplus of an accumulated four month period does not surpass 10% (ten percent) of the reference value set for the total of three four-month periods (the current period as well as the two following periods) taking as a basis for calculation the annual reference value established in paragraph 5, above. 9. To establish the following mechanisms in order to reestablish a dynamic balance: A. If the imbalance should comprise more than 10% (ten percent) calculated according to the method provided for in paragraph 8 the following shall apply: a) inclusion of new products from the universe on the common list; b) an additional financial framework to operate between the Central Banks of both countries, in conformity with paragraphs 2 and 3 of Protocol No. 6. . Whenever the imbalance surpasses 20% (twenty percent) calculated according to paragraph 8, the clause on contributions by the Investment Fund shall apply, pursuant to paragraph 2 of Protocol No. 7. 10. To insure that should the imbalance be over 40% (forty percent) calculated according to the method provided for in paragraph 8 of the present Protocol, necessary measures compatible with prevailing trade conditions shall be taken in order to correct the imbalance. 11. To establish the following: A. In purchases by the public sector, both direct and indirect, the products on the common list of either Brazilian or Argentine origin shall receive the same treatment as local products; B. In the public sector's decisions to import either Brazilian or Argentine products on the common list, directly or indirectly from Argentina and/or Brazil, these products shall receive the same preferential treatment given other third party suppliers; C. With respect to bids for public tenders in either of the two countries, financed by loans from international financial institutions, the capital goods of either Argentine or Brazilian origin not included in the common list shall be favored in regard to third party suppliers, with a reduction of 50% (fifty per cent) of the amount of protection awarded to local products. 12. To equalize and maintain the total margin of protection with respect to third party suppliers, in such a manner that the level of protection for each product on the common list is equivalent in both Argentina and Brazil. The level of protection should have a direct bearing on pricing decisions by importers, with a view to encouraging the flow of trade between Argentina and Brazil. To this end, adjustments shall be made for products on the common list in regard to customs duties or non-tariff procedures of any nature, be they administrative, quantitative or tributary, whenever they affect imports from third party suppliers. The effect of reimbursements or incentives on exports of any of the products on the common list that one of the two countries awards the other may be neutralized by the other through reimbursements, incentives or other equalizing measures. As soon as the Project enters into force, both countries agree to refrain from adopting additional reimbursements or incentives affecting products on the common list, without prior agreement of the Parties, except in cases of equalization. 13. To establish, within this context, that the Program Implementation Committee shall appoint a permanent Coordination and Follow Up Group to propose specific measures for the gradual harmonization of policies affecting the production, marketing and technological development of capital goods, as well as to insure the correct implementation of the Project and to examine questions concerning equalization measures, safeguard clauses and exceptional market situations, and also to initiate mechanisms designed to correct any imbalances that might occur. 14. To set up a working group within the Program Implementation Committee to formulate the necessary economic, legal and administrative measures in order to: A. Determine the margin of total protection in regard to third parties, to become effective after January 1, 1987, simultaneously with the initiation of the Project and in conformity with the provisions of paragraph 12; B. Assure that treatment as a national product as defined in paragraph 11 shall be respected. The first meeting of this Working Group shall take place in August 1986. Its functions shall terminate on November 30, 1986. 15. To establish that the value of components pertaining to products on the common list, and imported from third countries, may not be greater than 20% (twenty per cent) of the price of the product. This percentage shall be calculated by comparing the f.o.b. price of the imported components with the f.o.b. International Reference Price of the finished product. When no f.o.b. International Reference Price is available, the basis for comparison shall be the f.o.b. sales price within the exporting country, exclusive of domestic taxes. Unprocessed raw materials of universal use which have not been industrially processed for specific use in the manufacture of the finished product shall be treated as local products. 16. To establish that, with regard to the Project described in the present Protocol, the Argentine Minister of the Economy and the Brazilian Treasury Minister shall enact such measures ?s are necessary to insure the maintenance of a real and effective exchange rate between the currencies of the two countries sufficiently balanced and stable as to allow the exchange policy to remain neutral in regard to the relative competitiveness of imports and exports in either one of the two countries. PROTOCOL NO. 2: WHEAT The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The importance of ensuring stable conditions for the production and supply of food in order to implement their national development plans within a context of economic stability; The prime objective of raising the level of consumption of the inhabitants of the two countries by using the most efficient methods; The particularities of agricultural production, the characteristics of international markets and agricultural policies pursued by certain producing countries; DECIDE: 1. To establish, within the framework of the Economic Integration and Cooperation Program, an Integrated Project for the production, storage, transport and supply of wheat. 2. To set up a Working Group to examine and propose a gradual program for the harmonization of economic policies in Argentina and Brazil in the areas of the production, storage, distribution and consumption of wheat, with a view to increasing the productivity and security of the food supply. 3. Furthermore, to set up another Working Group for the identification of critical areas in the systems of production, storage, transport and supply of wheat between Argentina and Brazil, and such investments in infrastructure as may be carried out according to pertinent schedules. 4. Both Working Groups shall be set up before September 30, 1986 and shall present their first report to the Program Implementation Committee before December 31, 1986. 5. To award the highest priority, from the point of view of inclusion in the appropriate budgets and the allocation of resources, to investments in th? system that are to be carried out within the territories of each of the two countries. 6. To formalize a commitment to purchase on behalf of the Government of Brazil and a corresponding commitment to sell ?n behalf of the Government of Argentina, the following minimum volumes of wheat, within an initial period of five years: 1987: 1,375,000 tons 1988: 1,450,000 tons 1989: 1,550,000 tons 1990: 1,700,000 tons 1991: 2,000,000 tons 7. The types of wheat, conditions of price and payment, schedules and points of loading and of unloading shall be decided by the Argentine Wheat Board and by the Wheat Board of Brazil, in conformity with normal market conditions and with the customary practices of the wheat trade between Argentina and Brazil. 8. The Federative Republic of Brazil shall be assured the status of privileged purchaser by the Argentine Government, and the Argentine Republic shall be assured the status of privileged supplier by the Brazilian Government. 9. If because of climatic conditions in any given year the Argentine Republic is unable to fulfill, totally or partially, its obligation to supply wheat as established in paragraph 6, it shall serve formal notice in advance to the Brazilian Government, in order to allow the latter to search for alternative sources of supply. The Government of Argentina and the Government of Brazil, considering the economic policy decisions affecting the 1987 harvest, agree that the purchase commitments for that year may be met by the acquisition of wheat and/or other types of grain, equal to the value of the volume of wheat established previously for that year. PROTOCOL NO. 3: COMPLEMENTARITY OF THE FOOD SUPPLY The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The strategic importance, for the success of their plans for economic development and stability, of ensuring a regular supply of the main food products of mass consumption; The incidence of climatic events, the natural variation of harvests and the systems of storage and transport in Argentina and Brazil; The prime objective of increasing food security in the two countries; DECIDE: 1. To establish mechanisms that complement, totally or partially, the domestic supply of food in each country, in order to meet eventual deficits in local production. 2. To create, for this purpose, a Working Group within the framework of the Program Implementation Committee, to define groups of food products whose domestic supply may be complemented by the production of the other country, and to propose mechanisms designed to assure that this supply shall be provided. 3. To assign this Working Group the task of examining and proposing a gradual schedule for the harmonization of policies regarding the production, storage, transport and distribution of certain itemized food products in Argentina and Brazil. Furthermore, this same Group shall supervise the implementation of the proposed schedule. 4. This Working Group shall be convened before September 30, 1986 and shall present its first report to the Committee before December 31 of the same year. PROTOCOL NO. 4: EXPANSION OF TRADE The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The central objective of vigorously encouraging the expansion of trade and its dynamic, progressive, quantitative and qualitative equilibrium, in large sectors as well as by segments; That such expansion depends upon the political decisions of the Governments involved, as well as the initiative of private economic agents; That the process of economic integration and cooperation requires the harmonization of foreign trade policies pursued by Argentina and Brazil in their dealings with third countries; The advisability of updating and renegotiating mutual commitments adopted within the framework of ALADI [the Latin American Integration Association], in order to adapt them to present realities regarding production within the two countries, as well as to the demands of their markets and to situations emerging from technological change; The need to establish appropriate mechanisms to encourage, progtessively and firmly, the intrasectorial integration of the Argentine and the Brazilian economies; DECIDE: 1. To carry out economic and commercial negotiations in order to achieve the gradual and sustained expansion of reciprocal trade, at the same time searching for a broad complementarity of production. 2. To agree that the expansion of trade should go forward in a dynamically-balanced manner, for which effective follow up or exchanges shall be ensured by the most appropriate mechanisms, to encourage the export of products originating in the deficit country. 3. To undertake in Montevideo, at the headquarters of ALADI, beginning August 4, 1986, the renegotiation of Partial Agreement No. 1, in accordance with the terms of reference established on July 10 (Annex 1) and to conclude no later than October 31, 1986.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX 1 OF PROTOCOL NO. 4 CRITERIA FOR THE RENEGOTIATION OF PARTIAL AGREEMENT NO. 1 The following terms of reference shall prevail in regard to the renegotiation of Partial Agreement [PA] No. 1, from which products enumerated in the common list of Protocol No. 1 on Capital Goods are to be excluded. A. The rules regulating the new Agreement shall comprise the terms approved in the negotiations of May 1984 valid over a six year period and renewable upon agreement of the signatory states. B. The renegotiation of PA No. 1 shall include the entire list of products mentioned in the Agreement, as well as any new products the Contracting Parties have agreed to negotiate C. Any product in which trade over the last four years averaged less than 10,000 (ten thousand) United States dollars, or that has not generated any trade at all, shall be analyzed according to the interest shown by each of the countries involved within the scope of the Agreement. D. The lists of the products that the Parties wish to withdraw from the Agreement shall be reduced to a minimum. This includes sensitive products, which shall be negotiated with a view to satisfying the interests of both countries. E. For the non-sensitive products remaining in the Agreement, the Parties shall not reduce existing preferences. Otherwise, adequate compensation shall be negotiated for the affected Party. Preferences on a percentage basis shall be negotiated for those products without a margin of preference whose tariff for third countries differs from zero. F. The Parties shall present lists of specific products that they wish to negotiate. G. The Parties shall endeavor not to duplicate negotiations concerning the same product in different instruments between the two countries, which would risk leading to situations that make it difficult to evaluate agreements and operative management measures concerning the products in both the public and private sectors. H. In accordance with the commitments entered into in the month of April, 1984, negotiated products shall not be subject to non-tariff restrictions or additional charges equivalent to customs duties or similar exactions. However, in the event that exceptional circumstances make it advisable to maintain restrictions of this type, a commitment to achieve negotiated gradual reductions shall be entered into by the Parties. Furthermore, no new restrictions nor increases in existing duties may be imposed. I. Products mentioned in paragraph C shall be defined and renegotiated no later than August 31, 1986. Sensitive products from both countries shall be renegotiated before September 30, 1986. PROTOCOL NO. 5: JOINT COMPANIES The Government of Argentina and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The prime objective of promoting integration and complementarity on a company level in order to insure the success of the Economic Integration and Cooperation Program between Argentina and Brazil; That the process of economic integration between the two countries shall promote the strengthening of national capital; The need to establish specific mechanisms in order to promote these ends; DECIDE: 1. To create favorable conditions for the establishment of joint companies. 2. To this end, to set up a Working Group within the framework of the Program Implementation Committee to formulate regulations for these joint companies, contemplating that juridical persons with national capital in both countries may wish to associate with such joint companies. 3. This Working Group shall be constituted before September 30, 1986 and shall present its report to the Committee before November 30, 1986. PROTOCOL NO. 6: FINANCIAL MATTERS The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federal Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The need to make broader viable commerciali relations on a balanced basis; The need to improve the liquidity of the compensation system provided for by the Agreement on Reciprocal Credits between Argentina and Brazil; The need to attenuate possible imbalances in the specific sector of capital goods; DECIDE: 1. That the Central Bank of the Argentine Republic and the Central Bank of Brazil shall adjust their operative and technical conditions to improve the efficiency of the system by the establishment of a reciprocal financial mechanism for debit balances registered in each four month period. 2. That their respective Central Banks shall formulate an additional financial scheme, to be activated as soon as an imbalance occurs in the exchange of any product mentioned in the common list in the field of capital goods, as indicated in Protocol No. 1 paragraph 9 A(b). 3. To this end, to establish contingent lines of credit to be opened by the Central Banks of the two countries, with the and conditions subject to specific interbank adjustments, destined to finance cash payments in the exports of the deficit country, and/or the imports of the country with a surplus, in order to cover existing imbalances. PROTOCOL ? 7: INVESTMENT FUND The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The need to strengthen the processes of integration and of cooperation within a framework of economic growth in both countries; The need to encourage the process of accumulation in joint undertakings; The need to guarantee allocations of resources that stimulate a balanced increase in trade, particularly in the field of capital goods and other sectors incorporated into the Program for Economic Integration and Cooperation; The importance of medium- and long-term financing for the process of economic integration; DECIDE: 1. To create an Investment Fund for the promotion of economic growth, with special consideration for the capital goods sector and any other sector that becomes a part of the Economic Cooperation and Integration Program, by means of existing mechanisms and according to the following guidelines: A. The financing of projects designed to increase production by means of medium- and long-term credit shall be targeted mainly toward joint companies employing local capital, instituted in accordance with the provisions of Protocol No. 5 ; B. The Fund may also participate, with a minority share, in joint companies; C. The initial capital of the Fund shall be equivalent to 200,000,000 (two hundred million) United States dollars subscribed in equal shares by both countries in their respective currencies; D. Resources shall be obtained from the capital markets of Argentina and Brazil as well as from the international market and international financial institutions, with both Governments acting as guarantors in all cases. 2. In the event that trade in capital goods presents an imbalance of over 20% (twenty percent) of the reference value mentioned in Protocol No. 1, paragraph 9 B, the two Governments undertake to complete or to increase the capital of the Fund, in equal parts, up to an additional value equal to the amount of the aforementioned imbalance. This increase in the resources of the Fund shall be used to finance local investments within the country showing the deficit, in order to improve its productive and exporting capacity. 3. Mechanisms such as those provided for in paragraph 2 shall be established for the same type of situation taking place in new sectors, as such sectors are incorporated into the Program for Economic Integration and Cooperation. 4. Before November 30, 1986, the Ministry of the Economy of the Argentine Republic, and the Treasury Ministry of the Federative Republic of Brazil shall define the constitution, structure, organization and operating conditions of the Investment Fund. PROTOCOL NO. 8: ENERGY The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The need to make better use of the natural resources of the two countries; The strategic importance for economic development of guaranteeing a regular supply of energy; That cooperation in the field of energy is one of the fundamenta factors in Argentine-Brazilian integration; The interest shared by both Argentina and Brazil in making full use of their shared water resources; DECIDE: 1. That the appropriate authorities in both countries shall conclude technical studies on the supply of natural gas by Argentina to Brazil, before December 31, 1986, with a view to facilitating pertinent political decisions. 2. That the appropriate authorities in both countries shall analyze the possibilities of joint participation in exploration programs and subsequently in the extraction of oil from Argentine territory, as well as bilateral technological exchanges in this sector, including an increase in the exchange of petrochemical products and the byproducts of the oil extraction industry. 3. To ensure that the basic binational hydroelectric project of Garabi is concluded before the end of the current year, and to recommend the formulation of a schedule for the completion of the subsequent stages of the project under the terms of the Treaty of May 17, 1980. 4. To emphasize the advances achieved in the negotiations on the implementation of the hydroelectric project of Pichi-Picdn-Leufu, in order to initiate work as soon as possible in 1987. 5. To reaffirm the importance of existing electrical interconnections and to underline the need to promote new interconnections to make better use of their energy resources. 6. To strengthen the Latin American Energy Organization (OLADE) [for the agreement establishing OLADE see 13 I.L.M. 337 (1974)] by means of more active participation by both countries. PROTOCOL NO. 9: BIOTECHNOLOGY The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The strategic importance of scientific and technological research in the field of biotechnology; The need to improve this sector's human and scientific resources; The magnitude of investments needed to achieve an acceptable level of research, as well as the reduction of costs made possible by the coordination and joint performance of research activities; DECIDE: 1. To establish an Argentine-Brazilian Biotechnology Center. 2. That this Center is to comprise two Information-Generating Services, initially constituted by the enlargement of already existing research centers. 3. To set up a Working Group to meet during the coming month of September for the purpose of drafting such documents as are needed for the full operation of the aforementioned Center. These documents shall be presented to the Program Implementation Committee in the course of the present year. 4. That this Working Group shall observe the following guidelines in the drafting of the aboveraentioned documents: a) To set up, within the scope of each Service, Research Centers bearing a relationship to the number of joint projects to be developed b) That, within each Service, activities shall be aimed at supporting research projects in the field of development and application of biotechnology, with a view to promoting integration among "Universities/Official Institutions "Companies", with the ultimate aim of producing marketable goods and services. c) That the management of the Center be entrusted alternately to an Argentine and a Brazilian researcher, according to a biannual rotation system, and that said Center be aided by an Advisory Committee composed of an equal number of scientists from each country, who may propose projects and participate in the evaluation of the Center's Research and Development Programs. d) Both Governments shall contribute equally to the financing of the abovementioned Research Programs. e) Each Government shall make such investments as are needed to complement the infrastructure of their respective Information-Generating Services. PROTOCOL NO. 10: ECONOMIC STUDIES The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The importance of mutual information regarding the Argentine and Brazilian economic systems, for the purpose of facilitating the study of measures targeted toward the harmonization of economic policies in the two countries, and the better utilization by private companies of economic opportunities derived from the integration process; DECIDE: 1. To establish an Argentine-Brazilian Center for Advanced Economic Studies, within the framework of the Program for Economic Integration and Cooperation. 2. That annually the Center shall select Argentine and Brazilian professionals to carry out research projects on subjects related to the economy of the other country, within the scope and objectives of the integration process. 3. That each Government shall contribute the equivalent of 200,000 (two hundred thousand) United States dollars annually to cover the total expenses of this project. 4. That a Working Group shall draft a Charter for the Argentine-Brazilian Center for Advanced Economic Studies. 5. This Working Group shall be set up before September 30, 1986 and shall present the draft Charter to the Program Implementation Committee before November 30, 19 PROTOCOL NO. 11: INSTANT REPORTING AND MUTUAL ASSISTANCE IN CASES OF NUCLEAR ACCIDENTS AND RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCIES The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The Agreement on Cooperation in the Development and Application of the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, signed in Buenos Aires on May 17, 1980, as well as the Joint Declaration on Nuclear Policy, signed in Foz de Iguazu, on November 30, 1985; TAKING INTO ACCOUNT: The medical, agricultural and industrial uses of radioisotopes and other sources of ionizing radiation, as well as the generation of nuclear electrical energy within the two countries; COMMITTED: To adopt wide-ranging measures to guarantee the highest degree of security in these activities; CONSCIOUS: Of the fact that these security measures have been conceived to reduce the probability of nuclear accidents and radiological emergencies as well as to mitigate their consequences; CONVINCED: Of the advisability of creating a prompt warning system in the event of nuclear accidents or radiological emergencies; CONVINCED: Of the advantages of close cooperation between the two countries to facilitate mutual assistance, as requested, in the event of nuclear accidents or radiological emergencies; DECIDE: 1. To cooperate and to exchange technical information, with a view to formulating measures and procedures that contribute to the prevention or mitigation of the damage resulting from an eventual nuclear accident or radiological emergency. 2. To make every effort to implement a system of prompt mutual warning, in the event of nuclear accidents or radiological emergencies in either of their respective territories. 3. That each of the Parties may, at its discretion, request the assistance of the other Party, in the event of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency in its territory. The Party receiving the request for assistance shall make every effort to offer it as rapidly as possible, within the measure of its capabilities. 4. That the control, coordination and general supervision of the assistance shall remain within the jurisdiction of the Party that requested it. 5. To appoint for coordinating and implementing the present Protocol, the Comisión Nacional de Energía?a Atomica in the Argentine Republic, and the Comision Nacional de Energia?a Nuclear in the Federative Republic of Brazil. 6. That the aforementioned bodies shall formulate the procedures necessary to implement the present Protocol before January 30, 1987. PROTOCOL NO. 12: AERONAUTICAL COOPERATION The Government of the Argentine Republic and The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil, CONSIDERING: The Agreement, signed on January 17, 1986 between the Ministry of Defense of the Argentine Republic and the "EMBRAER" Company of the Federative Republic of Brazil, The importance of developing technical, industrial and commercial cooperation, leading to maximum complementarity between the aviation industries in the two countries, to satisfy the need for aeronautical equipment, not only within their respective domestic markets, but principally on international markets; The breadth of agreements already entered into, as well as further agreements to be concluded over the long period of validity of the initial agreements ; DECIDE: 1. To conclude, as soon as possible, agreements to carry out the production of aircraft parts for Brazilian airplanes, in the "Area Material Cordoba". 2. To study and define the possible utilization of aircraft produced by Argentine and Brazilian industries by their respective Air Forces, within the framework of appropriate industrial cooperation and harmonious integration, subject to the particular interests of each of the Parties. 3. To set up a Joint Working Group to study, advise and follow up mutual Argentine and Brazilian exchanges in the aerospace industries, under the supervision of both Air Forces.
