MainText:
Agreement between the Republic of Finland and the People's Republic of Bulgaria on the reciprocal removal of obstacles to trade The Republic of Finland and the People's Republic of Bulgaria, Noting the endeavours of both countries to contribute to the progressive elimination of obstacles to international trade on a worldwide basis, and to seek means of increasing the trade and of creating doser economic cooperation between countries having different economic and social systems, Desirous of solving, in a fair arcl equal way, the problems arising from the contemporary European economic Integration processes to the commercial and economic relations between the Contracting Parties, ind to this end to c-limin.ue progressively the obstacles lo substantially all their trade, in accordance with the provisions of. the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade: concerning the establishment of free trade areas, Considering that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting the Contracting Parues from the rights and obligations devolving upon them from outer international agreements, Have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 1 The objective of this Agreement is: a) to provide fair conditions of competition on the markets of the Contracting Parties in order to ensure the development of their mutual trade in a satisfactorily balanced manner; b) to promote through the expansion of reciprocal trade the harmonious development of economic relations between the Contracting Parties and to create the most favourable conditions for the enterprises and other economic organizations of the Contracting .Parties to develop their economic, industrial and technical co-operation to the mutual benefit of their economies. ARTICLE 2 The Agreement shall apply to products originating in the Republic of Finland or in the People's Republic of Bulgaria: a) which fall within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Brussels Nomenclature, according to the provisions in Protocol No. 1; b) which fall within Chapters 25 to 99 of the Brussels Nomenclature. ARTICLE 3 1. No new customs duty on imports shall be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties. 2. Customs duties on imports shall be progressively abolished inaccordance with the following timetable: a) on 1 January 1975 each duty shall be reduced ro 40 per cent of the basic duly; b) two further reductions of 20 percent each shall be made on: 1 January 1976 1 July 1977. 3. Protocol No. 2 lays down the tariff treatment applicable lo certain products. 4. The reduced duties calculated in accordance with this Agreement shall be applied rounded to the first decimal place. ARTICLE 4 The basic duties to which the successive reductions provided for in Article 3 and in Protocols No. J and No. 2 art to be applied shall, for each product, be the duty actually applied in trade between the Contracting Parties on 1 January 1974. ARTICLE 5 1. No new charge having an effect equivalent to a customs duty on imports shall be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties. . • 2. Charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on imports shall be abolished upon the entry into force of the Agreement. ARTICLE 6 1. The Contracting Parties shall not apply directly or indirectly to goods imported from the territory of the other Contracting Party any fiscal charge in excess to those applied directly or indirectly to like domestic and imported goods. 2. "Fiscal charges" means revenue duties, internal taxes and other internal charges on goods. 3. The Contracting Parties shall not apply in the field of foreign exchange rate matters any measures which may jeopardise the realization of the objectives of the Agreement. ARTICLE 7 Protocol No. 3 lays down the rules of origin. ARTICLE 8 i. No new quantitative, restrictions on imports or measures having equivalent effect shall be introduced fii trade between the Contracting Parties. 2. The Contracting Parties shall eliminate such restrictions upon the entry into force of this Agreement. 3. Protocol No. 4 lays down the treatment applicable to certain products. ARTICLE 9 1. If the imports of products originating in the territory of one of the Contracting Parties take place in such increased quantities and/or undr; such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause disruption to the domestic market or production of the other Contracting Party, the Contracting Party concerned may take, in accordance with the procedures laid down in paragraph 4 of this Article, such measures as is necessary to prevent or remedy the situation. 2. Likewise, such measures may be taken by the Contracting Party concerned if serious disturbances arise in any sector of the economy or if difficulties arise which could cause deterioration in the economic situation of a region. 3. In the selection of measures priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the Agreement. 4. For the implementation of this Article, the following provisions shall apply: a) In the cases specified above, before taking the measures provided for therein or, in cases to which paragraph 4 c) applies, as soon as possible, the. Contracting Party concerned shall immediately inform the other Contracting Party of the disturbances and of the safeguard measures concerned and supply the other Contracting Party with all relevant information required for a thorough examination in the Joint Commission . provided for in Article 14 of the situation with a view to seeking a solution. b) In the absence of any mutually satisfactory solution in the Joint Commission within three months of the matter being referred to it, the Contracting Party concerned may apply any safeguard measures, including, in particular, withdrawal of tariff concessions, ir considers necessary to deal with the situation. c) Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior notification to the other Contracting Party impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may apply forthwith the safeguard measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation. ARTICLE 10 Where a Contracting Party is in difficulties or is seriously threatened with difficulties as regards its balance of payments the Contracting Party concerned may take the necessary safeguard measures. It shall inform the other Contracting Party forthwith. ARTICLE 11 1. The Contracting Parties shall take all measures required to fulfil their obligations arising from the Agreement. 2. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any measures likely to jeopardize the fulfilment of the objectives of the Agreement. 3. If either Contracting Party considers that the other Contracting Party has failed to fulfil an obligation arising from the Agreement or that one of the objectives is in jeopardy, it may adopt appropriate safeguard measures, in accordance with the procedures established in Article 9 "of this Agreement, in order to prevent or remedy any likely injuries arising from such a situation. ARTICLE 12 The Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, law and order or public security, the protection of life and health of humans, animals or plants, the protection of national treasures of artistic,' historic or archaeological value, the protection of industrial and commercial property, or rules relating to gold or silver. Such prohibitions or restrictions must not, howevei, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting- Parties.ARTICLE 13 Nothing in the Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking any measures: a) which it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security needs; b) which relate to trade in arms, munitions or war materials or to research, development or production indispensable for defence purposes, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specially military purposes; c) which it considers essential to its own security in time of war or serious international tension. ARTICLE 14 1. An intergovernmental Joint Commission ««misting of representatives of the Contracting Parties is hereby established, which shall be responsible for the administration of the Agreement and shall review its implementation. For this purpose it shall carry out examinations and take decisions in the cases provided for in the Agreement. These decisions - shall be put into effect by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their own legislative requirements. 2. Foi the purpose of the proper implementation of the Agreement the Contracting Parties shall exchange information and, at the request of either Contracting Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Commission. 3. The Joint Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure. A. The Joint Commission shall act by mutual agreement. ARTICLE 15 1. Each Contracting Party shall preside alternately over the Joint Commission, in accordance with the provisions to be laid down in its rules of procedure. 2. The Chairman shall convene the meetings of the Joint Commission at least once o year in order to review the general functioning of the Agreement. The Joint Commission shall, in addition, meet whenever special circumstances so require, at the request of either Contracting Party, in accordance with the conditions to be laid down in its rules of procedure. 3. The Joint Commission may decide to set up any working group that can assist it in carrying out itduties. ARTICLE 16 The Protocols to the Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. ARTICLE 17 Either Contracting Parly may denounce the Agreement, by notifying the other Contracting Party. The Agreement shall cease to be in force three months after the date of such notification. The Contracting Parties may, however, continue to apply the Agreement for a period not exceeding nine months from the. date on which the Agreement actually terminates ARTICLE 18 This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the English language, both texts being authentic. The Agreement will be subject to ratification by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their own constitutional procedures. The instruments of ratification are to be exchanged through diplomatic channels. The Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the. exchange of instruments of ratification.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
PROTOCOL No. 1 concerning the treatment applicable to products falling within Brussels Tariff Nomenclature Chapters 1 to 24 ARTICLE 1 The Contracting Parties declare their readiness to foster, as far as their national agricultural policies allow, the harmonious development of trade in agricultural products. The Contracting Parties further declare that the objective of their arrangements concerning trade in agricultural products shall be to facilitate an expansion of trade on a mutually beneficial basis. ARTICLE 2 The provisions of the Agreement shall apply, if not otherwise provided for elsewhere in this Protocol, to products specified in Annexes 1 and II to this Protocol. ARTICLE 3 The Contracting Parties shall apply their rules and regulations in veterinary, health and phytosanitary matters in a manner not having the effect of unduly obstructing trade. ARTICLE 4 The Contracting Parties shall examine under the conditions and procedures set out in Articles 14 and 15 of the Agreement any difficulties and other matters that might arise in their trade in agricultural products with a view to finding appropriate solutions. ARTICLE 5 During the consultations set out in Articles 14 and 15 of the Agreement the Contracting Parties shall pay particular attention to the fulfilment of the provisions of the Agreement and to the possibilities to enlarge the product coverage of the Agreement. ANNEX I List of products originating in Bulgaria referred to in Article 2 of this Protocol to which Finland shall apply the provisions of the Agreement ANNEX II ANNEX II list of products originating in Finland referred to in Article 2 of this Protocol to which Bulgaria shall apply the provisions of the Agreement PROTOCOL No. 2 concerning the treatment applicable to certain products 1. The customs duties on imports from Bulgaria into Finland of products specified in List 1 and on imports from Finland into Bulgaria of products specified in List 2 .shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the following timetable: PROTOCOL No. 3 Rules of origin ARTICLE 1 For the purpose of implementing the Agreement, the following products shall be considered as: 1. products originating in Finland: a) products wholly obtained in Finland; • b) products obtained in Finland in the manufacture of which products other than those referred to in a) are used, provided that the said products have undergone sufficient working or processing within the meaning of Article 3. This condition shall not apply, however, to products which, within the meaning of this Protocol, originate in Bulgaria. 2. products originating in Bulgaria: a) products wholly obtained in Bulgaria; b) products obtained in Bulgaria in the manufacture of which products other than those referred to in a) are used, provided that the said products have undergone sufficient working, or processing within the meaning of Article 3. This condition shall not apply, however, to products which, within the meaning of this Protocol, originate in Finland. ARTICLE 2 .The following shall be considered as wholly obtained either in Finland or in Bulgaria within the meaning of Article 11a ) and 2 a): a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed; b) vegetable products harvested there; c) live animals bom and raised there; d) products from live animals raised there; e) products obtained by hunting or fishing -conducted there; f ) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea by their vessels; g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in subparagraph f); h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials; i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there; j) goods produced there exclusively from products specified in subparagraphs a) to i). ARTICLE 3 1. For the purpose of implementing Article 1 lb ) and 2b) the following shall be considered as sufficient working or processing: a) working or processing as a result of which the goods obtained receive a classification under a tariff heading other than that covering each of the products worked or processed, except, however, working or processing specified in List A, where the special provisions of that list apply; b) working or processing specified in List B. 2. When, for a given product obtained, a percentage rule limits in List A and in List B the value of the materials and parts which can be used, the total value of these materials and parts, whether or not they have changed tariff heading in the course of the working, processing or assembly within the limits and under the conditions laid down in each of those two lists, may r;ot exceed, in relation to the value of the product obtained, the value corresponding either to the common rate, if the rates are identical in both lists, or to the higher of the two if they are different. 3. For the purpose of implementing Article lib ) and 2 b), the following shall still be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not there is a change of tariff heading: a) operations to ensure the preservation of merchandise in good condition during transport and storage (ventilation, spreading out; drying, chilling, placing in salt, sulphur dioxide or other aqueous solutions, removal of damaged parts, and like operations); b) simple operations consisting of removal of dust, sifting or screening, sorting, classifying. matching (including the making up of sets of articles), washing, painting, anting up; c) i) changes of packing and breaking up and assembly of consignments; ii) simple placing in bottles, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards, etc., and all other simple packing operations; d) affixing marks, labels or other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging; e) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds, where one or more components of the mixtures do not meet the conditions laid down in this Protocol to enable them to be considered as originating either in Finland or in Bulgaria; f) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article; g) a combination of two or more obligations specified in subparagraphs a) to f); h) slaughter of animals. ARTICLE 4 1. Where the Lists A and B referred to in Article" 3 provide that goods obtained in Finland or in Bulgaria shall be. considered as originating therein only if the value of the products worked or processed does not exceed a given percentage of the value of the goods obtained, the values to be taken into consideration for determining such percentage shall be: — on the one hand, as regards products whose importation can be proved: their customs value at the time of importation; as regards products of undetermined origin: the earliest ascertainable price paid for such products in the territory of the Contracting Party where manufacture takes place; — and on the other hand, the ex-works price of the goods obtained, less internal taxes refunded or refundable on exportation. ARTICLE 5 1. Goods originating in Finland or in Bulgaria may be transported: a) without passing through the territory of any other country; b) through the territory of one or more countries, with or without transshipment or temporary storage in such countries, provided that the transit has been necessary for geographical reasons or by considerations related to transport requirements and that the goods have remained under customs control, have not entered into trade or consumption in these countries and have not there undergone operations other than unloading and reloading or any •operation required to keep them in good condition. 2. The customs authorities may in the case of serious suspicion require the production of the following supplementary evidence to establish the fact that the above conditions have been met: • a) either a single supporting transport document, made out in Article 8 1. Goods sent from Finland or from Bulgaria fot exhibition in other countries and sold after the exhibition for importation into Bulgaria or into Finland shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement on condition that the goods meet the requirements of this Protocol entitling them to be recognized as originating in Finland or. i Bulgaria and provided that it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that: a) an exporter has consigned these goods from Finland or from Bulgaria to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them dicTc; b) the goods have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to someone in Bulgaria or in Finland; c) the goods have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter to Bulgaria or to- Finland in the- state in which they were sent for exhibition; d) the goods ,have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition. 2. A declaration of origin must be produced to the customs authorities in the norma] manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Additional documentary evidence of the nature of the goods and the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required in the case of serious suspicion. 3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign goods, and during which the goods remain under customs control. Article 9 « • In order to ensure the proper application of the provisions of this Protocol, Finland and Bulgaria shall assist each other, through their respective customs administrations, in checking the authenticity and accuracy of declarations of origin. the exporting country, under the cover of which the passage across the transit country has been effected; b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the transit country containing an exact description of the goods, the date of unloading and reloading of the goods, with identification of the vessel or other means of transport used and certification of the conditions under which the goods have remained in the transit country; c) or, failing such particularà, any "corresponding documentary evidence. ARTICLE 6 J. Originating products within the*meaning of Article 1 of this Protocol shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement upon submission, in connection with importation, of a declaration of origin given by the exporter. 2. The exporter may give the declaration either by inserting on the invoice coveting the goods the declaration contained in Annex IV or by completing a declaration form a specimen of which is given in Annex V to the Protocol. ARTICLE 7 The discovery of non-fundamental differences between the statements made in the declaration of origin and those made in the other documents required for the purpose of customs clearance shall not render the declaration null and void if it is established that the declaration does correspond to the goods submitted. ARTICLE 8 1. Goods sent from Finland or from Bulgaria fot exhibition in other countries and sold after the exhibition for importation into Bulgaria or into Finland shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement on condition that the goods meet the requirements of this Protocol entitling them to be recognized as originating in Finland or. i Bulgaria and provided that it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that: a) an exporter has consigned these goods from Finland or from Bulgaria to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them dicTc; b) the goods have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to someone in Bulgaria or in Finland; c) the goods have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter to Bulgaria or to- Finland in the- state in which they were sent for exhibition; d) the goods ,have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition. 2. A declaration of origin must be produced to the customs authorities in the norma] manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Additional documentary evidence of the nature of the goods and the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required in the case of serious suspicion. 3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign goods, and during which the goods remain under customs control. ARTICLE 9 In order to ensure the proper application of the provisions of this Protocol, Finland and Bulgaria shall assist each other, through their respective customs administrations, in checking the authenticity and accuracy of declarations of origin. ARTICLE 10 Penalties shall be imposed, according to national legislation, on any person who draws up or causes to be drawn up a declaration of origin which contains incorrect particulars for the purpose of obtaining for the goods the preferential treatment provided for by this Agreement. ARTICLE 11 The explanatory notes, Lists A and B, and the specimens of declarations of origin shall form an integral part of this Protocol. ARTICLE 12 The Joint Commission may decide to amend the provisions of this Protocol. ANNEX I EXPLANATORY NOTES Note 1 — Article 1 The terms "Finland" or "Bulgaria" shall, also cover the territorial waters of Finland and of Bulgaria. Vessels operating on the high seas, including factory ships, on which the fish caught is worked or processed shall be considered as part of the territory of the State to which they belong, provided that they satisfy the conditions set out in Explanatory Note 6. Note 2 — Article 1 In order to determine whether goods originate in Finland or in Bulgaria it shall not be necessary to establish whether the power and fuel, plant and equipment, and machines and tools used to obtain such goods originate in third countries or not. Note 3 - Article 1 Packing shall be considered as forming a whole with the goods contained therein. This provision, however, shall not apply to packing which is not of the normal type for the article packed and which has intrinsic utilization value and is of a durable nature, apart from its function as packing. Note 4 — Article 1 Tools, parts and accessories which are imported with an article, and the price of which . is included in that of the article or for which no separate charge is made, shall be considered as forming a whole with the article, provided -that they constitute the standard equipment customarily included on the sale of articles of that kind. Note 5 — Article 1 For the purpose of determining the origin, an unassembled or disassembled article which is imported in more than one consignment because it is not feasible for transport or production reasons to import it in a single consignment shall, if the importer so requests, be treated as one article. Note 6 — Article 2 f ) The term "their vessels" shall apply only to vessels: — which are registered or recorded in Finland or in Bulgaria; — which sail under the flag of Finland or of Bulgaria. Note 7 — Article 3 "Sections", "Chapters" and "tariff headings" shall mean the Sections, Chapters and tariff headings in the Convention on Nomenclature for the Classification of Goods irr Customs tariffs signed in Brussels on 15 December 1950. Note 8 — Article 4 "Ex-works price" shall mean the price paid to the manufacturer in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of ell the products used in manufacture. "Customs value" shall be understood as meaning the customs value laid down in the Convention concerning the Valuation of Goods for Customs Purposes signed in Brussels on 15 December 1950. Note 9 — Article 12 The Parties, with reference to the objectives of the Agreement, and noting the provisions in Article 14 of the Agreement and Article 12 of this Protocol, assure their readiness to examine any difficulties which might occur during the application of the provisions of the rules of origin, with the view of finding appropriate solutions including the possibility of amending these rules as well as of establishing a basic materials list. ANNEX II LIST A List of •working or processing operations products on the products undergoing such which result in a change of tariff heading without conferring the status of "originating" operations, or conferring this status only subject to certain conditions. ANNEX III LIST ANNEX IV SPECIMEN FOR THE DECLARATION OF ORIGIN BY THE EXPORTER, to be inserted on the invoice covering the goods I, the undersigned, declare that the goods visions of Protocol No. 3 annexed to the covered by this invoice are of Finnish/ Agreement between Finland and Bulgaria. ANNEX V PROTOCOL No. 4 concerning the treatment applicable to certain products 1. Notwithstanding Article 8 of the Agreement, Finland may retain quantitative restrictions on the products specified in List A below. 2. The quantitative restrictions which Finland may retain in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Protocol shall be applied in such a way as to make it possible, as regards the products specified in List A below, for the exporters of Bulgaria to compete with other suppliers on fair and equal terms for a reasonable share of the Finnish markets, account being taken of die normal development of trade.
