MainText:
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE GOVERNMENT OF REPUBLIC OF BELARUS ON FREE TRADE (November 13, 1992) The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Belarus, hereafter referred to as the Contracting Parties, guided by the provisions of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus, signed on December 18, 1990, taking into consideration the multilateral Agreement on Co-operation in the Area of Foreign Trade Activities as of May 15, 1992, taking into consideration the Agreement on Co-ordination of Work on Issues Related to Export Control of Raw Materials, Equipment, Technologies and Services Which Can Be Used to Create Weapons of Mass Destruction and Missiles for Delivery Thereof as of June 26, 1992, striving to develop trade and economic cooperation between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus based upon equality and mutual benefits, based upon the sovereign right of each State to conduct independent foreign economic policy, aiming at fostering economic activities, providing full employment, increasing productivity and rational use of resources, striving to facilitate harmonious development and growth of international trade, elimination of barriers on its development, have agreed on the following: ARTICLE 1 1. Contracting Parties shall not apply customs duties, taxes and charges having equivalent impact on exportation and (or) importation of goods originating from the customs territory of one of Contracting Parties and destined for the customs territory of the other Contracting Party. Exceptions to this trade regime on agreed nomenclature of goods shall be formalized by separate Protocol or Agreement, annual which shall be an integral part of this Agreement. 2. For the purposes of this Agreement, and for its effective term, goods originating from the territories of Contracting Parties shall be deemed to be: (a) completely produced in the territory of the Contracting Party; or (b) having been processed on the territory of the Contracting Party by utilizing raw materials, materials and components of third country origin and having changed its classification under the Harmonized System of Commodity Description and Coding of goods in at least one of the first four digits due to this processing; (c) produced with the use of raw materials and components listed in subparagraph "b" raw materials, materials and components under the condition that their total cost does not exceed a fixed proportion of the export price of commodities sold. Detailed rules of origin of goods shall be coordinated by the Contracting Parties and included in a separate document that shall become an integral part of this Agreement. ARTICLE 2 Contracting Parties shall not: directly or indirectly impose on goods from the other Party, covered by this Agreement, internal taxes or charges, in excess of corresponding taxes and charges imposed on similar goods of domestic production or on goods of third country origin; apply in respect of import or export of goods, covered by this Agreement, any special limitations or requirements, which in similar situation shall not apply to like goods of domestic production or goods of third country origin; apply in respect of warehousing, reloading, storage, transportation of goods that originating from the territory of the other Contracting Party, as well as of payments and payment transfers rules other than those applied in similar situations regarding goods of domestic production or goods of third country origin. ARTICLE 3 1. The Contracting Parties shall undertake not to apply quantitative restrictions or equivalent measures on export and (or) import on goods under this Agreement. 2. The quantitative restrictions referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may be set under unilateral procedure within reasonable limits and for a strictly defined time only in cases of: acute shortage of a given good on the domestic market - until the stabilization of the situation on the market; acute balance of payments deficit - until the stabilization of the balance of payments; in case if a good is imported into the territory of one of the Contracting Parties in such increased quantities and on such terms that cause or threaten to cause damage to domestic producers of like or directly competitive goods; in order to take measures provided for in Article 4 of the present Agreement. 3. The quantitative restrictions referred to in paragraph 1 of the Article may also be set by mutual consent of the Parties and be included in the protocols referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 1 of the present Agreement. 4. The Contracting Party that applies quantitative restrictions in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article shall, by the request of the other Contracting Party, provide necessary information about the reasons of introduction, forms and possible time of application of the referred to restrictions. 5. The Contracting Parties shall strive to resolve all the issues that arise from the introduction of the quantitative restrictions referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article through consultations. 6. When selecting the measures in compliance with this Article, the Contracting Parties shall give priority to those of them that produce the least negative impact on the achievement of the purposes of the present Agreement. ARTICLE 4 Each of the Contracting Parties shall not permit the re-export of goods, relative to the export of which the other Contracting Party, where these goods originate from, applies measures of tariff and (or) nontariff regulation. The Parties shall exchange the list of goods, to which are applied the measures of tariff and nontariff regulation. Re-export of such goods may be made only with a written consent and on the terms set by the authorized agency of the country of origin of the said goods. In case of failure to comply with this provision, the Contracting Party whose interests have been affected shall be entitled to unilaterally take measures on regulating the export of such goods to the territory of the other State that permitted the unsanctioned re-export. In case of re-export of such goods the State, from which territory these goods originate from, has the right to claim for compensation of losses. For the purposes of this Article, re-export shall mean export of goods, originated from the customs territory of one of the Contracting Parties, by another Contracting Party beyond the customs territory of the former, in order to export them to a third country. ARTICLE 5 The Contracting Parties shall on a regular basis exchange information on customs issues, including customs statistics in its full. Corresponding authorized authorities of the Contracting Parties shall coordinate the procedure for exchanging such information. ARTICLE 6 1. The Contracting Parties will endeavor to bring together the levels of customs duty rates applied in trade with third countries and for these purposes have agreed to conduct regular consultations. 2. The Contracting Parties shall inform each other of all exceptions to the current state rules on customs tariffs. ARTICLE 7 The Contracting Parties recognize the incompatibility with the purposes of the present Agreement of unfair business practices manifested, in particular, in the following: concluding agreements between enterprises, and its unions, having by its aim to hinder or restrict competition or violate its terms on the territories of the Contracting Parties; making actions by which one or several enterprises use their dominating status, restricting competition on the entire or a substantial part of the territories of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 8 For the purposes of applying measures of tariff and non-tariff regulation in the bilateral economic relations, statistical information exchange, and for carrying out customs procedures, the Contracting Parties agreed to use the unified, nine-digit Commodity Nomenclature of Foreign Economic Activities (CN FEA), based upon the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and Combined Tariffs and Statistics Nomenclature of the Eurasian economic community. For their own needs Contracting Parties may expend this Commodity Nomenclature beyond the nine digits if necessary. Introduction of the reference original of the Commodity Nomenclature is carried out on a mutually agreed basis through the existing representations in the relevant international organizations. ARTICLE 9 Contracting Parties agreed not to accord export or other subsidies to enterprises, that are on their territories, if such subsidies have as a result violation of fair competition conditions. ARTICLE 10 The Contracting Parties agree that the adherence to the principle of freedom of transit is the major condition for achieving goals of this Agreement and a substantial element in the process of their integration into the system of international division of labour and cooperation. Thereupon each Contracting Party shall provide unimpeded transit through its territory for goods originating from the customs territory of the other Contracting Party and (or) third countries and destined for the customs territory of the other Contracting Party or any third country, and shall supply exporters, importers, and carriers with all facilities and services available and necessary for ensuring transit on terms not worse than those granted to national exporters (importers) or carriers, or exporters, importers or carriers of any third state. Transit tariffs for all types of transportation, including tariffs for loading and unloading operations, shall be economically justified. ARTICLE 11 Nothing in this Agreement shall not prevent the right of the Contracting Parties from taking, commonly recognized in international practice, measures, which it considers necessary for protecting their vital interests or which are undoubtedly necessary for compliance with international agreements to which they are or intend to become parties, if these measures relate to: information affecting the interests of national defence; trade in arms, munitions and military equipment; research or production related to the defence needs; supply of materials and equipment used in nuclear industry; protection of public morality and public order; protection of industrial and intellectual property; gold, silver, and other precious metals and stones; protection of human, animal and plant life. ARTICLE 12 With the goal of pursuing coordinated policy of export control in relation to third countries, the Contracting Parties shall establish an Inter-State Coordination Council on Export Control consisting of the heads of national bodies of export control in composition of the heads of national state bodies of export control, which functions shall include the approval of common control check lists, examination of cases of violation of export control requirements and elaboration of proposals to introduce or to eliminate sanctions. ARTICLE 13 Provisions of this Agreement shall replace the provisions of agreements concluded earlier by the Contracting Parties insofar as the latter are incompatible or identical with the former or identical to them. The Contracting Parties will instruct their competent authorities to prepare an appropriate protocol on this issue. ARTICLE 14 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Contracting Parties to exercise relations, which shall not contradict the goals and terms of this Agreement with the States, which are not parties to this Agreement, as well as with their associations and international organizations. ARTICLE 15 Disputes between the Contracting Parties in relation to interpretation or application of provisions of this Agreement shall be resolved by means of negotiations. ARTICLE 16 To achieve the goals of this Agreement and to elaborate recommendations for improving trade and economic cooperation between the two countries, the Contracting Parties have agreed to establish a joint Russian-Belorussian commission. ARTICLE 17 Contracting Parties have agreed that the Russian Federation may establish its trade representation in the Republic of Belarus, and the Republic of Belarus may establish its trade representation in the Russian Federation. The legal status of these trade representations, their functions and residence will be agreed by the Contracting Parties in a separate agreement. ARTICLE 18 Any state, under the condition that the Contracting Parties will approve that, may accede to this Agreement on terms, which would be agreed between the acceding State and the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 19 The integral part of this Agreement is the Protocol on the exceptions from the free trade regime, which the Parties shall sign until 1992. ARTICLE 20 This Agreement becomes effective upon exchange of notices of completion by the Contracting Parties of intra-state procedures necessary for its entry into force and will remain in force prior twelve months from the date of written notification by one Contracting Party of its termination to the other Contracting Party. Done in the city of Moscow, November 13, 1992 in two originals, each in Russian and Belorussian, both texts being equally authentic.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF BELARUS ON FREE TRADE AGREEMENT AS OF NOVEMBER 13, 1992 (January 22, 1993) ANNEX 1 Authorized representatives of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus have concluded this Protocol on the following. ARTICLE 1 Exceptions provided by Article 1 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on Free Trade as of November 13, 1992, shall apply to: 1. Goods subject to the Russian legislation on export tariff, as well as the legislation on licensing and quoting of exportation of goods (works, services) which is in force at the moment of customs clearance of goods during their exportation from the Russian Federation to the Republic of Belarus (at the moment of signing this Protocol in force are list of goods, established by the Government of the Russian Federation Regulation No 461 as of June 30, 1992; list of goods subject to quotas and licensing, established by the Government of the Russian Federation Regulation No 854 as of November 6, 1992); 2. Goods subject to the Belorussian legislation on customs export tariff, as well as the legislation on licensing and quoting of exportation of goods (works, services) which is in force at the moment of customs clearance of goods during their exportation from the Republic of Belarus to the Russian Federation (at the moment of signing this Protocol the following legislation is in force: customs export duties, established by the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus Regulation No. 202 “On introduction of customs duties on export and import for foreign operations” as of April 10, 1992; list of goods subject to quotas and licensing, established by the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus Regulation No. 556 “On improvement of foreign economic activity” as of September 14, 1992) The Parties have agreed not to charge in 1993 export duties from the goods, included in Annex 3 to the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on trade and economic cooperation in 1993, within the limits, envisaged by the mentioned Annex. The Parties have agreed not to apply exceptions to free trade regime on additional volumes of goods, which Parties shall agree upon till February 1993. The Parties have agreed to agree upon the plan of phasing out elimination of exceptions to free trade regime, formulated in separate protocols, till April 1, 1993. ARTICLE 2 1. In respect of goods subject to exceptions to free trade regime in accordance with Article 1 of this Protocol, the Parties shall provide each other most favoured nation regime in regard to: - customs duties, taxes and charges payable upon export, including methods of levying such duties, taxes and fees; - provisions relating to customs clearance of transit, transportation, storage, reloading and other similar services; - methods of payments and remittance of payments; - issuance of export licenses; - rules concerning sale, purchase, transportation, distribution and use of commodities on the domestic market. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to: - advantages offered by any of the Parties to third countries with the aim of creating a customs union or free trade area or as a result of the establishment of such a union or area; - advantages granted to developing countries, in accordance with the laws of the Parties; - advantages provided to the neighbouring countries in order to facilitate cross-border trade; - advantages provided by Contracting Parties to each other in accordance with special agreements. ARTICLE 3 The Contracting Parties have agreed not to apply customs export duties in mutual trade till February 1, 1993. ARTICLE 4 1. This Protocol is an integral part of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on Free Trade, dated November 13, 1992, and becomes effective simultaneously with the above stated Agreement. 2. This Protocol will be valid until the signature of a new Protocol in accordance with Article 1 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on Free Trade, dated November 13, 1992. Done in the City of Moscow, on January 22, 1993 in two originals, each in Russian and Belorussian, both texts being equally authentic. ANNEX 2 Annex 2 PROTOCOL ON TERMS AND PROCEDURES OF APPLIYING TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS IN MUTUAL TRADE (April 12, 1994) The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government the Republic of Belarus, hereinafter referred to as the Parties, aiming at realization of the Agreement on the harmonization of the monetary system of the Republic of Belarus with the monetary system of the Russian Federation as of September 8, 1993, recognizing that the aim of the above mentioned Agreement is the creation of favourable conditions for development of mutual trade, highlighting desire for elimination of tariff, non-tariff and other equivalent on its consequences restrictions in mutual trade, guided by the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government the Republic of Belarus on free trade as of November 13, 1992, have agreed on the following. 1. Temporary restrictions in the mutual trade by means of applying tariff, non-tariff or other equivalent measures may be applied only in case, envisaged by the Article 3 of the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government the Republic of Belarus on free trade as of November 13, 1992. 2. Until the adoption of any restriction measures in cases, after the need for its application was revealed, the Parties shall provide each other with respective information for consultations. Holding consultations with a view of finding an acceptable solution for the Parties shall take place in the shortest possible period of time. 3. If as a result of such consultations, the Parties, within 45 days from the date of receipt of the relevant information, will not reach an agreement on the adoption of measures to avoid the situation, the Party, which requested consultations, shall be free to introduce restrictive measures to such extent and for such period, which are necessary to prevent or remedy the damage. 4. In critical circumstances, where delay might cause damage that will be difficult to repair, the Parties may take measures referred to in this Protocol, prior to holding such consultation on the condition that consultations shall be held immediately after the adoption of such measures. 5. Temporary restrictions imposed on export or import from the moment of their adoption by one of the Parties shall be communicated to the other Party in the shortest possible time. 6. The Parties have agreed to continue to work on harmonization of normative - legal base to avoid possibilities to create conditions, eligible for the imposition of tariffs and quantitative restrictions in mutual trade. 7. This Protocol shall enter into force from the introduction of free trade regime without exceptions and restrictions and is an integral part of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on Free Trade. Done in the City of Moscow on April 12, 1994 in two originals, each in Russian and Belorussian, both texts being equally authentic.
