MainText:
PART 1. BASIC PROVISIONS. ARTICLE 1. 1. Between the Kingdom of Belgium, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and the Kingdom of the Netherlands an economic union is hereby established, including the free movement of persons, goods, capital and services. 2. This Union involves: a) the coordination of economic, financial and social policies; (b) the adoption and pursuit of a common policy in economic relations with third countries and in matters of payment relating thereto. ARTICLE 2. 1. Nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall be entitled to enter and leave the territory of the other Contracting Parties. 2. They shall enjoy there the treatment accorded to nationals as regards: (a) movement, residence and establishment; (b) the exercise of economic and professional activities, including the provision of services; (c) capital transactions; (d) working conditions; e) the benefit of social security; f) taxes and duties of any kind; g) the enjoyment of civil rights as well as the legal and judicial protection of their person, their rights and their interests. ARTICLE 3. 1. The circulation of goods, without distinction of origin, provenance or destination, between the territories of the High Contracting Parties, shall be exempt from all collection of import and excise duties as well as from all other taxes. , taxes, fees, levies or charges generally of any kind. 2. It is also exempt from all prohibitions or obstacles of an economic and financial nature, in particular quantitative, qualitative or exchange restrictions. 3. Goods originating in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties shall enjoy in the territory of the other Contracting Parties the treatment accorded to national goods. ARTICLE 4. The circulation of capital between the territories of the High Contracting Parties shall be exempt from all prohibitions or obstacles. ARTICLE 5. 1. The movement of services between the territories of the High Contracting Parties shall be exempt from all levying of taxes, duties, royalties, levies or charges of any kind whatsoever. 2. She is also exempt from all prohibitions or obstacles of an economic and financial nature, in particular quantitative, qualitative or exchange restrictions. ARTICLE 6. Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 2 to 5 inclusive of this Treaty, the High Contracting Parties shall jointly ensure that no legislative or regulatory provision or any other provision of public law, in particular those of a health nature, unduly impedes free movement. ARTICLE 7. The High Contracting Parties shall jointly ensure that no legislative or regulatory provision, or any other provision of public law, distorts the conditions of competition in their territories. ARTICLE 8. 1. The High Contracting Parties shall pursue, in close mutual consultation, a co-ordinated policy in economic, financial and social matters. 2. The High Contracting Parties shall coordinate their policy with regard to private economic cooperation agreements and understandings as well as with regard to abuses resulting from a dominant position held on the market by one or more undertakings; they take the appropriate measures with a view to remedying abuses of economic power. ARTICLE 9. Insofar as the attitudes and commitments to be adopted, both in relations with countries and with regard to or within the framework of international institutions and conferences, affect the objectives of the Union, the High Contracting Parties shall consult each other so that these attitudes and commitments promote the achievement of these objectives. ARTICLE 10. In their relations with third countries, the High Contracting Parties: (a) shall adopt and pursue a common policy in matters of foreign trade and related payments; (b) jointly conclude treaties and agreements relating to foreign trade and customs tariffs; (c) conclude jointly or in parallel treaties and agreements relating to payments relating to foreign trade. ARTICLE 11. 1. With regard to goods originating from or destined for countries third parties, import and excise duties as well as all other taxes, levies or general levies whatsoever, to be collected on the occasion of importation, exportation or transit, are subject to common tariffs comprising the same rates, the collection rules being coordinated. 2. The system of licenses and quotas for imports, exports and transit is common. 3. The High Contracting Parties shall coordinate the legislative and regulatory provisions and the other provisions of public law, of an economic and financial nature, not referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, and concerning the import, export and transit. ARTICLE 12. 1. The High Contracting Parties shall establish by mutual agreement their exchange rate policy between the Netherlands guilder and the Belgian and Luxembourg francs. Likewise, they set by mutual agreement their exchange rate policy with regard to the currencies of third countries. 2. In particular, they shall modify exchange rates only by mutual agreement. ARTICLE 13. The measures which the High Contracting Parties take in the execution of the common and co-ordinated policies provided for in this Treaty must take account of the need to ensure monetary stability and can only result in one of the High Contracting Parties be required to incur losses of reserves incompatible with its responsibility with regard to its currency or, except by prior agreement setting limits, to accept inconvertible currencies or to grant credits. ARTICLE 14. 1. When the vital interests of one of the High Contracting Parties are in danger, the Committee of Ministers may, after consulting the Interparliamentary Consultative Council and the Economic and Social Consultative Council, determine what measures may be taken by derogation from the provisions of this Treaty, for a period which it shall fix at the same time. 2. If, owing to urgency, the opinions provided for in paragraph 1 of this article cannot be requested or obtained in good time, the Committee of Ministers shall, as soon as possible, report to the Interparliamentary Consultative Council and the Economic Advisory Council and social both on the measures taken and on the circumstances which justified them. PART 2. INSTITUTION. ARTICLE 15. The institutions of the Union are: a. the Committee of Ministers; b. the Interparliamentary Advisory Council; vs. the Economic Union Council; d. Commissions and Special Commissions; e. the General Secretariat; f. Common Services; g. the College of Arbitrators; h. the Economic and Social Advisory Council. CHAPTER I. Of the Committee of Ministers. ARTICLE 16. The Committee of Ministers shall see to the application of this Treaty and ensure the achievement of the objectives set therein. It adopts the necessary measures for this purpose under the conditions provided for in this Treaty. ARTICLE 17. 1. Each of the High Contracting Parties shall designate at least three members of the Government to serve on the Committee. 2. Each Government may invite other members of the Government to take part in a specific meeting of the Committee whenever it deems it appropriate. ARTICLE 18. The deliberations of the Committee are acquired unanimously. Each of the High Contracting Parties has one vote. The abstention of a High Contracting Party does not constitute an obstacle to a decision being taken. ARTICLE 19. For the performance of the tasks entrusted to it, the Committee of Ministers may: a) take decisions to determine the procedures for implementing the provisions of this Treaty under the conditions provided for therein. The decisions of the Committee bind the High Contracting Parties; (b) draw up conventions which are submitted to the High Contracting Parties with a view to bringing them into force in accordance with the constitutional rules of each of the High Contracting Parties; c) make recommendations relevant to the functioning of the Union. These recommendations do not bind the High Contracting Parties; d) issue directives to the Council of the Economic Union, to the Commissions and Special Commissions, to the General Secretariat and to the Common Services. ARTICLE 20. 1. The Committee of Ministers shall meet at least once every three months. In case of emergency, it shall meet at the request of the Government of one of the High Contracting Parties. 2. Committee meetings are chaired in turn and for a period of six months by a Belgian, Luxembourg or Dutch member, regardless of the place of the meeting. ARTICLE 21. The Committee may set up Working Groups to which it may delegate some of its powers. These Groups are composed of members of the Committee or other members of the Government of each of the High Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 22. The Committee establishes its rules of procedure. CHAPTER 2. Interparliamentary Advisory Council. ARTICLE 23. The Convention of 5 November 1955 establishing an Interparliamentary Consultative Council of Benelux regulates the composition, competence and working method of the Interparliamentary Consultative Council. ARTICLE 24. The Committee of Ministers acts in the name of the three Governments in the relations which these Governments maintain together with the Consultative Interparliamentary Council insofar as it concerns problems which directly concern the functioning of the Union. CHAPTER 3. Of the Economic Union Council. ARTICLE 25. The Council of the Economic Union has the following mission: a) to coordinate the activity of the Commissions and of the Special Commissions. To this end, he can give them the necessary directives. It transmits to the Committee of Ministers the proposals of the Committees and Special Committees, accompanied, if necessary, by its opinion; b) ensure, as far as he is concerned, the execution of the deliberations of the Committee of Ministers; c) to make proposals to the Committee of Ministers which it deems useful for the functioning of the Union. ARTICLE 26. 1. The Committee of Ministers determines the number of delegates who make up the Council. 2. The Presidency of the Council is assumed in turn by three persons, each designated for this purpose by one of the Governments. The Committee of Ministers determines the modalities of a rotation for the exercise of the presidency. 3. Each Government chooses its other delegates from among its delegation within the Commissions. 4. The Special Commissions are represented at Council meetings whenever the agenda includes questions falling within their remit. ARTICLE 27. 1. The Council shall draw up its rules of procedure which it shall submit to the Committee of Ministers for approval. 2. The Rules provide in particular for the cases in which the Committees may apply directly to the Committee of Ministers. 3. These regulations also provide for the exercise of certain functions of the Council by restricted formations of the Council. CHAPTER 4. Commissions and Special Commissions. ARTICLE 28. The following Commissions are established: Foreign Economic Relations Commission; Monetary and Financial Commission; Industry and Commerce Commission; Committee for Agriculture, Supply and Fisheries; Customs and Tax Commission; Communications Commission; Social Committee. ARTICLE 29. The following Special Commissions are hereby established: Special Commission for the Coordination of Statistics; Special commission for the comparison of the budgets of public and parastatal institutions; Special Commission for Tenders; Special Commission for Public Health; Special commission for the middle classes. ARTICLE 30. The tasks of the Commissions and Special Commissions, each within its field of competence: a) to carry out the deliberations of the Committee of Ministers; they report to the Committee of Ministers through the Economic Union Council; b) to make, through the Economic Union Council, proposals to the Committee of Ministers likely to promote the functioning of the Union; (c) to follow the execution, by the national administrations, of the decisions taken. ARTICLE 31. The Committee of Ministers determines the powers of the Commissions and Special Commissions. It can set up new Commissions and Special Commissions. It may abolish the Special Commissions thus instituted. ARTICLE 32. 1. The Committee of Ministers determines the manner in which each of the Commissions and Special Commissions is composed. 2. Each Government appoints its delegates in accordance with the arrangements to be made by the Committee of Ministers pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article. 3. The Commissions and Special Commissions shall draw up their rules of procedure and submit them to the Economic Union Council for approval. CHAPTER 5. Of the General Secretariat. ARTICLE 33. The seat of the General Secretariat is fixed at Brussels. ARTICLE 34. 1. The management of the General Secretariat is entrusted to a Secretary General of Dutch nationality. 2. The Secretary General is assisted by a Deputy Secretary General of Belgian nationality and a Deputy Secretary General of Luxembourg nationality. 3. The Committee of Ministers appoints and dismisses the Secretary General and the Deputy Secretaries General. It fixes, after consulting the Council of the Economic Union in restricted formation, the scales of their salary, pension and allowances, as well as all the conditions under which they must carry out their functions. ARTICLE 35. 1. Staff members are of Belgian, Luxembourg or Dutch nationality. 2. The Secretary General appoints and dismisses the members of the staff of the General Secretariat, in accordance with the statute provided for in paragraph 3 of this article. 3. The staff regulations, the organizational structure, the scales of salaries, pensions and allowances, as well as all the conditions under which the members of the staff must carry out their duties shall be determined by the Committee of Ministers on a proposal from the Secretary General and after consulting the Council of the Economic Union in restricted formation. ARTICLE 36. 1. The Secretary General shall provide the secretariat for the Committee of Ministers, the Economic Union Council, the Commissions and Special Commissions, and any subordinate bodies; he is responsible for coordinating the activity of these institutions in the administrative field, for establishing, where necessary, the necessary links and for making all suggestions useful for the execution of the project. this Treaty, taking into account the competence of the other institutions of the Union. The services of the Registry of the College of Arbitrators are provided by the Secretary General. 2. The Committee of Ministers may assign other tasks to the Secretary General. ARTICLE 37. 1. The Secretary General shall draw up the draft annual budget of the institutions of the Union and submit it for the approval of the Committee of Ministers with the advice of the Council of the Economic Union. 2. By convention, the High Contracting Parties shall regulate: (a) control of the execution of budgets; (b) the closing of accounts; (c) the granting of the necessary advances; (d) the apportionment among the High Contracting Parties of the excess of expenditure over receipts. 3. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the Interparliamentary Consultative Council or to the Economic and Social Consultative Council. ARTICLE 38. The archives of the General Secretariat are inviolable. ARTICLE 39. The Secretary General enjoys in Belgium privileges and immunities analogous to those accorded to the head of a diplomatic mission accredited in that country. Immunity from jurisdiction may, if necessary, be waived by the Committee of Ministers. CHAPTER 6. Common Services. ARTICLE 40. The Committee of Ministers may set up common services useful to the functioning of the Union; it determines the attributions, the conditions of organization and the operation of these Services. CHAPTER 7. College of Arbitrators. ARTICLE 41. The mission of the Arbitral College shall be to settle any disputes which may arise between the High Contracting Parties with regard to the application of this Treaty and of the conventional provisions relating to its object. ARTICLE 42. 1. The Arbitral College is made up of sections according to the categories of disputes.2. For each section, each of the High Contracting Parties appoints a titular national arbitrator and a substitute national arbitrator. 3. For each dispute, the section is composed of the national arbitrator of each of the two parties to the dispute as well as a person designated in rotation from a list drawn up for this purpose by the Committee of Ministers. This person assumes the presidency of the section. ARTICLE 43. If the President deems that the importance of the questions of law raised in the dispute makes it appropriate, he may, either ex officio or at the request of one of the parties, decide that the section shall be completed by the addition of two arbitrators from the list provided for in Article 42, paragraph 3 of this Treaty. These arbitrators must have the same nationality as the parties to the dispute. ARTICLE 44. When a dispute could not be resolved within the Committee of Ministers, the matter shall be referred to the College of Arbitrators, either by joint request of the parties to the dispute, or by unilateral request from one of them. ARTICLE 45. 1. The College of Arbitrators rules on the basis of respect for the law. Before rendering its award, it may, in any state of the dispute, propose to the agreement of the parties an amicable settlement of the dispute. 2. If the parties agree, the Arbitral College shall decide ex aequo et bono. ARTICLE 46. 1. Awards and amicable settlement proposals are adopted by the Arbitral College by a majority of votes. The awards are final and without appeal. Amicable settlements accepted by the parties have the same effect as awards. 2. Unless otherwise stipulated, the College of Arbitrators may prescribe, when it has gathered sufficient information, the interim measures it deems necessary. ARTICLE 47. 1. Each of the High Contracting Parties may intervene in a dispute between the two other Contracting Parties if it demonstrates an interest in the solution of the dispute; the intervention cannot have any other object than the support of the claims of one of the parties. 2. The intervention does not modify the initial composition of the section dealing with the dispute. ARTICLE 48. By an award, the College of Arbitrators may declare that a decision taken by a judicial authority or that a measure emanating from any other authority of one of the High Contracting Parties is entirely or partially in opposition to the stipulations of this present Treated or with conventional provisions relating to its object. If the internal law of the said Contracting Party does not allow the consequences of this decision or this measure to be erased, the injured State is entitled to equitable reparation. In the absence of agreement between the parties to the dispute, the Arbitral College, at the request of the interested party, determines the nature and the extent of the repair. ARTICLE 49. When the College of Arbitrators is seized of a dispute, the parties refrain from any act likely to compromise the settlement or aggravate the dispute. ARTICLE 50. In the event that one of the parties has not executed an award of the Arbitral College or a precautionary measure prescribed by it, the other party is entitled to refer the matter to the International Court of Justice in application of Article 50. Article 36, paragraph 2 of its Statute, unless the parties to the dispute have recourse by mutual agreement to another mode of settlement. ARTICLE 51. 1. The High Contracting Parties undertake not to submit the disputes referred to in Article 41 to methods of settlement other than those provided for in this Treaty. 2. However, the High Contracting Parties agree to submit disputes also involving the interpretation or application of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community or of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community to the Court of Justice established by the said Treaties. Insofar as the Court of Justice declares itself incompetent to settle the dispute, the Arbitral College, provided for in Article 15 of this Treaty, is competent. ARTICLE 52. 1. The Committee of Ministers may ask the College of Arbitrators for advisory opinions on questions of law relating to the provisions of this Treaty and to the conventional provisions relating to its subject. 2. Opinions are issued by a majority vote of the Section Presidents sitting together. ARTICLE 53. The status of the College of Arbitrators is determined by decision of the Committee of Ministers. CHAPTER 8. Economic and Social Advisory Council. ARTICLE 54. 1. The Economic and Social Consultative Council shall draw up opinions on the subject of problems which directly concern the functioning of the Union, at the request of the Committee of Ministers, which shall provide it with the necessary information for this purpose. He is also entitled to present, on its own initiative, opinions on these problems to the Committee of Ministers. 2. The Consultative Council is composed of a maximum of 27 members and 27 alternate members, one third of whom may be appointed by each High Contracting Party. The members and alternate members are appointed in agreement with the national body or bodies constituting the highest level of economic and social organization. 3. The Advisory Board appoints its Chairman from among its members. 4. The Advisory Council draws up, by a simple majority of the votes cast, its rules of procedure which it submits to the Committee of Ministers for approval. PART 3. PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO CERTAIN ASPECTS OF THE ECONOMIC UNION. CHAPTER 1. National treatment, free movement and the exercise of professional economic activities. ARTICLE 55. By agreement between the High Contracting Parties, the conditions to which may be subject, for reasons relating to public order, security or public health, or good morals, the entry, exit , movement, residence, establishment and removal of nationals of a High Contracting Party from the territory of another Contracting Party. ARTICLE 56. The treatment of nationals of a High Contracting Party in the territory of another Contracting Party, with regard to the legal and judicial protection of their person, their rights and their interests, is determined, insofar as necessary, by agreement between the High Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 57. In so far as the matter of rents is regulated by the legislative or administrative authorities, the nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall enjoy, in the territory of the other Contracting Parties, the treatment accorded to nationals. ARTICLE 58. 1. The operations of companies incorporated in accordance with the legislation of a High Contracting Party, when they are exercised in the territory of another Contracting Party either directly or through branches or agencies, are subject to the law of the latter. 2. These operations cannot be subject to stricter conditions than those applied to national companies. In the territory of a High Contracting Party, companies of another Contracting Party may not, however, have more rights than national companies of the corresponding type. 3. In the sectors of insurance, capitalization and mortgage loans, the High Contracting Parties may derogate from paragraph 2 of this article provided that these derogations essentially aim at the protection of the insured, subscribers or injured parties. These derogations are regulated by agreement. 4. Companies within the meaning of this article means companies governed by civil or commercial law, including cooperative societies and other legal persons governed by private law. However, for the application of this article, legal persons governed by private law which do not pursue profit-making purposes shall only be considered as companies with regard to their activity in the banking, insurance, capitalization and mortgage loans. The Luxembourg agricultural associations are also considered to be companies. ARTICLE 59. 1. Companies incorporated in accordance with the legislation of a High Contracting Party and having their fiscal domicile in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties shall not be subject, in the territory of the other Contracting Parties, to whether or not they have one or more branches or agencies, at a higher tax burden than that borne by similar national companies. 2. The companies within the meaning of paragraph 1 of this article are those defined in article 58 of this Treaty. ARTICLE 60. The treatment of nationals of the High Contracting Parties with regard to the exercise of salaried employment with a private employer as well as the benefit of social security shall be determined by agreement between the High Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 61. 1. By derogation from Article 2, paragraph 2, sub b), of this Treaty, each of the High Contracting Parties retains the right to reserve to its nationals the exercise of the following economic and professional activities: a) public functions, offices or employment , including the duties of notary, solicitor and bailiff; (b) the legal profession; c) the medical and paramedical professions in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg; (d) inland fishing, pilotage and inland port services. 2. The provisions of Article 2, paragraph 2, sub b), of this Treaty shall not modify the national provisions relating to the diplomas required for the exercise of certain professions. ARTICLE 62. In the field of tenders, no discrimination, in any form whatsoever, may be applied by the public authorities of a High Contracting Party in favor of its national products or of its nationals and to the detriment of the products or nationals of other Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 63. For the application of article 62 of the present Treaty, it is necessary to understand by: A. Tenders: all tenders for works and all purchases of goods by the public authorities for their own needs, whatever the mode of procurement of the order; B. Public authorities: a) State services; b) regional and local authorities in Belgium and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg as well as subordinate authorities in the Netherlands; c) insofar as the State exercises real action over their tenders: parastatal bodies in Belgium and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg as well as semi-official bodies in the Netherlands. CHAPTER 2. Policy coordination. ARTICLE 64. 1. In the field of investments, the Committee of Ministers shall decide on the advisability of adopting general or specific objectives of a coordinated investment policy applicable either to the economy as a whole or to a or more economic sectors. 2. When establishing such objectives, the Committee of Ministers shall at the same time determine the methods to be employed with a view to achieving the co-ordinated policy; these methods may involve harmonization of investment legislation. ARTICLE 65. In the field of agricultural policy, the High Contracting Parties undertake: (a) to systematically encourage technical progress; (b) to take measures capable of harmonizing the production and marketing of agricultural products, of assuring the farmers and agricultural workers of the three countries of a security of existence in enterprises which are well run and justified from the economic point of view, and as well as to develop productivity and keep agricultural costs as low as possible in order to be able to meet domestic needs as much as possible, and to acquire as strong a position as possible on external markets. ARTICLE 66. 1. In the event that one of the High Contracting Parties finds that the situation develops in a sector of agriculture, food supply or fishing in such a way that there is reason to fear a state of serious crisis , the Committee of Ministers may, after consulting the Interparliamentary Consultative Council and the Economic and Social Consultative Council, take decisions of such a nature as to avoid such a state of crisis or to remedy it. These decisions may temporarily derogate from the provisions of this Treaty. 2. If, owing to urgency, the opinions provided for in paragraph 1 of this article cannot be requested or obtained in good time, the Committee of Ministers shall, as soon as possible, report to the Interparliamentary Consultative Council and to the Economic and Social Advisory Council both on the measures taken and on the circumstances which justified them. ARTICLE 67. In applying the provisions of Article 66 of this Treaty, the High Contracting Parties shall take into account the particular situation of Luxembourg agriculture so long as it remains determined by more unfavorable natural factors of production. ARTICLE 68. In the field of transport, the coordinated policy referred to in Article 8 of this Treaty shall be based on the basic principles hereafter: (a) the harmonization of the conditions of competition between the various modes of inland transport, in the territory of each of the High Contracting Parties, by means of the abolition of the charges imposed and the advantages granted to transport undertakings; b) the profitability of public and private transport companies. ARTICLE 69. The High Contracting Parties undertake to direct their common policy in such a way as to encourage the harmonious development and active collaboration of their maritime ports. ARTICLE 70. In the field of social policy, the High Contracting Parties shall pursue, in consultation with the professional organizations, a co-ordinated policy tending to the development of social progress as well as the establishment of social provisions ensuring their populations maximum protection. and social security. ARTICLE 71. In the monetary and payment fields, the High Contracting Parties shall associate the Issuing Institutions in the development of coordinated and common policies, in particular by ensuring their adequate representation within the Monetary and Financial Commission. CHAPTER 3. Economic and financial relations with foreign countries. ARTICLE 72. 1. The Committee of Ministers determines the common commercial policy in economic relations with foreign countries and adopts the detailed rules for its implementation. 2. In particular, it determines the common import and export quotas. ARTICLE 73. It is for the Committee of Ministers to decide on the advisability of: a) any negotiation with third countries with a view to the conclusion of treaties and agreements concerning foreign trade, related payments and customs tariffs; (b) joint participation in international conferences and organizations of an economic nature. ARTICLE 74. 1. The negotiations provided for in article 73 of this Treaty shall be conducted by a joint delegation. The Committee of Ministers determines its composition and appoints its Chairman. 2. The Committee of Ministers shall lay down the instructions to be followed by the joint delegation. The President assumes responsibility for the negotiation vis-à-vis the Committee of Ministers. ARTICLE 75. The High Contracting Parties shall consult together on the subject of the measures which they propose to take in order to promote exports. They jointly ensure that these measures do not distort, on foreign markets, the conditions of competition between goods from their territories. ARTICLE 76. 1. The High Contracting Parties shall afford each other mutual assistance for the application of legislative or regulatory provisions concerning the import, export and transit of goods as well as the payments relating thereto, as well as for the prevention and repression of offences. 2. The procedures for implementing the provisions of paragraph 1 of this article shall be determined by agreement between the High Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 77. If the common commercial and financial relations with certain countries or groups of third countries involve the granting of credits or the acceptance of inconvertible currencies, the burden thereof shall be shared between the High Contracting Parties according to methods to be agreed. CHAPTER 4. Customs and fiscal matters. ARTICLE 78. 1. Import and excise duties as well as all other taxes, duties and levies of any kind levied on the occasion of importation, exportation and transit shall be determined by mutual agreement or by the parties. multilateral conventions to which the High Contracting Parties are parties. 2. The methods of collection of the taxes referred to in paragraph 1 of this article are determined at the same time as the common tariffs. ARTICLE 79. There is hereby instituted, with regard to taxes on turnover, transmission tax and similar taxes, a system which ensures the free movement provided for in Articles 3 to 5 of this Treaty. ARTICLE 80. 1. Common rates are determined with regard to excise duties as well as remuneration for the guarantee of articles of precious metals, the rules of collection being coordinated. 2. Natural wines non-sparkling natives made using fresh grapes are not subject to excise duty. ARTICLE 81. 1. If the equivalence of the specific rates stipulated for duties, taxes, levies and generally any levies which are unified is broken following a realignment of the monetary parities occurring within the European Monetary System, that (these) of the High Contracting Parties whose currency has fallen in value against that of another High Contracting Party(ies) undertake(s), unless has been agreed otherwise in advance, to increase the rates of the said tariffs expressed in his/their currency so as to temporarily restore the equivalence. The High Contracting Party(ies) will take the necessary measures at the national level so that this increase comes into force within two months from the day of the decision to realign the parities. 2. By way of derogation from the first paragraph, the High Contracting Parties undertake to re-establish provisionally the equivalence between the rates of excise duty on fermented fruit drinks by carrying out an approximation on both sides, as regards relates to the total amount of excise duty and additional excise duty as well as in respect of additional excise duty, each for half of the difference resulting from the change in parity, it being understood that the rate of excise duty will be maintained at the level of 600 F/hl. The High Contracting Parties shall take the necessary measures so that these adjustments enter into force within two months from the date of the decision to realign the parities. 3. The High Contracting Parties shall consult together immediately from the date of the decision to realign the parities in the European Monetary System in order to definitively establish in each of their currencies the new common rates of duties, taxes, levies and levies referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article. ARTICLE 82. The duties, taxes, levies and levies referred to in Articles 11, 78, 79 and 80 of this Treaty shall be fixed in the currency having legal tender in the country where the claim arose. ARTICLE 83. 1. The High Contracting Parties agree mutual assistance in all matters relating to the collection and recovery of duties, taxes, levies and levies referred to in Articles 11, 78, 79 and 80 of this Treaty, as well as in the prevention and repression of offences. 2. The procedures for implementing the provision of paragraph 1 of this article shall be determined by agreement between the High Contracting Parties. ARTICLE 84. The High Contracting Parties shall take the necessary measures to ensure the devolution of the proceeds of the duties, taxes, charges or levies referred to in Articles 11, 78, 79 and 80 of this Treaty. CHAPTER 5. Free movement of transport services. ARTICLE 85. The conditions of admission to national transport by road or waterway of nationals of the High Contracting Parties not established in the territory in which they wish to provide their services, shall be determined by the Committee of Ministers. ARTICLE 86. 1. Road transport of goods and irregular road transport of passengers between the territories of the High Contracting Parties shall be subject to common rules of execution and control laid down by the Committee of Ministers. With a view to promoting the harmonious development of the said transport of goods, the Committee of Ministers shall also adopt all useful measures, in particular with regard to price formation. 2. The arrangements for regular road passenger transport between the territories of the High Contracting Parties shall be determined by the Committee of Ministers. ARTICLE 87. 1. In matters of international road transport, with the exception of irregular passenger transport involving traffic departing from the territory of a High Contracting Party to a third country, the Committee of Ministers shall lay down the conditions for the admission of nationals of the High Contracting Parties not established in the territory of that High Contracting Party. 2. With regard to irregular road transport of passengers departing from the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties to a third country, the Committee of Ministers lays down the rules for the execution and control of such transport. ARTICLE 88. In the matter of transport by road or by inland waterway carried out by nationals of the High Contracting Parties, each of these shall ensure to persons not established in its territory a regime at least as favorable as compared with persons established there. ci applied upon entry into force of this Treaty. ARTICLE 89. In the matter of air transport, each of the High Contracting Parties shall pursue, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 5 of this Treaty, a liberal policy for the granting to the other Contracting Parties of commercial air rights with a view to operation of scheduled international air services crossing or within its territory. CHAPTER 6. Statistics. ARTICLE 90. The High Contracting Parties undertake to draw up the statistics which are essential for obtaining comparable data, enabling the economic, financial and social situation of their countries to be assessed, and to communicate the said statistics to each other. ARTICLE 91. None of the High Contracting Parties shall be obliged to communicate information meeting the qualification set out in Article 90 of this Treaty in violation of national provisions attributing a confidential nature to certain data which, as a result of the reduced number of declarants , would make it possible to discover the situation of an individual person, company or institution. ARTICLE 92. The Committee of Ministers may decide that statistical statements shall be made in collaboration concerning the goods and the means of transport of goods which cross the common frontiers of the High Contracting Parties. PART 4. FINAL PROVISIONS. ARTICLE 93. 1. The application of this Treaty shall be limited to the territories of the High Contracting Parties in Europe. 2. The Kingdom of the Netherlands reserves the right to insert in the treaties and agreements referred to in Article 10 of this Treaty of the clauses concerning Surinam, the Netherlands Antilles and Netherlands New Guinea. 3. The Kingdom of Belgium reserves the right to insert in the said treaties and agreements, clauses concerning the Belgian Congo and Ruanda-Urundi. ARTICLE 94. 1. The provisions of this Treaty shall not preclude the existence and the possible development of the economic union existing between the Kingdom of Belgium and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg insofar as the objectives of this Union are not achieved under this Treaty. 2. The Belgian and Luxembourg Governments shall carry out an examination of all the conventions and agreements constituting the Economic Union between them and shall notify the Netherlands Government of the result of this examination before adopting the provisions which they may agree. ARTICLE 95. 1. The Union shall enjoy in the territory of each of the High Contracting Parties the immunities recognized to foreign States. 2. To the extent granted to national civil persons, the Union shall enjoy, in the territory of each of the High Contracting Parties, the legal capacity necessary to exercise its functions and achieve its aims; it may in particular acquire and alienate immovable and movable property and be a party to legal proceedings. The Union is represented for this purpose by the Secretary General. 3. In the event of a conflict of jurisdiction between the courts of the High Contracting Parties with regard to a dispute to which the Union is a party, the court within whose jurisdiction the General Secretariat has its headquarters shall have exclusive jurisdiction. ARTICLE 96. French and Dutch are the official languages of the institutions of the Union. ARTICLE 97. The full application of the provisions of this Treaty takes effect from the entry into force of the Treaty insofar as the transitional Convention does not derogate therefrom. ARTICLE 98. The Transitional Agreement and the Implementation Protocol form an integral part of this Treaty. ARTICLE 99. 1. This Treaty is concluded for a period of fifty years. 2. It shall thereafter remain in force for successive periods of ten years, unless one of the High Parties Contracting Parties notifies the other Contracting Parties, one year before the expiry of the current period, of its intention to terminate it. ARTICLE 100. This Treaty shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Belgian Government, which shall transmit them to the General Secretariat as soon as this Treaty comes into force. It shall enter into force on the first day of the third month following the deposit of the third instrument of ratification. In witness whereof, the Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Treaty and have affixed their seal thereto. Done at The Hague on February 3, 1958, in triplicate, in the French and Dutch languages, both texts being equally authentic.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
