MainText:
COMPREHENSIVE AND PROGRESSIVE AGREEMENT FOR TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP PREAMBLE The Parties to this Agreement, resolving to : REAFFIRM the matters embodied in the preamble to the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, done at Auckland on 4 February 2016 (hereinafter referred to as "the TPP"); REALISE expeditiously the benefits of the TPP through this Agreement and their strategic and economic significance; CONTRIBUTE to maintaining open markets, increasing world trade, and creating new economic opportunities for people of all incomes and economic backgrounds; PROMOTE further regional economic integration and cooperation between them; ENHANCE opportunities for the acceleration of regional trade liberalisation and investment; REAFFIRM the importance of promoting corporate social responsibility, cultural identity and diversity, environmental protection and conservation, gender equality, indigenous rights, labour rights, inclusive trade, sustainable development and traditional knowledge, as well as the importance of preserving their right to regulate in the public interest; and WELCOME the accession of other States or separate customs territories to this Agreement, HAVE AGREED as follows : ARTICLE 1. Incorporation of the Trans-pacific Partnership Agreement 1. The Parties hereby agree that, under the terms of this Agreement, the provisions of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, done at Auckland on 4 February 2016 ("the TPP") are incorporated, by reference, into and made part of this Agreement mutatis mutandis, except for Article 30.4 (Accession), Article 30.5 (Entry into Force), Article 30.6 (Withdrawal) and Article 30.8 (Authentic Texts).(1) 2. For the purposes of this Agreement, references to the date of signature in the TPP shall mean the date of signature of this Agreement. 3. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and the TPP, when the latter is in force, this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. (1) For greater certainty, nothing in this Agreement shall provide any rights to any non-Party to this Agreement. ARTICLE 2. Suspension of the Application of Certain Provisions Upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall suspend the application of the provisions set out in the Annex to this Agreement, until the Parties agree to end suspension of one or more of these provisions. (2) (2) For greater certainty, any agreement by the Parties to end a suspension shall only apply to a Party upon the completion of that Party's applicable legal procedures. ARTICLE 3. Entry Into Force 1. This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which at least six or at least 50 per cent of the number of signatories to this Agreement, whichever is smaller, have notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of their applicable legal procedures. 2. For any signatory to this Agreement for which this Agreement has not entered into force under paragraph 1, this Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which that signatory has notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of its applicable legal procedures. ARTICLE 4. Withdrawal 1. Any Party may withdraw from this Agreement by providing written notice of withdrawal to the Depositary. A withdrawing Party shall simultaneously notify the other Parties of its withdrawal through the overall contact points designated under Article 27.5 (Contact Points) of the TPP. 2. A withdrawal shall take effect six months after a Party provides written notice to the Depositary under paragraph 1, unless the Parties agree on a different period. If a Party withdraws, this Agreement shall remain in force for the remaining Parties. ARTICLE 5. Accession After the date of entry into force of this Agreement, any State or separate customs territory may accede to this Agreement, subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed between the Parties and that State or separate customs territory. ARTICLE 6. Review of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-pacific Partnership Further to Article 27.2 (Functions of the Commission) of the TPP, if the entry into force of the TPP is imminent or if the TPP is unlikely to enter into force, the Parties shall, on request of a Party, review the operation of this Agreement so as to consider any amendment to this Agreement and any related matters. ARTICLE 7. Authentic Texts The English, Spanish and French texts of this Agreement are equally authentic. In the event of any divergence between those texts, the English text shall prevail. In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement. DONE at Santiago the eighth day of March, two thousand and eighteen, in the English, French and Spanish languages.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX II Schedule of Brunei Darussalam – 14 – paragraph 3: the phrase "after the signature of this Agreement" (5) 11. ANNEX IV Schedule of Malaysia – 3 and 4 – Scope of Non-Conforming Activities (hereinafter referred to as the "Scope"): all references to the phrase "after signature of this Agreement" (6) (3) To assist with the understanding of this Annex, the Parties have used a colon to indicate the specific portion(s) of a provision that has been suspended. (4) The Parties agree that negotiations referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 15.24 (Further Negotiations) shall commence no earlier than five years after entry into force of this Agreement, unless the Parties agree otherwise. Such negotiations shall commence at the request of a Party. (5) As a result of the suspension, the Parties agree that the phrase "after the signature of this Agreement" shall refer to after the entry into force of this Agreement for Brunei Darussalam. Therefore, the Parties understand that the reference to "Any non-conforming measure adopted or maintained" in this paragraph shall mean any non-conforming measure adopted or maintained after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Brunei Darussalam. (6) As a result of the suspension, the Parties agree that the phrase "after signature of this Agreement" shall refer to after the entry into force of this Agreement for Malaysia. Therefore, the Parties understand that the references in the Scope to: (a) "the first year" shall be the first one year period; (b) "the second and third years" shall be the second and third one year periods; (c) "the fourth year" shall be the fourth one year period; (d) "the fifth year" shall be the fifth one year period; and (e) "the sixth year" shall be the sixth one year period, counted from the date of entry into force of this Agreement for Malaysia.
