MainText:
c("eec - greece association agreement", "customs union", "247", "219", "inactive", "gatt art. xxiv", "1961-07-09", "1962-11-01", "1961-11-02", "1981-01-01", "bel", "deu", "fra", "grc", "ita", "lux", "nld", "plurilateral", "europe", "yes", "no", "en", "http://sul-derivatives.stanford.edu/derivative?csnid=90750087&mediatype=application/pdf", "agreement establishing an association between the european economic community and greece preamble his majesty the king of the belgians, the president of the federal republic of germany, the president of the french republic, the president of the italian republic, her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg, her majesty the queen of the netherlands, the council of the european economic community, of the one part, and his majesty the king of the hellenes, of the other part, determined to establish ever closer bonds between the greek people and the peoples brought together in the european economic community; resolved to ensure a continuous improvement in living conditions in greece and in the european economic community through accelerated economic progress and the harmonious expansion of trade, and to reduce the disparity between the greek economy and the economies of the member states of the community; mindful of the special problems presented by the development of the greek economy; recognizing that the support given by the european economic community to the efforts of the greek people to improve their standard of living will facilitate the accession of greece to the community at a later date; resolved to preserve and strengthen peace and liberty by joint pursuit of the ideals underlying the treaty establishing the european economic community, have decided to conclude an agreement establishing an association between the european economic community and greece in accordance with article 238 of the treaty establishing the european economic community, and to this end have designated as their plenipotentiaries: his majesty the king of the belgians: mr paul-henri spaak, deputy prime minister and minister for foreign affairs; the president of the federal republic of germany: dr gebhard seelos, ambassador to athens; the president of the french republic: mr maurice couve de murville, ministe.r for foreign affairs; the president of the italian republic: mr emilio colombo, minister for industry and commerce; her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg: mr eugene schaus, vice-president of the government and minister for foreign affairs; her majesty the queen of the netherlands: dr h. r. van houten, secretary of state for foreign affairs; the council of the european economic community: prof. dr ludwig erhard, president-in-office of the council of the european economic community, vice-chancellor and minister for economic affairs of the federal republic of germany; his majesty the king of the hellenes: mr p. kanellopoulos, vice-president of the council of ministers; mr. a. protopapadakis, minister for coordination; mr e. averof-to,ssizza, minister for foreign affairs; who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed as follows:", "by this agreement an association is established between the european economic community and greece.", "1. the aim of this agreement of association is to promote the continuous and balanced strengthening of trade and economic relations between the parties, while taking full account of the need to ensure an accelerated development of the greek economy and to improve the level of employment and the living conditions of the greek people.2. in order to attain the objectives set out in paragraph 1, the association shall entail, as provided in this agreement and in accordance with the timetable set out therein: '(a) the establishment of a customs union;(b) the promotion of joint measures by the parties and harmonization of their policies in the fields men- tioned in this agreement;(c) the making available to the greek economy, within the framework of the financial protocol to this agreement, of resources which will assist it to develop at a higher rate.", "to ensure the implementation and progressive de- velopment of the association, the contracting parties shall meet in a council of association, which shall act within the powers conferred upon it by this agreement.", "the contracting parties shall take all appropriate mea- sures, whether general or particular, to ensure the ful- filment of the obligations arising out of this agreement.hey shall refrain from any measure which could jeopardize the attainment of the objectives of this agreement.", "1. within the field of application of this agreement and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein, the contracting parties shall not practise or tolerate any discrimination on grounds of nationality to the prejudice of natural persons who are nationals of one of the contracting parties and are established in the territory of another contracting party. 2. companies or firms formed under the law of a member state of the community or of greece and having their registered office, central administration or principal place of business in the territory of one of the contracting parties shall, for the purposes of paragraph 1; be treated as natural persons. companies or firms means companies or firms constituted under civil or commercial law, including cooperative societies, and other legal persons governed by public or private law, save for those which are nonprofit-making. 3. the council of association shall, where necessary, take the appropriate decisions to bring to an end the discrimination referred to in this article.free movement of goods", "the association shall be based upon a customs union which, save as otherwise provided in this agreement, shall cover all trade in goods and which shall involve the prohibition between member states of the community and greece of customs duties on imports and exports and of all charges having equivalent effect, and the adoption by greece of the common customs tariff of the community in its relations with third countries. save as otherwise provided in this agreement, the transitional period for attainment of the customs union shall be 12 years.", "1 ARTICLE i, section i, and chapter ii of this title shall apply: (a) to goods produced in member states of the community or in greece, including those wholly or partially obtained or produced from products coming from third countries which are in free circulation in member states or in greece; (b) to goods coming from third countries which are in free circulation in member states or in greece. 2. products coming from third countries shall be considered to be in free circulation in member states or in greece if the import formalities have been complied with and any customs duties or charges having equivalent effect which are payable have been levied in the member states or in greece, and if they have not benefited from a total or partial drawback of such duties or charges.", "1 ARTICLE i, section i, and chapter ii of this title shall likewise apply to goods obtained or produced in the member states of the community or in greece, in the manufacture of which were used products coming from third countries and not in free circulation either .. in the community or in greece. these .provisions shall, however, apply to those goods only if the exporting state charges a levy, the rate of which is a percentage of the duties laid down in the common customs tariff for third country products used in their manufacture. this percentage, fixed by the council of association for each of such periods as it may determine, shall be based on the tariff reduction granted on the goods in the importing state. the council of association shall also lay down the rules for the levy, taking into account the relevant rules in force in trade between member states. 2. should the rules in question be amended in the trade between the member states, the council of association would determine the new provisions applicable between the contracting parties.", "the contracting parties shall determine the methods of administrative cooperation to be used in implementing articles 7 and 8, taking into account the methods laid down by the community with regard to trade between member states.", "1. ifeither contracting party considers that differences arising from the application to imports of customs duties, quantitative restrictions or any measures having equivalent effect, or from any other measure of commercial policy, threaten to deflect trade or to cause economic difficulties in its territory, it shall bring the matter before the council of association, which may, if necessary, recommend appropriate methods for avoiding any harm liable to result therefrom. 2. where deflections occur or economic difficulties arise and the party concerned considers that they call for immediate action, that party may itself take the necessary protective measures, and shall notify the council of association thereof without delay; the council of association may decide whether the party concerned shall amend or abolish those measures. 3. in the choice of such measures preference shall be given to those which least disturb the operation of this agreement and the normal development of trade. 4. before the end of the first year after the entry into fon;e of this agreement, however, each contracting party may draw up a list of goods which fall within the category mentioned in article 7 ( 1) (b) and in relation to which it considers that, by reason of disparities in customs duties, deflection of trade is likely to occur, so that it cannot immediately apply chapter i, section i or chapter ii of this title. these lists shall be forwarded to the council of association which shall review them periodically with a view to their progressive abolition.", "during the transitional period laid down in article 6, the contracting parties shall, in so far as may be necessary for the proper functioning of the association, take steps to approximate their provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in respect of customs matters, taking into account the approximations already effected by member states of the community.", "the contracting parties shall refrain from introducing between themselves any new customs duties on imports or exports or any charges having equivalent effect, and from increasing those whic!i they already apply in their trade with each other at the date of entry into force of this agreement.", "customs duties on imports and charges having equivalent effect in force between member state~ of the community and greece shall be progressively abolished in accordance with articles 14 and 15.", "1. for each product, the basic duty on which member states of the community are to apply the successive reductions shall be the duty applied on 1 january 1957, in conformity with article 14 (1) of the treaty establishing the community. 2. for each product, the basic duty on which greece is to apply the successive reductions shall be the duty actually applied in respect of member states at the date of entry into force of this agreement. 3. the timetable for the reductions to be effected by the contracting parties shall be as follows: the first reductions shall be made on the entry into force of this agreement. the second. third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh reductions shall be made at intervals of 18 months thereafter. the eighth and subsequent reductions shall. be made each year thereafter. 4. each reduction shall be made by lowering the basic duty on each product by 10 % . 5. in no case, however, shall the customs duties or charges having equivalent effect which member states apply in respect of greece be lower than those which they apply between themselves.", "1. notwithstanding article 6 and article 14 (3) and (4), greece shall, in respect of the tariff headings listed in annex i to this agreement for which an extended transitional period appears necessary, reduce as follows, over a transitional period of 22 years, the basic duties in respect of member states of the community: a reduction of 5 % on each duty shall be applied on the entry into force of this agreement. three further reductions, each of 5 %, shall be made at intervals of 30 months thereafter. the duties thus reduced shall constitute the basic duties on which the subsequent reductions are to be made from the end of the 10th year, in accordance with the timetable and conditions laid down in article 14 (3) and (4). 2. greece may, during the first two years of application of this agreement, and up to the equivalent of 3 % by value of its imports from the community in 1958, amend the list in annex i; however, the total value of that list at 1958 prices shall not be exceed~d. the reductions of duty on products initially subject to the tariff reductions in article 14 and subsequently transferred to the list in annex i shall be provisionally maintained. as regards products initially included in that list and subsequently removed therefrom, greece shall apply immediately the tariff reductions already made pursuant to article 14.", "1. irrespective·of the provisions of articles 14 and 15, a contracting party may suspend in whole or in part the collection of duties applied by it to products imported from the other contracting party; the latter shall be informed of such measures. 2. each contracting party declares its readiness to reduce its customs duties in trade with the other contracting party more rapidly than is provided for in articles 14 and 15 if its general economic situation and the situation of the economic sector concerned so permit. the council of association shall make recommendations to this end.", "1. articles 12 to 16 shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature. 2. on the entry into force of this agreement the member states of the community and greece shall inform the council of association of their customs duties of a fiscal nature. 3. the member states and greece shall retain the right to substitute for these customs duties of a fiscal nature an internal tax which complies with the provisions of article 53. 4. if the council of association finds that substitution for any customs duty of a fiscal nature meets with serious difficulties in greece, it shall authorize that country to retain the duty on condition that it shall abolish it not later than six years after the entry into force of this agreement. such authorization must be requested within two months of the date of entry into force of this agreement. greece may provisionally continue to apply such a duty until a decision has been taken by the council of association.", "1. notwithstanding articles 6, 12 and 14, and with a view to promoting the creation of new activities contributing to the country's economic development and improving the level of employment and living conditions of the greek people, greece may, during the transitional period laid down in article 6, reintroduce, increase or impose customs duties on imports. these measures may be taken on condition that they are necessary for protecting and for promoting the development of a processing industry which did not exist in greece at the date of entry into force of this agreement. they shall be applied only in respect of a specific branch of production. 2. tariff measures of the kind described in paragraph 1 shall not, for any of the tariff headings which they affect, raise the duty on imports from the community to more than 25 % . ad valorem. tariff measures taken pursuant to this article must not affect imports of a value exceeding in aggregate 10 % of greek imports from the community in 1958. for each of the products affected by such tariff measures the amount which is to be imputed to the aggregate value of 10 % shall be based on imports of that product from the community in 1958. unless the council of association decides otherwise, such measures shall not apply for more than nine years. 3. greece shall notify the council of association of the measures which it proposes to take; the council may make appropriate recommendations in respect thereof if the rules and conditions set out in paragraph 1 are not complied with. 4. on expiration of the period of validity of each of the measures· taken pursuant to this article, the duty applied shall be abolished if no such duty previously existed, or reduced to its former level if an existing duty had been increased. in the latter event the duty shall again become subject to the rules for tariff reductions which were applicable to it. it shall be abolished by the end of the transitional period laid down in article 15 at the latest. greece may suspend the application ofarticle 20 during the period of validity of each of the measures taken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs, and in respect of the products affected by these measures. the common customs tariff duties in respect of the products affected shall, however, be applied in full by the date on which the duties against member states are abolished in respect of those products. 5. ' the council of association may decide that the measures open to greece under paragraph 1 may: (a) be extended beyond the transitional period laid down in article 6; (b) include tariff measures which go beyond the limit of 10 % laid down in paragraph 2 of this article; (c) include the option of reintroducing quotas, instead of increasing or imposing duties, provided that the quota is fixed at not less than 60 % of imports of \\ the goods in question from member states of the community in the preceding year. the value of imports from member states, in 1958, of the products affected by these quota measures shall be imputed to the aggregate value mentioned in paragraph 2 of this article. the council of association shall lay down the rules for such measures and the conditions for their abolition. 6. tariff measures taken by greece pursuant to the above provisions shall in no case have the effect of raising the duties on greek imports from member states above the level of the duties on greek imports from third countries. 7. the provisions of this article shall not apply to the products listed in annex i to this agreement.", "the member states of the community and greece shall, at the latest four years after the date of entry into force of this agreement, abolish between themselves customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect.adoption by greece of the common customs tariff", "1. the greek customs tariff shall be aligned on the common customs tariff during the transitional period laid down in article 6 on the basis of the duties actually applied by greece in respect of third countries at the date of entry into force of this agreement, and in accordance with the following rules: (a) in the case of tariff headings on which the duties actually applied by greece at the date of entry into force of this agreement do not differ by more than 15 % either way from the duties in the common customs tariff, the latter duties shall be applied from the date of the third reduction of customs duties provided for in article 14; (b) in any other case greece shall,· as from the same date, apply duties reducing by 30 % the difference between the duty actually applied at the date of entry into force of this agreement and the duty in the common customs tariff; (c) this difference shall be reduced by a further 30 % on the occasion of the sixth reduction of customs duties provided for in article 14; (d) the common customs tariff shall be applied in its entirety when the 10th reduction of customs duties provided for in article 14 is applied. 2. notwithstanding paragraph 1 greece shall, for the products listed in annex i to this agreement, align its ' customs tariff during the transitional period laid down in article 15, in a,ccordance with the following rules: (a) seven and a half years after the date of the entry into force of this agreement, reduce by not less than 20 % the difference between the duties actually applied at that date and the duties in the common customs tariff; (b) in the case of· tariff headings on which the duties resulting from the application of subparagraph (a) of this paragraph do not differ by more than 15 % either way from the duties in the common customs tariff, the latter duties shall be applied from the beginning of the 14th year; in any other case greece shall, as from the same date, apply duties reducing by 30 % the difference between the duties resulting from the application of subparagraph (a) and the duties in the common customs tariff; this difference shall be reduced by a further 30 % at the beginning of the 18th year; the common customs tariff shall be applied in its entirety at the end of the 22nd year. 3. in the case of particular products making·up not more than 5 % of the total value of its imports in 1958, greece may, after consultation in the council of association, defer until the end of the transitional period laid down in article 15 the reductions of duties in respect of third countries laid down in the foregoing paragraphs. in the case of particular products making up not more than 3 % of the total value of its imports in 1958, greece may, after consultation in the council of association, retain, after expiry of the transitional period laid down in article 15, customs duties in respect of third countries which are higher than those in the common customs tariff. retention of a customs duty higher than that in the common customs tariff must not, however, prejudice the free movement of goods within the association. in the event of an accelerated alignment of its customs tariff with the common customs tariff, greece hereby undertakes to make no substantial change in the scope of the procedures of this agreement and to take into account community practice in this field. as regards the products listed in annex i, no such acceleration may take place before the end of the 12th year from the entry into force of this agreement, unless prior authorization has been given by the council of association. 4. as regards duties which have been authorized pursuant to article 17 ( 4), greece need not apply the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article. on expiry of the authorization, greece shall apply the duties provided for therein.", "1. to facilitate the importation of particular goods from countries with which greece has concluded bilateral trade agreements, greece may, with the prior authorization of the council of association, grant tariff quotas at reduced or zero rates of duty, if the functioning of the agreements with those countries is substantially affected by the application of this agreement. 2. in no case may the duty under a tariff quota be lower than that applied in practice by greece on imports from the community.", "quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall, without prejudice to the following provisions, be prohibited between the contracting parties.", "1. the contracting parties shall refrain from introducing between themselves any new quantitative restrictions on imports or measures having equivalent effect. this obligation shall however apply only: (a) in respect of member states of the community, to the degree of liberalization which they have consolidated between themselves; (b) in respect of greece, to 60 % of its imports on private account from member states in the reference year 1958. the percentage shall be increased to 75 % and 80 % of the abovementioned imports five and 10 years respectively after the date of entry into force of this agreement. on the latter date greece will endeavour to attain a higher degree of liberalization, which shall be consolidated in relation to member states. 2. on the entry into force of this agreement, member states shall forward to greece the liberalization lists which they have consolidated between themselves; these lists shall also be consolidated in relation to greece. 3. one year after the date of entry into force of this agreement greece shall supply a list of liberalized products to the commission of the community. this list shall be consolidated in respect of the member states. at the end of the fifth and 10th years greece shall supply the commission with further lists of products which are to be consolidated in respect of the member states. 4. greece may reintroduce quantitative restrictions on imports of products which have been liberalized but not consolidated pursuant to this article. however, on reintroduction of these restrictions greece shall open global quotas to member states equal to at least 7 5 % of imports from the community during the year preceding that reintroduction ARTICLE 26 ( 4) of this agreement shall apply to these quotas. 5. in no case may greece apply to member states a treatment less favourable than that accorded to third countries.", "in their trade with one another the contracting parties shall refrain from making more restrictive the import quotas and measures having equivalent effect existing at the date of the entry into force of this agreement.", "1. member states of the community shall abolish quantitative restrictions on imports from greece in accordance with the provisions of the following paragraphs. 2. one year after the entry into force of this agreement member states shall open to greece, in respect of products which have not been liberalized, quotas corresponding to those contained in bilateral agreements existing at that date, or, failing that, corresponding to the level of imports from greece in the first year of implementation of this agreement. 3. three years after the entry into force of this agreement member states shall increase the quotas so established by not less than 10 % of the total amount thereof for the preceding year. the amount shall be increased annually in the same proportion in relation to the preceding year. with effect from the 11th year after the entry into force of this agreement, each quota shall be increased every 18 months over that of the preceding period by not less than 20 % . 4. where, in the case of a product which has not been liberalized, there have been no imports into member states from greece in the first year of application of this agreement, the rules for opening and increasing quotas shall be drawn up by mutual agreement. 5. all quantitative restrictions applied by member states to imports from greece shall be abolished not later than 22 years after the entry into force of this agreement.", "1. greece shall abolish quantitative restrictions on imports from member states of the community in accordance with the provisions of the following paragraphs. 2. one year after the entry into force of this agreement global quotas available without discrimination to member states shall be opened for imports of products not liberalized in greece. the amount of these quotas shall be equal to that of imports from member states in the preceding year~ 3. where, in respect of a product which has not been liberalized, imports from member states in the first year after the entry into force of this agreement amount to less than 7 % of total imports of the product, a quota equal to 7 % of those imports shall be opened one year after the entry into force of this agreement. 4. three years after the entry into force of this agreement greece shall increase the aggregate of global quotas so opened by not less than 10 % over the amount thereof for the preceding year. this amount shall be increased annually in the same proportion in relation to the preceding year. 5. with effect from the 11th year after the entry into force of this agreement each quota shall be increased every 18 months by not less than 20 % in relation to the preceding period. 6. where, in respect of a product which has not been liberalized, there have been no imports into greece in the first year of application of this agreement, the rules for opening and increasing quotas shall be laid down by mutual agreement. 7. if the council of association finds that during two successive years the imports of any product which has not been liberalized have been below the level of the . quota opened, that quota shall not be taken into account in calculating the total value of the global quotas. in such case greece shall abolish quota restrictions on imports of such products from member states. 8. all quantitative restrictions on imports into greece shall be abolished not later than 22 years after the entry into force of this agreement.", "member states of the community and greece shall, at the latest by the end of the transitional period laid down in article 6, abolish all measures having an effect equivalent to quotas. the council of association shall recommend the progressive adjustments to be made during · this period, taking into account provisions adopted between member states. the contracting parties shall supply each other as soon as possible, and not later than six months after the entry into force of this agreement, with all inforn~ation in their possession as to measures having an ettect equivalent to quotas.", "1. quantitative restnct1ons on exports, and all measures having equivalent effect, shall be prohibited between the contracting parties. the member states of the community and greece shall, by the end of the transitional period laid down in article 6 at the latest, abolish between themselves all quantitative restrictions on exports and any measures having equivalent effect. 2. notwithstanding paragraph 1 and in respect of basic products, greece may, after consultation in the council of association, retain or introduce restrictions on exports of basic products to the extent necessary to promote the development of specific sectors of the greek economy or to meet any shortage of basic foodstuffs. in that event, greece shall open for member states a global quota which takes into account exports in previous years and the normal development of trad~ resulting from the establishment of a customs union.", "each contracting party declares its readiness to abolish quantitative restrictions on imports from and exports to the other contracting party more rapidly than is provided for in the preceding articles, if its general economic situation and the situation of the economic sector concerned so permit. to this end, the council of association shall make recommendations to the contracting parties .", "the provisions of the .preceding articles shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures ··possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; or the protection of industrial and commercial property. such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the contracting parties.", "1. the contracting parties shall progressively adjust any state monopolies of a commercial character so as to ensure that when the transitional period laid down in article 15 has ended no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals of member states of the community and nationals of greece. the provisions of this article shall apply to any body through which a member state or greece, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly supervises, determines or appreciably influences imports-or exports. these provisions shall also apply to monopolies delegated by the state to others . .' 2. the contracting parties shall refrain from introducing any new measure which is contrary to the principles laid down in paragraph 1 or which restricts the scope of the articles dealing with the abolition of customs duties and quantitative restrictions between the contracting parties. 3. if a product is subject to a state monopoly of a commercial, character or a monopoly delegated by the state, in one or more member states, the timetable for the measures provided for in paragraph 1 shall be harmonized with the abolition of quantitative restrictions in respect of the same products, as provided for in article 25 of this agreement. 4. the procedures and the, timetable in accordance with which the greek monopolies mentioned in this article are to be adjusted and the barriers to trade are to be lowered by member states, shall be faid down by the council of association not later than two years after the entry into force of this agreement. until the council of association takes the decision provided for in the preceding subparagraph, member states shall apply to products which are subject to a monopoly in greece the treatment laid down for like products from third countries. 5. the obligations on the contracting parties shall be binding only in so far as they are compatible with existing international agreements. 6. the provisions of the foregoing paragraphs shall not apply to the agricultural products listed in annex ii to this agreement.", "the association shall extend to agriculture and trade in agricultural products. 'agricultural prodncts' means the products listed in annex ii to the treaty establishing the community, as at present supplemented in accorpance with article 3 8 (3) of the treaty. these products are listed in annex ii to this agreement. save as otherwise provided in articles 33 to 43, this agreement shall apply to agricultural products.", "the functioning and development of the association in respect of agricultural products shall be accompanied by progressive harmonization of the agricultural policies of the community and of greece. in establishing the common agricultural policy the community shall take due account of the special situation, potential and interests of greek agriculture. the purpose of harmonization shall be to ensure equality of treatment between products of member states and like products of greece on the markets of the contracting parties, taking into account the objectives set out in article 39 of the treaty establishing the community. the agricultural policies of the community and of . greece shall be harmonized in accordance with articles 35 and 36 'by the end of the transitional period laid down in article 15 at the latest.", "1. for the purpose of implementing article 33 (2), greece shall supply the community with all relevant information regarding its agricultural policy, and the special situation, potential and interests of greek agriculture. 2. the community shall inform greece of proposals concerning the common agricultural policy submitted by the commission to other organs of the community and of the opinions and decisions of those other organs with regard to such proposals. the council of association shall decide: -what agricultural information is to be supplied by the community to greece after common organizations of the market have replaced the national organizations; -what agricultural information is to be supplied by greece to the community; -the dates on which such information is to be supplied. 3. consultations on the commission's proposals and on the measures contemplated .by the community and greece in agriculture shall take place within the council of association.", "as soon as the community has declared that the basic provisions for implementing the common agriculniral policy in respect of a particular product have been laid down, for the community, for all or part of the transitional period, and as soon as greece has declared its readiness to undertake harmonization, the council of association shall decide on: -the conditions under which such harmonization is to be carried out; the conditions under which restrictions on trade between the community and greece are to be abolished; the conditions under which greece is to introduce the common customs tariff. in determining these conditions the council of association shall be guided by the principles of the market organization adopted by the community for the product in question.", "1. if the community declaration referred to in article 35 relates to the laying down of the basic provisions for implementing the common agricultural policy for the whole of the transitional period, the council of association shall, within two years of that declaration, lay down the rules which will apply to trade in the product in question between the contracting parties at the end of that two-year period if no decision as provided for in article 35 is taken in the meantime. if no such rules are laid down by the council of association, the contracting parties shall be free at the end of that period to take any measure which they consider appropriate, provided that the rules applied to trade in the product in question are at least as favourable as those applied to imports from states receiving general most-favoured-nation treatment. if the provisions to which the community's declaration relate are implemented before the end of the two-year period, the council of association shall take the necessary measures to maintain existing import openings, for the product in question until the end of that period. 2. if the declaration by the community referred to in article 35 relates to the laying down of the basic provisions for the implementation of the common agricultural policy for a part of the transitional period, the council of association shall within one year of that declaration lay down the rules which will apply to trade in the product in question between the contracting parties after the end of that period if no decision as provided for in article 35 (1) is taken in the meantime. if no such rules are laid down by the council of association, the contracting parties shall be free at the end of that period to take any measure which they consider appropriate, provided that the rules applied to trade in the product in question are at least as favourable as those applied to imports from states receiving general most-favoured-nation treatment. if the provisions referred to in the community's declaration are implemented before the end of the one-year period, the council of association shall take the necessary measures to maintain existing import openings for the product in question until the end of that period. 3. expiry of the periods laid down in the above paragraphs shall not prevent the council of association from taking a decision as provided for in article 35.", "1. in anticipation of harmonization of the agricultural policies of the community and greece the contracting parties shall apply to each other, in respect of the products listed in annex ii to this agreement, the general rules for the abolition of customs duties, import quotas, and charges and measures having equivalent effect laid down in articles 14, 17, 25, 26 and 2 7 of this agreement. 2. as regards agricultural products not listed in annex iii and by way of derogation from articles 13, 14, 15, 17, 25, 26 and 27 of this agreement, the contracting parties shall refrain from: (a) introducing between themselves new customs duties on imports or exports or charges having equivalent effect, or increasing those which they apply' in their trade with each other at the date of entry into force of this agreement; (b) introducing between themselves any new quantitative restrictions on imports and exports or measures having equivalent effect, or making more restrictive the quotas and measures having equivalent effect existing at the date of entry into force of this agreement; the obligaton to refrain from introducing new quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect shall, however, apply only to products the liberalization of which has been cons.olidated in accordance with article 23 and does not prejudice the application of article 28 (2). 3. for agricultural products not listed in annex lll: (a) each contracting party shall extend to the other the tariff concessions it grants to third countries; (b) where a contracting party abolishes or reduces quantitative restrictions in respect of third countries, it must apply the same treatment to the other contracting party. 4. the provisions of the preceding paragraphs shall be applied until the council of association has taken the decision provided for in article 35, or until the end of the two-year or one-year periods referred to in article 36 (1) and (2) respectively.", "1. until the council of association has taken the decision provided for in article 35, or until the end of the two-year or one-year periods referred to in article ' 19.6.78 official journal of the european communities no l 161/21 36 (1) and (2) respectively, greece shall, in respect of the products listed in annex iii, align its customs duties on the common customs tariff in accordance with the conditions and timetable laid down in article 20. 2. until the council of association has taken the decision provided for in article 35, greece may postpone implementation of the common customs tariff in respect of agricultural products not listed in annex iii.", "the provlslons of the articles on competmon shall apply to production of and trade in agricultural products only to the extent determined by the council of association, which shall decide on the matter after decisions have been taken on the application of the rules on competition to the production of and trade in agricultural products within the community.", "the council of association shall review the situation annually, taking into account inter alia the harmonization already initiated. where such review shows that trade is not developing harmoniously, the council of association shall decide upon the measures to be taken. these measures may lead, in particular, to: -further liberalization of trade in accordance with the procedure laid down in article 35; -revision of the list in annex iii.", "1. in so far as progressive abolition of customs duties and quantitative restrictions between the contracting parties may result in prices likely to jeopardize the attainment of the objectives set out in article 39 of the treaty establishing the community, the community and greece may, from the date of the introduction of the common agricultural policy in the case of the community, and from the entry into force of this agreement in the case of greece, apply to particular products a system of minimum prices below which imports may be either: temporarily suspended or reduced, or allowed, but subject to the condition that they are made at a price higher than the minimum price for the product concerned. in the latter case the minimum prices shall not include customs duties. 2. until the common agricultural policy referred to in paragraph 1 is introduced, and in so far as the progressive abolition of customs duties and quantitative restrictions between the contracting parties may result in prices likely to jeopardize the attainment of the objectives set out in article 39 of the treaty establishing the community, member states may, with respect to greece, apply the above provisions in accordance with the principles and procedures set out in article 68 (1) of this agreement. 3. measures adopted pursuant to the preceding paragraphs must take into account the criteria set out in article 44 (2) and (3) of the treaty establishing the community. 4. the preceding paragraphs shall remain in force until the council of association has taken the decision provided for in article 35, or until the end of the two-year or one-year period referred to in article 36 (1) and (2) respectively.", "if a member state of the community applies minimum prices to imports of a product from other member states under article 44 of the treaty establishing the community, it shall apply the same measures to imports of that product from greece. in that event, the member state shall inform greece as it does the other member states. .·", "where a product is subject to a market organization or to internal rules having equivalent effect, or where a product is directly or indirectly affected by such a market organization for other products, and where the resulting disparity in the price of the raw materials used has a damaging effect on the market of one or more member states or of the community, on the one hand, or of greece on the other, a countervailing charge may be applied to imports of that product by the contracting party concerned, unless that contracting party applies a countervailing charge on export. the amount of and the rules concerning this charge shall be determined by the council of association. until the decision of the council of association takes effect the contracting parties may determine the amount of and rules concerning the charge.", "freedom of movement for workers under articles 48 and 49 of the treaty establishing the community shall be secured between member states and greece at a date and in accordance with rules to be determined by the council of association, but not before the end of the transitional perioo laid down in article 6 of this agreement. the council of association may lay down the rules to be applied until that date to the movement of workers between member states and greece; it shall do so in the light of the employment situation in greece and on the basis of provisions on freedom of movement for workers, adopted pursuant to chapter i of title iii of part two of the treaty establishing the community.", "the council of association shall determine the manner in which the measures implementing articles 50 and 128 of the treaty establishing the community, concerning the exchange of young workers and vocational training respectively, can be applied to greece.", "the council of association may consider the preparation and development of technical assistance programmes in favour of greece in the manpower field. it shall decide on the financing of such programmes.", "the contracting parties shall, in progressive and balanced stages, facilitate the establishment of nationals of member states in the territory of greece and of nationals of greece within the community, in accordance with the principles of articles 52 to 56 and article 58 of the treaty establishing the community, except for the provisions of those articles which lay down the time limits and the procedure for attaining freedom of establishment.", "the council of association shall determine the timetable for the implementation of article 4 7 and the rules for its application in respect of the various types of activity; progressive implementation shall take place after the entry into force of the corresponding directives provided for in articles 52 to 56 of the treaty establishing the community and shall take into account the special economic and social situation of greece.", "the council of association shall, during the transitional period laid down in article 6 of this agreement, decide on the appropriate measures to be adopted to facilitate the provision of services between the community and greece.", "1. in accordance with rules and conditions which it shall determine, the council of association shall extend the transport provisions of the treaty establishing the community to greece, with due regard to the geographical situation of that country. 2. acts adopted by the institutions of the community in implementation of the provisions of the treaty establishing the community relating to transport other than by sea or by air may be extended to greece, in accordance with rules adopted by the council of association. 3. if the council of the community takes a decision in respect of transport by sea or by air, pursuant to article 84 (2) of the treaty establishing the community, the council of association shall decide whether, to what extent and by what procedure provisions may be laid down for greek sea and air transport.", "the contracting parties recognize that the, principles laid down in articles 85, 86, 90 and 92 of the treaty establishing the community should be applied in their relations within the association.", "1. the council of association shall, within two years of the entry into force of the agreement, adopt the rules and conditions for the application of the principles referred to in article 51.2. for the purposes of applying paragraph 1 of this article, as regards state aids the contracting parties recognize that in the first 10 years of the transitional period laid down in article 15 greece may be considered as being in the situation specified in article 92 (3) (a) of the treaty establishing the community, and that aid to promote greek economic development shall be considered to be compatible with association if it does not alter the conditions of trade to an extent inconsistent with the mutual interests of association. at the end of the abovementioned 10 years, the council of association shall, taking into account the economic situation of greece at that time, decide whether it is necessary to extend the period of validity of the preceding subparagraph.", "1. neither contracting party shall impose, directly or indirectly, on the products of the other contracting party any internal taxation of any kind in excess of that imposed directly or indirectly on similar domestic products. neither contracting party shall impose on the products of the other contracting party any internal taxation of such a nature as to afford indirect protection to other products. the contracting parties shall, not later than the beginning of the third year after the entry into force of this agreement, repeal any provision existing at the date of its entry into force which conflicts with the above rules. 2. in trade between the contracting parties, repayment of internal taxation in respect of exported products shall not exceed the internal taxation imposed on those products, whether directly or indirectly. 3. contracting parties which levy a turnover tax calculated on a cumulative multi-stage tax system may, in the case of internal taxation imposed by them on imported products or of repayments allowed by them on exported products, establish average rates for products or groups of products, provided that there is no infringem~nt of the principles laid down in the preceding paragraphs. 4. the council of association shall ensure that the above provisions are applied, taking into account the experience of the contracting parties in the field covered by this article.", "as regards trade between the community and greece, and in the case of charges other than turnover taxes, excise duties and other forms of indirect taxation, remissions and repayments in respect of exports may not be granted and countervailing charges in respect of imports may not be imposed unless the measures contemplated have been approved in advance by the council of association for a limited period.", "the contracting parties may adopt any protective measures which they consid~r to be needed to overcome difficulties due to the absence of a' decision of the council of association on the matters covered by articles 52 and 53 or to the non-application of the measures adopted by the council of association in relation thereto.", "1. if, during the transitional period laid down in article 15 of this agreement, the council of association, on application by a contracting party, finds that dumping is being practised in trade between the community and greece, it shall address recommendations to the person or persons with whom such practices originate for the purpose of putting an end to them. the injured party may, after notifying the council of association, take suitable protective measures where: (a) the council of association has taken no decision pursuant to the first subparagraph above within three months from the date of the application; (b) despite the issue of recommendations under the first subparagraph, the dumping practices continue. where protective measures have been taken under (a) above, the council of association may, at any time, decide that such protective measures shall be suspended pending the issue of recommendations under the first subparagraph. where protective measures have been taken under (b) above, the council of association may, at the request of a contracting party or on its own initiative, recommend to the injured party abolition or amendment of those protective measures, the conditions and details of which the council shall determine. 2. products which originated in or were in free circulation in the territory of one of the contracting parties and which have been exported to the other contracting party shall· on reimportation be admitted into the territory of the former contracting party free of all customs duties, quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect. the council of association shall, acting in the light of the experience of contracting parties in the field covered by this article, address such recommendations to the contracting parties as it thinks fit for the purpose of supplementing this paragraph so as to ensure that it is applied.", "the council of association may recommend the con- tracting parties to take measures to approximate the laws, regulations or administrative provisions in respect of fields which are not covered by this agreement but have a direct bearing on the functioning of the associ- ation, and of fields covered by this agreement but for which no specific procedure is laid down therein.", "1. each state party to this agreement shall pursue the economic policy needed to ensure the equilibrium of its overall balance of payments and to maintain confidence in its currency, while taking care to ensure a continuous balanced growth of its economy in conjunction with stable prices. each state party to this agreement shall pursue a conjunctural policy, in particular a financial and monetary policy, which furthers these objectives. 2. the states parties to this agreement shall regularly consult each other in the council of association to coordinate their economic policies. 3. the council of association shall, where necessary, recommend appropriate measures to the states parties to this agreement.", "each state party to this agreement shall treat its policy with regard to exchange rates as a matter of common concern.", "1. in the event of greece being in difficulties or seriously threatened with difficulties as regards its balance of payments either as a result of an overall disequilibrium in its balance of payments or as a result of the type of currency at its disposal, and where such difficulties are liable to be detrimental to the attainment of the objectives of this agreement, the council of association shall immediately investigate the position and the action which, making use of all the means at its disposal, greece has taken or may take in accordance with article 58. the council of association shall state what measures it recommends each side to take to enable greece to meet such difficulties. if the action taken by greece and the measures suggested by the council of association do not prove sufficient to overcome the difficulties which have arisen or which threaten, greece may take the necessary interim protective measures. ance of payments, the institutions of the community shall irtitiate the procedure laid down in article 108 of the treaty establishing the community. the member state in difficulty may take the necessary protective measures in accordance with the conditions laid down in that treaty. 3. such protective measures must cause the least possible disturbance in the functioning of the association and must not be wider in scope than is strictly necessary to remedy the difficulties which have arisen. the council of association shall be informed of protec-· tive measures affecting trade and payments between the community and greece not later than when they enter into force. it shall, within six months, review the effect of these measures on the functioning of this agreement.", "1. the member states of the community and greece undertake to authorize, in the currency of the country in which the creditor or the beneficiary resides, any payments connected with the movement of goods, services or capital, and any transfers of capital and earnings, to the extent that the movement of goods, services, capital and persons between them have been liberalized pursuant _!o this agreement. the contracting parties declare their readiness to undertake the liberalization of payments beyond the extent provided in the preceding subparagraph, in so far as their economic situation in general and the state of their balance of payments in particular so permit.· 2. in so far as movement of goods, services and capital are limited only by restrictions on payments connected therewith, these restrictions shall be progressively abolished by applying mutatis mutandis the provisions relating to the abolition of quantitative restrictions, the provision of services and to capital movements. 3. the contracting parties undertake not to make more restrictive the arrangements which they apply to transfers connected with the invisible transactions listed in annex iv to this agreement without the prior agreement of the council of association. 2. where a member state is in difficulties or is 4. if need be, the contracting parties shall consult each seriously threatened with difficulties as regards its bal-other on the measures to be taken to enable the payments and transfers mentioned in this article to be effected.", "the contracting parties shall consult each other with a view to facilitating movements of capital between member states of the community and greece which will further the objectives of this agreement. they shall seek all means of promoting the investment in greece of capital from countries of the community which can contribute to the development of the greek economy. with respect to arrangements for foreign capital, residents of all member states shall be entitled to all the advantages, in particular as regards currency and taxation, which greece accords to any other member state or to a third country.", "the contracting parties shall endeavour to avoid introducing any new foreign exchange restrictions on the movement of capital and current payments connected therewith between member states of the community and greece, and shall endeavour not to make existing rules more restrictive. the contracting parties shall simplify to the maximum extent possible authorization and control formalities applicable to the conclusion and carrying out of capital transactions and transfers, and shall, in so far as is necessary, consult each other for the purpose of achieving such simplification.", "1. the contracting parties shall consult each other in the council of association in order to achieve, in the transitional period laid down in article 6, the coordination of their commercial policies in relation to third countries, in particular in the fields mentioned in article 113 (1) of the treaty establishing the community. for this purpose each contracting party shall, at the request of the other party, furnish all relevant information on agreements which it concludes and which contain tariff or commercial provisions, as well as on changes which it makes in its external trade arrangements. where such agreements or changes might have a direct and particular effect on the functioning of this agreement, there shall be appropriate consultation in the council of association in order to take into account the interests of the contracting parties. 2. at the end of the transitional period laid down in article 6, the community and greece, meeting in the council of association, shall coordinate their commercial policies more closely with the aim of achieving a commercial policy based on uniform principles. 3. should an agreement be concluded concerning accession to or association with the ·community, full account shall be taken of the mutual interests stated in this agreement; appropriate consultation shall take place to this end. in the case of an association, the adjustment of the relations between greece and the associated country may be the subject of an agreement after consultation with the community. in the case of an accession, rights and obligations shall devolve on greece only after a supplementary protocol has been concluded with greece. the necessary adjustments to this agreement shall be agreed by the contracting parties. to this end, each contracting party shall take the necessary measures in accordance with its constitutional requirements.", "1. in order to attain the objectives of this agreement the council of association shall have the power to take decisions in the cases provided for therein. each of the parties shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. the council of association may also make appropriate recommendations. 2. the council of association shall periodically review the functioning of the association in the light of the objectives of this agreement. 3. the council of association shall consist of members of the governments of the member states, and members of the council and of the commission of the community on the one hand, and of members of the greek government on the other. the members of the council of association may arrange to be represented in accordance with its rules of procedure. 4. the council of association shall act unanimously.", "the office of the president of the council of association shall be held alternately for a term of six months by a representative of the community and a representative of greece. the council of association shall adopt its rules of procedure. the council of association may decide to set up committees to assist in the performance of its tasks and in particular a committee to ensure the continuing cooperation necessary for the proper functioning of this ~greement. the council of association shall lay down the terms of reference of these committees.", "1. each of the parties referred to in article 65 of this agreement may submit to the council of association any dispute relating to the application or interpretation ' of this agreement which concerns the community, a member state of the community or greece. 2. the council of association may settle the dispute by decision; it may also decide to submit the dispute to the court of justice of the european communities or to any other existing court or tribunal. 3. if the council of association is unable to settle the dispute in ·accordance with paragraph 2 of this article, or has not designated a court or tribunal to settle the dispute, either party may notify the other party of the appointment of an arbitrator, and the other party shall be required to appoint a second arbitrator within two months. for the purposes of this procedure the community and the member states shall be considered to be a single party to the dispute. a third arbitrator, who shall act as chairman, shall be appointed in accordance with the provision of paragraph 4 below. arbitration rulings shall be given by a simple majority. 4. during the first five years after the entry into force of this agreement the third arbitrator shall be the president of the court of justice of the european communities. after that period, and unless the council of association has decided otherwise, the third arbitrator shall be appointed by mutual agreement of the first two arbitrators. failing agreement within two months, he shall be appointed by the president of the international court of justice from among persons who, in the signatory states of the convention on the organization for economic cooperation and development, exercise or have exercised high judicial functions. 5. each party shall take the measures necessary to comply with such decision.", "1. member states of the community may apply article 226 of the treaty establishing the community in their relations with greece. for the purpose of that article, greece shall be treated as a member state. the community shall consult the greek government in advance within the council of association. 2. during the transitional period laid down in the first subparagraph of article 8 (1) of the treaty establishing the community and during any extensions of that period which may be decided under that article, greece may, under the same conditions and after consultations in the council of association, take the measures provided for in article 226 (1) of the treaty establishing the community. 3. after the end of the transitional period laid down in the treaty establishing the community, 'the council of association may decide that the measures provided for in article 226 (1) of the treaty establishing the community shall continue to apply in relations between the community and greece.", "this agreement shall not apply to products within the province of the european coal and steel community.", "if joint action by the contracting parties should prove necessary to attain, in the application of the association, one of the objectives of this agreement and this agreement has not provided the necessary powers, the council of association shall take the appropriate dec1swns.", "the council of association shall take all appropriate steps to promote the necessary cooperation and contacts between the european parliament, the economic and social committee and other organs of the community, on the one hand, and the greek parliament and the corresponding organs in greece, on the other.", "as soon as the operation of this agreement has advanced far enough to justify envisaging full acceptance by greece of the obligations arising out of the treaty establishing the european economic community, the contracting parties shall examine the possibility of the accession of greece to the community.", "1. this agreement shall apply to the european territories of the kingdom of belgium, of the federal republic of germany, of the french republic, of the italian republic, of the grand duchy of luxembourg and of the kingdom of the netherlands on the one hand, and to the kingdom of greece on the other. 2. the agreement shall also apply to the territories specified in the first subparagraph of article 227 (2) of the treaty establishing the community so far as con. cerns those fields covered by it which are listed in that subparagraph. the conditions for applying to those territories the provisions of this agreement relating to other fields shall be decided at a later date by agreement between the contracting parties. ·", "the protocols annexed to this agreement by common accord of the contracting parties shall form an integral part thereof.", "this agreement shall be ratified by the signatory states in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements, and shall become binding on the community by a decision of the council taken in accordance with the treaty establishing the community and notified to the parties to this agreement. the instruments of ratification and the notification of conclusion shall be exchanged at brussels.", "this agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the third month following the date of exchange of the instruments of ratification.", "this agreement is drawn up in two copies in the dutch, french, german, italian and greek languages, each of these texts being equally authentic.", "in witness whereof, the undersigned plenipotentiaries have signed this agreement. done at athens this ninth day of july in the year one thousand nine hundred and sixty-one. for his majesty the king of the belgians: paul-henri spaak for the president of the federal republic of germany: gebhard seelos for the president .. of the french republic: maurice couve de murville for the president of the italian republic: emilio colombo for her royal highness the grand duchess of luxembourg: eugene schaus for her majesty the queen of the netherlands: h. r. van houten for the council of the european for his majesty the king economic community: of the hellenes: ludwig erhard p. kanellopoulos a. protopapadakis e. a verof-tossizza provided that the community shall be finally bound only after the other contracting party has been notified that the procedures required by the treaty establishing the european economic community, and, in particular, consultation of the european parliament, have been completed. ." )

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX I Use Of articles currently manufactured in Greece and subject to the provisions of Article 15 ANNEX II List of products referred to in Article 32 of the Agreement of Association A. Products listed in Annex Il to the Treaty establishing the Community ANNEX III List of agricultural products referred to in Article 37 ( I) of the Agreement of Association ANNEX IV List of invisible transactions referred to in Article 61 of the Agreement of Association Maritime freights, including chartering, harbour expenses, disbursements for fishing vessels, etc. Inland waterway freights, including charter ng. Road transport: passengers and freights, including chartering. Air transport: passengers and freights, including chartering: payment by passengers of international air tickets and excess luggage charges; payment of international air freight charges and chartered flights; receipts from the sale of international air tickets, excess luggage charges, international air freight charges and chartered flights. For all means of maritime transport: harbour services (bunkering and provisioning, maintenance, repairs, expenses for crews, etc). For all means of inland waterway transport: harbour services (bunkering and provisioning, mainte­nance and minor repairs of equipment, expenses for crews, etc). For all means of commercial road transport: fuel, oil, minor repairs, garaging, expenses for drivers and crews, etc. For all means of air transport: operating costs and general overheads, including repairs to aircraft and to air transport equipment. Warehousing and storage charges, customs clearance. Customs duties and fees. Transit charges. Repair and assembly charges. Processing, finishing, processing of work under contract, and other services of the same nature. Repair of ships. Repair of means of transport other than ships and aircraft. Technical assistance (assistance relating to the production and distribution of goods and services at all stages, given over a period limited according to the specific purposes of such assistance, and including advice or visits by experts, preparation of plans and blueprints, supervision of manufacture, market research, training of personnel). Commission and brokerage. Profits arising out of transit operations or sales of transhipment. Banking commissions and charges. Representation expenses. Advertising by all media. Business travel. Participation by subsidiary companies and branches in overhead expenses of parent companies situated abroad and vice versa. Contracting (construction and maintenance of buildings, roads, bridges, ports, etc carried out by specialised firms, and, generally, at fixed prices after open tender). Differences, margins and deposits due in respect of operations on commodity terminal markets in conformity with normal bonafide commercial practice. Tourism. Travel for private reasons (education). Travel for. private reasons (health). Travel for private reasons (family). Subscriptions to newspapers, periodicals, books, musical publications. Newspapers, periodicals, books, musical publications and records. Printed films, commercial, documentary, education, etc. (rentals, dues, subscriptions, reproduction and synchronization fees, etc). Membership fees. Current maintenance and repair of private property abroad. Government expenditure (official representation abroad, contributions to international organizations). Taxes, court expenses, registration fees for patents andtrademarks. Claims for damages. Refunds in the case of cancellation of contracts and refunds of uncalled-for payments. Fines. Periodical settlements in connection with public transport and postal, telegraphic and telephone services. Exchange authorizations granted to own or foreign nationals emigrating. Exchange authorizations granted to own or foreign nationals returning to their country of origin. Salaries ::md wages (of frontier or seasonal workers and of other non-residents, without prejudice to the right of a co try to regulate terms of employment of foreign nationals). Emigrants' remittances (without prejudice to the right of a country to regulate immigration). Fees. Dividends and shares in profits. Interest on debentures, mortgages, etc. Rent. Contractual amortisation (with the exception of transfers in connection with amortisation having the character either of anticipated payments or of the discharge of accumulated arrears). Profits from business activity. Authors' royalties. Patents, designs, trade marks and inventions (the assignment and licensing of patent rights, designs, trade marks and inventions, whether or not legally protected, and transfers arising out of such assignment or licensing). Consular receipts. Pensions and other income of a similar nature. Maintenance payments resulting from a legal obligation or from a decision of a court and financial assistance in cases of hardship. Transfers by instalments of assets deposited in one member country by persons residing in another member country whose personal income in that country is not sufficient to cover their living expenses. Transactions and transfers in connection with direct insurance. Transactions and transfers in connection with reinsurance and retrocession. Opening and reimbursement of commercial industrial credits. Transfers of minor amounts abroad. Charges for documentation of all kinds incurred on their own account by authoriz:!d dealers in foreign exchange. Sports prizes and racing earnings. Inheritances. ANNEX I Declaration of Intent 1. Declaration of Intent on certain products of importance to Greece (1) The Community declares that it does not contemplate establishing a common organisation of the market in dried grapes. (2) The Council of Association shall examine the opportunities for expanding to the fullest possible extent trade in cotton between the Community and Greece. 2. Declaration of Intent on access by Greece to theEuropean Investment Bank The Member States of the Community, conscious of the importance for the development of the Greek economy of maintaining continuity in the external financing arrangements of Greece, declare their readiness to consider this question in the course of the five years following the entry into force of the Agreement of Association, and. in particular, to envisage access by Greece to the European Investment Bank. ANNEX II Interpretative Declarations 1. Interpretative Declaration on Article 31 of the Agreement of Association The Contracting Parties recognize that Article 31 of the Agreement of Association must be interpreted in accordance with the principles set out in Articles 37 and 90 of the Treaty establishing the Community. 2. Interpretative Declaration on Article 64(3) of the Agreement of Association The Contracting Parties recognise that the mutual interests to be taken fully into account in accordance with Article 64 (3) include the Community's interest in seeing other friendly nations accede to or associate themselves with it on equitable terms. 3. Interpretative Declaration on Paragraphs 5 and 6 of Protocol No 15 on imports of unmanufactured tobacco and tobacco refuse The Contract._ing Parties declare that: ( I) The first subparagraph of paragraph 5 of Protocol No 15 on the importation .of unmanufactured tobacco and tobacco refuse shall be interpreted in such a manner that, if the French and Italian , monopolies are fully adjusted in accordance with the Treaty establishing the Community before the common organisation of the market has been substituted for national organisations, those monopolies shall no longer be governed by the undertaking specified in paragraphs 5 and 6. In that event, France and Italy shall be bound by the same obligations as countries in which tobacco is not the subject of a monopoly. (2) The purchasing commitments of the Italian monopoly shall be calculated on the basis of that monopoly's annual imports of oriental types of tobacco, excludinginward processing traffic, as shown in official statistics. 4. Interp;etative Declaration, on Protocol No 16 on the Common Agricultural Policy for tobacco The Contracting Parties agree that the import openings provided for in paragraph 4 of that Protocol shall take a form to be determined on the basis of the Community rules for the product in question. Determination of the amount of the envisaged increase shall take into account any special situation arising from substantial differences in tobacco policies or sales outlets on the Community market. 5. lnJerpretative Declaration on the definition of Contracting Parties' in the Agreement of Association The Contracting Parties agree that, for the purposes of the Agreement of Association, 'Contracting Parties' means on the one hand either the Community and Member States or the Member States alone or the Community alone and on the other hand the Kingdom of Greece. The meaning in each case is to be deduced from the relevant provisions of the Agreement and from the corresponding provisions of the Treaty establishing the Community. In certain circumstances, such as those provided for in Articles 10, 55 and 56 of the Agreement of Association, 'Contracting Parties' means during the transitional period.of the Treaty establishing the Community, the Member States and. after the expiry of that period, the Community. ANNEX III Declarations by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany 1. Declaration on the definition of the expression 'German national' All Germans as defined in the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany shall be considered nationals of the Federal Republic of Germany. 2. Declaration on the application of the Agreement to Berlin The Agreement of Association shall equally apply to Land Berlin wiless the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany makes a declaration to the contrary to the other Contracting Parties within three months.
