MainText:
Unofficial translation TREATY on the Accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014 The Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation from one side, and the Kyrgyz Republic on the other side, hereinafter referred to as the Parties, reaffirming the friendly relations that binds the Parties and its people, and the endeavor to provide its prosperity, determined to give a new surge to the development of more closer integration, bringing together economies of the Parties for the purpose of social progress and enhancing the welfare of the people, confirming their interest in development of the Eurasian Integration Process, guided by the statements of Heads of Republic of Belarus, Republic of Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Kyrgyz Republic from 29 May 2014 and from 10 October 2014 about the participation of the Kyrgyz Republic in Eurasian Integration Process, taking into consideration signed on 10 October 2014 of the Treaty on the Accession by Republic of Armenia to the Eurasian Economic Union from 29 may 2014, providing among other inclusions amendments to the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014, taking into account that the formation of contractual-legal framework of Customs Union and Common Economic Area were realized on the basis of international treaties, which became the basis of the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014, affirming the readiness of the Kyrgyz Republic to fulfill the requirements specified by such international treaties, considering the subsequent preparatory work of Kyrgyz Republic to fulfill necessary measures on accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the Customs Union and Common Economic Area of the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation, have agreed on the following: ARTICLE 1 Hereby Kyrgyz Republic enters to the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014, as well as to the other international treaties constituting the legal framework of the Eurasian Economic Union, listed according to the Annex to this Treaty and as of the date this Treaty enters into force and Protocols specified in paragraph 2 and 3 of this Article, becomes the Member to the Eurasian Economic Union. With Kyrgyz Republic entering the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014 and to the certain international treaties listed in Annex to this Treaty (in view of the amendments included in the Protocol on introducing amendments to the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014 and international treaties concluded within the framework of formation of the contractual – legal basis of the Customs Union and Common Economic Area, in connection to the accession of the Kyrgyz Republic (Annex 2 of the Treaty on accession of the Republic of Armenia to the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014, signed on 10 October 2014)), amendments are introduced in accordance with the separate Protocol, which will be an integral part of this Treaty. Application by Kyrgyz Republic of the separate norms of the Treaty on Eurasian Economic Union from 29 May 2014 and other international treaties included in the Annex to this Treaty shall be realized in accordance with the conditions and transitional Provisions specified by separate Protocol, which will be an integral part of this Treaty, and taking into account Treatys on application of the Common Customs tariff of the Eurasian Economic Union in connection to the list of goods provided by this Protocol. ARTICLE 2 In case if an international Treaty concluded between Member States of the Eurasian Economic Union will be signed or enters into force, prior to the entry into force of this Treaty, on the issues related to the functioning and development of the Eurasian Economic Union, included into the legal framework of the Eurasian Economic Union, not mentioned in Annex of this Treaty, Kyrgyz Republic takes responsibility on accession to such an international Treaty on the date of its entry into force in accordance to the separate Protocol, but not earlier than the date of entry into force of this Treaty. ARTICLE 3 As of the date this Treaty enters into force, Kyrgyz Republic applies United Goods Nomenclature of the foreign economic activity of Eurasian Economic Union. Kyrgyz Republic applies the common customs tariff of the Eurasian Economic Union as of the date of taking a decision by Supreme Eurasian Economic Council on cancellation of the customs control of goods and transport vehicles moving though Kyrgyz-Kazakh part of the state border, with consideration of Provisions defined by Protocol specified in paragraph 3 of Article 1 of this Treaty. ARTICLE 4 As of the date this Treaty enters into force, the legal acts of Eurasian Economic Union bodies, as well as Decisions of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council (Interstate Council of the Eurasian Economic Union (Supreme body of the Customs Union)), decisions of the Eurasian Economic Commission (Customs Union Commission), enforced by the date of this Treaty entering into force, shall be applied on the territory of the Kyrgyz Republic, with consideration of Provisions defined by Protocol specified in paragraph 3 of Article 1 of this Treaty and in appliance with the paragraph 2 of Article 3 of this Treaty. ARTICLE 5 Provisions on regulation of issues considering Kyrgyz Republic membership to the World Trade Organization is defined by the Protocol specified in paragraph 3 of Article 1 of this Treaty. For the purposes of compliance with the Common trade regime of the Eurasian Economic Union in regards to third parties, Kyrgyz Republic in trade with third parties applies the regime, which corresponds to the regime applied by other Member States of the European Economic Union as of 1 January 2015 in accordance with international Treatys concluded with third parties thereof. ARTICLE 6 The decision to cancel the Customs control of goods and transport vehicles moving through Kyrgyz – Kazakh state border are adopted by the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council. Supreme Eurasian Economic Council shall consider taking decision on the issue written in the paragraph 1 of this Article not later than 8 May 2015, based on an assessment of the Customs control system after completion of the following measures: equipping the airports “Manas”, “Osh” of the Kyrgyz Republic and automobile checkpoints “Irkeshtam”, “Torugart” of the Kyrgyz Republic on the border of Eurasian Economic Union with weighing equipment, inspection monitor x-ray systems, video recording system for movement of goods and transport vehicles, stationary and (or) mobile equipment of radiation control, detection of drug subsistence and explosives, technical equipment and communication channels, providing the function of information systems in online regime, as well as engineering equipment required for the continues flow of work of checkpoints; organization of exchange of information between Tax authorities of Member States of the Eurasian Economic Union required to ensure complete payment of indirect taxes; organization of exchange of information in electronic form with the Customs authorities of Member States of the Eurasian Economic Union in regards to the following processes: control after the transportation of goods in accordance with Customs procedures of Customs transit; control and confirmation of actual exportation of goods from the territory of Eurasian Economic Union; control of temporary importation of transport vehicles of individuals and transport vehicles of international carriages; exchange of information within the framework of the Treaty on the organization of exchange of information for the implementation of analytical and control functions of the customs authorities of the Member States of the Custom Union from 19 October 2011. ARTICLE 7 The decision to cancel the Sanitary-quarantine, veterinary-sanitary and phytosanitary quarantine control (supervision) on the Kyrgyz – Kazakh state borders are adopted by the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council. Supreme Eurasian Economic Council shall consider taking decision on the issue specified in the paragraph 1 of this Article not later than 8 May 2015, in consideration with evaluation of veterinary-sanitary and phytosanitary quarantine control system, as well as familiarize – members of Eurasian Economic Commission and competent authorities of Member States of Eurasian Economic Union about the system of sanitary – epidemiological control (supervision) in Kyrgyz Republic. Until the decision of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council to cancel the Sanitary-quarantine, veterinary-sanitary and phytosanitary quarantine control (supervision) on the Kyrgyz – Kazakh state borders is made, the requirements and procedures of Eurasian Economic Union (Customs Union) and the requirements set by legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic will be enforced on the territory of Kyrgyz Republic in regards to the application of sanitary, veterinary sanitary and phytosanitary quarantine measures. ARTICLE 8 1. For a period of three years from the date Kyrgyz Republic started to apply the Common Customs tariff of Eurasian Economic Union, amendments to the Protocol of enrollment and distribution procedure of import customs duties (other duties, taxes and charges having equivalent effect), their transfer to the budgets of Member States (Annex 5 to the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty from 29 May 2014) shall be introduced according to the following: Point 12 worded as follows: “12. Distribution standards of import customs duties amount for each Member State establishes as follows: Republic of Armenia - 1.11 percent; Republic of Belarus - 4.56 percent; Republic of Kazakhstan - 7.11 percent; Kyrgyz Republic - 1.9 percent; Russian Federation - 85.32 percent.; The point 40 after the words “date Astana city” add the words “for Kyrgyz Republic – date Bishkek city”; The point 53 after the words “Republic of Kazakhstan,” add the words: “Audit Chamber of the Kyrgyz Republic,”. 2. The Protocol of enrollment order and distribution of import customs duties (other duties, taxes and charges having equivalent effect), their transfer to the budgets of Member States (Annex 5 to the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty from 29 May 2014) and Provision on crediting and distribution of the special, antidumping and compensatory duties (Annex 8 to the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty from 29 May 2014) shall be applied by Kyrgyz Republic from Day 1 of the second month, following the month after applying by Kyrgyz Republic of the Common Customs Tariff of the Eurasian Economic Union. ARTICLE 9 Reservations to this Treaty shall not be permitted. ARTICLE 10 Disputes relating to the interpretation and (or) the application of the provisions of this Treaty shall be settled according to the Article 112 of the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty from 29 May 2014. ARTICLE 11 This Treaty is a part to the legal framework of Eurasian Economic Union. This Treaty shall be ratified and shall enter into force from the date of receipt by the Depositary via diplomatic channels of the last written notification on the completion by the Member States of the internal procedures necessary for its entry into force, but not before the date, the last Protocol according to the points 2 and 3 of the Article 1 of this Treaty enters into force. The original text of this Treaty shall be deposited at the Eurasian Economic Commission, which, as a depositary of this Treaty, shall forward each Party a certified copy of this Treaty.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX to the Treaty on accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty from 29 May 2014 LIST of the international treaties constituting the legal framework of the Eurasian Economic Union to which Kyrgyz Republic is acceding 1. Treaty on Unified Rules for Determining the Country of Origin of Goods from 25 January 2008. 2. Treaty for determining the Customs Value of Goods crossing the Customs Border of the Customs Union from 25 January 2008 (in the Draft Protocol from 23 April 2012 on introducing amendments and additions to the Treaty determining the customs value of goods transferred across the Customs Union border from 25 January 2008). 3. Protocol on Unified System of Tariff Preferences of the Customs Union from 12 December 2008. 4. Treaty on the Rules for determining the Country of Origin of goods from Developing and Least developed Countries from 12 December 2008. 5. Treaty on the Customs Code of the Customs Union from 27 November 2009 (in the Draft Protocol from 16 April 2010 on introducing amendments and additions to the Treaty on the Customs Code of the Customs Union from 27 November 2009). 6. Treaty on mutual administrative assistance by the Customs authorities of the Customs Union Member States from 21 May 2010. 7. Treaty on the Unified customs register of intellectual property of the Customs Union Member States from 21 May 2010. 8. Treaty on certain matters related to the provisions of guarantees of payment of customs duties, taxes with respect to the goods transported according to the customs transit procedure, on specifics of collection of customs duties, taxes and procedure of transfer of collected amounts with respect to such goods from 21 May 2010 (in the Draft Protocol from 19 December 2011 on introducing amendments and additions to the Treaty on certain matters related to the provisions of guarantees of payment of customs duties, taxes with respect to the goods transported according to the customs transit procedure, on specifics of collection of customs duties, taxes and procedure of transfer of collected amounts with respect to such goods from 21 May 2010). 9. Treaty on Provision and Exchange of Preliminary Information on Goods and Transport Vehicles crossing the Customs Border of the Customs Union from 21 May 2010. 10. Treaty on the Requirements for the Exchange of Information between the Customs Authorities and other State Authorities of the Customs Union Member States from 21 May 2010. 11. Treaty on the Bases, Conditions and the Procedure of Changing the Terms of Payment of Customs Duties from 21 May 2010. 12. Treaty on the Specifics of Customs Transit of Goods transferred by Railway Transport in the Customs Territory of the Customs Union from 21 May 2010. 13. Treaty on the Procedure of Transfer of Goods for Personal Use across the Customs Boarder of the Customs Union by Individuals and on Performance of the Customs Operations related to the Release thereof from 18 June 2010 (in the Draft Protocol from 19 October 2011 on introducing amendments and additions to the Treaty on the Procedure of Transfer of Goods for Personal Use across the Customs Boarder of the Customs Union by Individuals and on Performance of the Customs Operations related to the Release thereof from 18 June 2010). 14. Treaty on Free Customs Area Warehouses and Customs Procedure of Free Customs Area Warehouses from 18 June 2010. 15. Treaty on Relief from Application of Certain Forms of Customs Control by the Customs Authorities of the Customs Union Member States from 18 June 2010. 16. Treaty on the Specifics of Use of International Carriage Transport Vehicles, transporting Passengers as well as Trucks, Semitrailers, Containers and Railway Rolling Stocks transferring Cargo and/or Luggage for Internal Carriage within the Customs Territory of the Customs Union from 18 June 2010. 17. Treaty on the Specifics of Customs Operations with respect to the Goods sent via International Postal Delivery from 18 June 2010. 18. Treaty on the Issues of Free Economic Zones in the Customs Territory of the Customs Union and Customs Procedure of a Free Customs Zone from 18 June 2010. 19. Treaty on the Procedure of Transfer of Cash and (or) Cash Instruments by Individuals across the Customs Border of the Customs Union from 5 July 2010. 20. Treaty on the Specifics of Criminal and Administrative Liability for Violations (infringement) of the Customs Laws of the Customs Union and Customs Laws of the Customs Union Member States from 5 July 2010. 21. Treaty on Legal Support and Co-operation of the Customs Authorities of the Customs Union Member States on Criminal Proceedings and Proceedings on Administrative Offences from 5 July 2010. 22. Cooperation Treaty on countering illegal labor migration from third countries from 19 November 2010. 23. Treaty on functioning of the Customs Union within the multilateral trade system framework from 19 May 2011. 24. Treaty on the Joint Board of Customs services of Customs Union Member States from 22 June 2011. 25. Treaty on cooperation and mutual assistance within the Eurasian Economic Community framework in customs issues involving the activities of the Customs Union Member States customs services representative offices from 22 June 2011. 26. Treaty on the organization of exchange of information for the implementation of analytical and control functions of the customs authorities of the Member States of the Custom Union from 19 October 2011. 27. Treaty on counteraction to legalization (laundering) of the income received by the criminal way, and financing of terrorism when moving cash and (or) cash tools through the customs border of the Customs Union from 19 December 2011. 28. Treaty of Member States of Customs Union on elimination of technical barriers in mutual trade with States parties to the Commonwealth of Independent States who is not Member States to the Customs Union from 17 December 2012. 29. Treaty on procedure of drug trafficking, psychotropic substances and their precursors on the customs territory of Customs Union from 24 October 2013. 30. Treaty on introducing of single forms of the passport of the vehicle (the passport of the vehicle chassis) and passports of the self-propelled machine and other types of equipment and the organization of systems of electronic passports from 15 August 2014. 31. Treaty on order of protecting confidential information and liability for its breach as the Eurasian Economic Commission exercises its authority to monitor compliance with common competition regulations from 12 November 2014. 32. Treaty on common principles and rules of treatment of drugs within the framework of Eurasian Economic Union from 23 December 2014. 33. Treaty on common principles and rules of treatment of medical devices (medical products and medical equipment) within the framework of Eurasian Economic Union from 23 December 2014. 34. Treaty on information exchange, including confidential information, in financial sphere for the purpose of creating conditions for free movement of goods on financial markets from 23 December 2014.
