MainText:
CONVENTION ESTABLISHING THE EQUATORIAL CUSTOMS UNION 23 June 1959 TITLE I THE CUSTOMS UNION ARTICLE 1. The Central African Republic, the Republic of the Congo, the Gabon Republic, and the Republic of Chad hereby establish a Customs Union among themselves within which the movement of merchandise, goods and capital shall be free. This Union shall take the. name of "EQUATORIAL CUSTOMS UNION". CHAPTER I Legislation andRegulations ARTICLE 2. To this end, the States undertake to apply and to maintain common legislation and regulations with respect to duties and taxes upon entry into the customs union. The customs legislation and regulations shall be in conformity with the rules laid down by. the authorities of the Community. On the date of entry into force of this Convention, such common legislation and regulations shall consist of the customs legislation and regulations, including the customs and statistical nomenclature; the import customs tariff; the customs code; as well as the other customs texts and regulations in effect in the four States. With respect to export duties and taxes concerning products common to two or more States, the Governments of the States undertake to hold consultations. ARTICLE 3. Subject to the competence of the Community, such legislation and regulation may be modified only under the following conditions: Proposals for modification shall be addressed to the Management Committee of the Customs Union provided for in Article 14 hereinafter which shall examine them. If it adopts them unanimously, they shall become applicable under the conditions set forth in Article 4 hereinafter. If the opinion is unfavourable, the proposal may not be adopted by any of thesignatory States. In the other cases, the proposal shall be submitted to the Conference of the Heads of State for a decision. ARTICLE 4. The proposals adopted by the Management Committee or the Conference of Heads of State shall be legally enforceable. They can enter into force only simultaneously in the four States. In the case of emergency, the Management Committee may publish them according to the emergency procedure. CHAPTER II Apportionment of Import and Export Duties ARTICLE 5. The proceeds from import duties and charges (import.turnover duties and charges) levied by the customs offices upon entry into the territory of one of the contracting States shall be: paid into the budget of the State in which the goods are declared as having entered into consumption. The proceeds of export duties and charges levied by the customs offices on departure from the territories of the four contracting States shall be paid into the budget of the State in which the goods originated. ARTICLE 6. In a spirit of co-operation and to take into account any errors made in declarations, a: certain percentage of the import duties and charges specified. in Article 5and levied by the Common Offices shall.be fixed annually by the Conference of the Heads of State. on a proposal of the Management Committee of the Customs Union and paid into a Common Solidarity Fund. "The proceeds of this Solidarity Fund shall be refunded to the contracting States according to the apportionment percentages to be set annually by the Conference of Heads of State on a proposal of the Management Committee of the Customs Union." CHAPTER III Levies ARTICLE 7. A percentage levy shall be effected on all transactions of the Common Customs Offices, which amount is intended to cover the expenses of these Offices. The receipts and expenditures of the Common Offices Service shall be determined by the Conference of Heads of State on proposals of the Management Committee of the Customs Union.. TITLE II FISCAL CO-OPEPATION ARTICLE 8. The Central African Republic, the Republic of the Congo, the Gabon Republic and the. Republic of Chad shall establish among themselves a procedure for the harmonization and co-ordination of their tax legislation and regulations, pursuant to Article 5 of protocol No. 1 of 17 January 1959. ARTICLE 9. The signatory States undertake not to modify unilaterally the present basis for computation of the following taxes: - taxes on industrial and commercialprofits, - internal turnover tax, - tax on income from securities. The Governments shall submit to the Conference proposals for the modification of their internal legislation. ARTICLE 10. The proposals for modification referred to in Article 9 shall be presented to the Management Committee of the Customs Union which shall consider them from the two following points of view: (a) The possibility one or more States to adopt the texts proposed without their being extended to all the member States; If, from this point of view, the Committee expresses a favourable opinion, the text may be adopted by States wishing to do so. In the contrary case, the States undertake not to give effect separately to the text under consideration. (b) The advisability of simultaneous adoption by the four States of the text under consideration. If the Management Committee unanimously expresses an opinion in favour of the adoption of the text, it shall be submitted to the Assemblies of the States for ratification. If it expresses an unfavourable opinion, the text cannot be adopted by ony of the signatory States. ARTICLE 11. With respect to the following matters: - rate of the internal turnover tax, - rate of the tax on industrial and commercial profits, - rate of the tax on income from securities, - basis for computation of tax on wages, - basis for computation of tax on income. The States undertake before any modification to consult with the Permanent Secretariat which shall bring the matter to the attention of the Management Committee of the Customs - won. Ifthree quarters of the members of the Committee express an unfavourable opinion, the States shall undertake to withdraw their proposal except for appeal to the Conference of Heads of States. ARTICLE 12. The States undertake to comply with the Convention on Double Taxation adopted by the Inter-Territorial Conference held on 14 and 15 October 1957. ARTICLE 13. Single charges established in pursuance of previous legislation are hereby confirmed. The contracting States hereby resolve, moreover, to apply the single charge system to certain locally manufactured products sold in the territories of several contracting States. The Management Committee of the Equatorial Customs Union shall approve the undertakingssubject to this system, define the conditions and limits for their duty-free supplies and set the rate of the single charge in accordance with the :procedure laid down in Article 3 above. Proceeds from the single charges shall be paid into the budget of the States where the products have been consumed. ARTICLE 14. The Management Committee of the Customs Union shall be composed as follows: - the Minister of Finance of each contracting State or in his absence a Minister designated by the Government; - a second representative designated by each Government; - the President of the Central Bank of the Equatorial African States and Cameroon, with consultative status; - a representative of the Community may attend meetings, with consultative status; - the French Republic may, by way of technical assistance, appoint a representative having consultative status. The members of the Management Committee may be represented by a duly authorized person of. their choice. The office of Chairman shall be exercised for a term of one year by each of the representatives of the States in rotation, according to the alphabetical order of the States. The Management Committee may invite any qualified person to its meetings on a consultative basis. It shall meet upon convocation by its Chairman,either at his initiative or at the request of one of the signatory States or of the Community. The Permanent Secretariat of the. Conference of the Heads of State shall carry out the duties of a Secretariat for the Management Committee. The Management Committee can meet validly only if all the States are represented by at least one member entitled to vote and speak. Except where otherwise specified in this Convention, the decisions of the Management Committee shall be taken by a simple majority of the members present. In case of a divided vote, the President shall cast the deciding 'vote ARTICLE 15. The competence of the Management Committee with respect to customs laws and regulations shall extend to the following matters, to theexclusion of all others, subject to the acknowledged powers of the Conference of Heads of State: - customs and statistical nomenclature, - import tariff and individual tariff systems, - import charges applicable in the four Republics (import turnover charge, single charge, handling and distribution charges, ancillary duties and charges levied by the customs services) with the exclusion of such consumption taxes or special charges as might be levied by the customs for reasons of convenience, - customs code.: Furthermore; in the" common offices, the Management Committee shall exercise the regulatory and supervisory powers with respect to Customs, -Handling and Distribution. In this capacity, it shall exercise in particular the following functions: - it shall decide in questions of customs and similar infractions whenever .the dispute involves sums of more than .500,000. CFA. francs in defrauded or jeopardized duties, or sums of 2 million.. CFA. francs in value if there are no jeopardized duties; -..it shall authorize all agreements, settlements and arrangements.other than Customs, consents, waivers, as well as all.obligations whenever the dispute involves a sum in excess of 500,000 CFA francs; - it shall propose for decision by the Conference of Heads of State the adjournment of discussion and the absolving from liability whenever the sum involved is in excess of 100,000 CFA francs; - it shall approve the records of the condemnation of material whenever the sum involved is. in excess of 1,000,000 CFA francs; - it may exercise all other powers which may be delegated to it by the signatory States. The responsibilities previously conferred on the General High Commissioner by Deliberation Nos. 88/55, 69/56, 39/57 of the Grand Council of FEA shall pass to the Government of each State. ARTICLE 16. The Common Customs Offices, the list of which is given as an annex to this Convention, shall be administered by a Chief of Service who shall, under the authority of the Permanent Secretary of the Conference of Heads of State: - assure their management and administration, - conduct proceedings in customs disputes and settle. them whenever the dispute involves sums of less than 500,000 CFA francs in defrauded or jeopardized duties, or sums of not more than 2,000,000 CFA francs in value if there are no defrauded or jeopardized duties. Furthermore, he shall deal with infractions committed by travellers which have not given rise to judicial proceedings, as well as infractions punishable by token fines, - co-ordinate and supervise application of the customs legislation and regulations in the Common Offices, In the Central African Republic, the Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Chad, a Customs official shall be placed at the disposal of the Minister of Finance in the capacity of technical advisers He shall be appointed by the said Minister on a proposal by the Chief of Service of the Common Customs Offices, ARTICLE 17. The Chief of Service of the Common Customs Offices, in co-operation and agreement with the Director ofCustoms of Gabon shall classify on the basis of assimilation those goods which are not included in the tariff. ARTICLE 18. Subject to the powers which have been passed to the Community authorities under the Constitution of 4 October 1958, any dispute arising between the signatory States concerning the application of this Convention shall be settled by an arbiter designated by the Conference of Heads of State or by the Court of Arbitration. ARTICLE 19. This Convention shall come into force definitively upon ratification by the contracting States according to the legislative procedure of each of them. It may be modified or denounced by one of the signatory States in the forms followed for its adoption. The denunciation shall take effect only at the end of the calendar year falling at least six months after its notification to the Customs Union.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX 1. COMMON CUSTOMS OFFICES OF THE UNION 1. In the Republic of the Congo: BRAZZAVILLE - POINTE-NOTRE - MOSSAKA - MINDOULI- DOLISIE. 2. In the Central African Republic: BANGUI - BERBERATI-BOUAR - BANGASSOU - BABOUA - ZINGA - MOBAYE - BIRAO - BAMBOUTI - OUANGO. 3. In the Republic of Chad: FORT-LAMY - FORT-ARCHAMBAULT - PALA - LERE - RlG-RIC - MOUNDOU BONGOR - FADA - ABECHER - ADRE - BAGA-SOLA - FIANGA - IARGEAU - ZOUAR. ANNEX 2 COMMON POSTS OF THE CONSIGNMENT CONTROL SERVICE OF THE "UNION" 1. Gabon Republic: LIBREVILlE - PORT-GENTIL - BITAM 2. Republic of the Congo: POINTE-NOTRE 3.Central African Republic: - BANGUI - BERBERATI - BOUAR 4. Republic of Chad: FORT- LAMY
