MainText:
His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco and the Government of the French Republic, referring to the Treaties of February 2, 1861 and July 17, 1918 and more particularly to Article 6 of the latter, have agreed on the following provisions: ARTICLE 1.- French territory and Monegasque territory, including their territorial waters, form a customs union. The Customs Code, import and export customs duties, other laws and customs regulations of the French Republic are applicable in the Principality of Monaco. There is only one customs line in the Principality. Established on the side of the sea, it is only a section of the French customs line existing on the Mediterranean coast. The provisions of the French Customs Code concerning the maritime zone of the radius apply up to the distance fixed by French customs legislation. ARTICLE 2 .- The policing of the ports of the Principality belongs to the Government of His Serene Highness, which exercises it through the port commander. The latter may only collect, in this respect, duties other than duties, taxes and other charges levied by the French Administration by virtue of this agreement. ARTICLE 3 .- French regulations and tariffs relating to health policy are applicable in the Principality. ARTICLE 4.- French ships enjoy the same treatment in the Principality's ports as Monegasque ships and conversely, Monegasque ships enjoy in French ports the same treatment as French ships. The navigation permits and ship safety certificates issued by the Monegasque authority are valid in the same way as the permits and certificates issued by the French authority, in execution of the legislation on the safety of maritime navigation. The navigation time of French sailors on Monegasque ships is counted for their retirement. ARTICLE 5 .- Internal taxes levied on imports into France by the Customs service on behalf of the Indirect Tax Administration, compensation surcharges provided for by the General Tax Code, balancing payments on rums, tafias and alcohol-based products intended for oral consumption imported from the French overseas departments, turnover taxes and similar taxes levied on entry into France are payable on importation into the Principality according to the laws and regulations applicable to imports into France. ARTICLE 6 .- Subject to the provisions of Article 7 of this Agreement, the duties, taxes and other charges, including navigation duties and taxes, provided for by French customs legislation and regulations, sanitary taxes, as well as the duties, taxes and surcharges referred to in the preceding article are collected on behalf of France, by the French Administration.The same applies to internal duties and taxes when the products subject to these duties and taxes are shipped from France to the Principality. ARTICLE 7 .- The annual product of the duties, taxes and other charges listed below and collected in French customs territory, with the exception of the overseas departments and in the Principality, by the French Customs and Duties Administration indirect is distributed by mutual agreement between the Principality of Monaco and the French Republic: - duties, taxes and other charges provided for by French customs legislation and regulations; - taxes, surcharges and balances referred to in Article 5 of this Agreement with the exception of turnover taxes and similar taxes. ARTICLE 8.- All Customs employees and agents in the Principality must be French; they are appointed by the Government of the Republic after having been approved by the Prince's Government, which reserves the right to request their replacement. ARTICLE 9 .- The Prince's Government provides, at its own expense, the premises necessary for the barracks of French customs officers and the installation on the quays of the Port of the customs office and the guardhouse. The Prince's Government also bears the cost of surveillance of the warehouses, the salaries and emoluments relating to the jobs necessary for the operation of the warehouses and the opening of the Monaco station to international transit, as well as the cost of the installations that the traffic development. ARTICLE 10.- All employees and agents of French Customs in the Principality are subject to the jurisdiction of the French courts with respect to crimes and misdemeanors of which they may be guilty in the exercise of their functions. In this case, the investigation is led by a French judge, but the findings, the visits to the scene and allthe operations of the investigation will be carried out on the territory of the Principality by a judge of the court of Monaco under a letter rogatory from the French judge previously endorsed by a member of the Public Prosecutor's Office. However, the authorities of the Principality can, if necessary, proceed, in the event of flagrante delicto, to the arrest of the defendant as well as to the observation of a crime or an offence. ARTICLE 11 .- Infringements of the laws and regulations applicable in the Principality as a result of the customs union may be observed by agents of the competent French administration exercising or authorized to exercise their functions within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal de grande instance of Nice where the minutes are affirmed, if applicable. They are prosecuted at the request of the competent French Administration. In the event of a finding in the Principality of flagrant customs offence, the defendants captured must be brought immediately before the representative of the Public Ministry of Monaco who decides on the basis of the report on their arrest or on their release on bail, the latter being determined in accordance with French customs legislation. Employees and agents of French Customs may request the Monegasque authorities to arrest suspects of smuggling and that the Public Ministry of Monaco search for individuals interested in fraud or accomplices thereof. This provision does not preclude the ex officio prosecution of offenses by the Monegasque authorities. Summonses to appear before the competent French courts in the cases provided for by this article and by the preceding article are given at the request of the French Authority, but they are served by the bailiffs or agents of the Principality, after having received the visa prescribed in article 10. The French courts may impose the penalties imposed by French law on the witnesses thus summoned who have not appeared either before the examining magistrates or before the French courts.Judgments rendered in the various cases above are enforceable in the Principality on the requisition bearing the aforementioned visa and sent by the competent French authority to the enforcement agents of the Principality. Imprisonment and coercion pronounced by French courts are suffered in France. ARTICLE 12 .- The Parties will set up a Joint Consultative Commission which will meet at the request of one or other of them. This commission will be composed of representatives of the Administrations concerned from each State. The mission of the Commission shall be to examine any difficulties which may arise in the interpretation or application of this Convention which could not be settled through diplomatic channels and to propose a solution to the Parties. ARTICLE 13 .- This Agreement shall be approved in accordance with the constitutional provisions in force in each of the two countries. It shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the exchange of notifications establishing that, on both sides, these provisions have been complied with and shall remain so as long as it has not been denounced by the one or other of the Contracting Parties, with six months' notice. It will produce its effects retroactively to the date of October 13, 1962 in such a way that there is no solution of continuity for the settlement of customs issues covered by Title 1 of the previous Convention of December 23, 1951. At the time of signing the Customs Convention of today's date, the signatories made the following concurring declaration, which forms an integral part of the Convention:I The French Customs and Excise Administration ensures in the Principality of Monaco, under the same conditions as in France, the application of: - the regulation of imports and exports of goods, as well as texts relating to the control of foreign trade; - the regulations relating to trademarks or indications of origin or provenance as well as to trademarks; - the regulations relating to the control of the library; and, in general, of all legislative or regulatory texts in force in France, relating in any way whatsoever to prohibition or restriction on import or export or making import or export subject to special formalities whose control is entrusted to Customs. The French Government, within the Mixed Commission provided for in article 12, will examine in a benevolent spirit the difficulties which the application of the preceding provisions might raise. II Pursuant to Article 7 of today's Agreement, the Government of the French Republic pays each year to the Prince's Treasury a sum the amount of which is determined by multiplying the annual product of the duties, taxes and other charges referred to in the said article, allocated by a coefficient fixed by mutual agreement by the ratio existing between the population of the Principality on the one hand and the total of the populations of metropolitan France and the Principality on the other hand. Payments are made annually on the basis of the results observed during the previous year and after publication of the statistics of receipts made during the entire year. However, during the year, quarterly installments representing, overall, four-fifths of the sums paid for the previous year are paid in arrears. A regularization takes place, as soon as possible, after the publication of the annual revenue statistics. If the installments paid prove to be greater than the allocation due for the entire year, the overpayment is deducted, until it is extinguished, from the following quarterly installments. III A real warehouse of tariffed and prohibited goods may be established in Monaco, by Order of the Prince, under the conditions provided for by French legislation. IV The two Governments are empowered to revise, by mutual agreement, the provisions of Article 4 of the Convention relating to the determination of the Monegasque nationality of ships. V No advantage may be granted, in the form of a bonus or otherwise, to industries established in the Principality, which produce or manufacture for the domestic market or for export, over similar French industries.By the words no benefit both Parties mean: - import or export premiums; - special advantages for goods imported or exported under the transit regime, as well as for those subject to a temporary admission account; - the restitution, in whole or in part, of the duties provided for by the Convention and the taxes collected for the operations of the port and the warehouse; - total or partial reimbursement of direct or indirect taxes; - tax refunds, subsidies, interest guarantees and other similar terms. The Prince's Government undertakes to take all necessary measures to prevent and repress fraud prejudicial to the Treasury and to French commerce, on all goods and in particular on precious objects or metals. VII Shipments intended for the Monegasque Red Cross are admitted free of duties and taxes levied by the Customs Service under the same conditions and subject to the same reservations as shipments intended for the French Red Cross. VII For the application of the provisions appearing under paragraph II of this Protocol, the populations to be considered, as regards both France and Monaco, are those recorded by the latest official censuses, excluding tourists staying in hotels and tourists passing.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
