MainText:
Agreement establishing an Association between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Republic of Lebanon THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND ("the United Kingdom") and THE REPUBLIC OF LEBANON ("Lebanon") (hereinafter referred to as "the Parties"), RECOGNISING that the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an Association between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Lebanon, of the other part, done at Luxembourg on 17 June 2002 ("the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement") and the agreement in the form of a Protocol between the European Community and the Republic of Lebanon establishing a dispute settlement mechanism applicable to disputes under the trade provisions of the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement, done at Brussels on 11 November 2010 ("the EU-Lebanon Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol") will cease to apply to the United Kingdom when it ceases to be a Member State of the European Union, or at the end of any transitional arrangement during which the rights and obligations under these agreements continue to apply to the United Kingdom; DESIRING that the rights and obligations between the Parties as provided for by the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement and the EU-Lebanon Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol should continue; HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: ARTICLE 1. Objectives 1. The overriding objective of this Agreement is to preserve the links between the Parties established by the association created in Article 1 of the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement. 2. In particular, the Parties agree to preserve the preferential conditions relating to trade between the Parties which resulted from the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement and to provide a platform for further trade liberalisation between the Parties. 3. For the avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that the Parties establish an association as well as a free trade area in goods and associated rules in accordance with this Agreement and affirm the objectives in Article 1 of the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement and Article 1 of the EU-Lebanon Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol. ARTICLE 2. Definitions and Interpretation 1. Throughout this Instrument: (a) "EU-Lebanon Agreements" means the Agreements defined in Article 3(1); (b) "Incorporated Agreements" means the provisions of the EU-Lebanon Agreements as incorporated into this Agreement (and related expressions are to be read accordingly); and (c) "mutatis mutandis" means with the technical changes necessary to apply the EU-Lebanon Agreements as if they had been concluded between the United Kingdom and Lebanon, taking into account the object and purpose of this Agreement. 2. Throughout the Incorporated Agreements and this Instrument, "this Agreement" means this Instrument and the Incorporated Agreements. 3. Throughout the Incorporated Agreements references to financial cooperation cover a range of forms of such cooperation and means by which it may occur, including cooperation through multilateral and regional organisations. ARTICLE 3. Incorporation of the EU-Lebanon Agreements 1. The provisions of the following agreements (together referred to as the "EU- Lebanon Agreements") in effect immediately before they cease to apply to the United Kingdom are incorporated into this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, subject to the provisions of this Instrument: (a) the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement; and (b) the EU-Lebanon Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol. 2. The obligations in the Joint Declarations made by the parties to the EU- Lebanon Association Agreement in relation to that Agreement shall apply with the same effect, mutatis mutandis, to the Parties to this Agreement, subject to any modifications provided for in Annex I of this Instrument. ARTICLE 4. References to European Union Law 1. Except as otherwise provided, references in this Agreement to European Union law are to be read as references to that European Union law in force as incorporated or implemented in United Kingdom law as retained European Union law on the day after the United Kingdom ceases to be bound by the relevant European Union law. 2. In this Article "United Kingdom law" includes the law of the territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible to whom this Agreement extends, as set out in Article 6. ARTICLE 5. References to the Euro Notwithstanding Article 3(1), references to the euro (including "EUR" and "€") in the Incorporated Agreements shall continue to be read as such in this Agreement. ARTICLE 6. Territorial Application 1. For the avoidance of doubt in relation to incorporated Article 90, this Agreement shall apply: (a) in respect of the United Kingdom, to the extent that and under the conditions which the EU-Lebanon Agreements applied immediately before they ceased to apply to the United Kingdom, to the territory of the United Kingdom and the following territories for whose international relations it is responsible: (i) Gibraltar; and (ii) the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and (b) in respect of Lebanon, to the territory of Lebanon, including the land, maritime and airspace under its sovereignty, and the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf within which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international law and its domestic law. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1(a) and Article 11 of this Instrument, this Agreement shall apply to those territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible listed in paragraph 1(a) from the date of written notification by the United Kingdom to Lebanon of the application of this Agreement to those territories. ARTICLE 7. Continuation of Time Periods 1. The Parties agree that unless this Instrument provides otherwise: (a) if a period in the EU-Lebanon Agreements has not yet ended, the remainder of that period shall be incorporated into this Agreement; and (b) if a period in the EU-Lebanon Agreements has ended, any ongoing right or obligation in the EU-Lebanon Agreements shall apply between the Parties and that period shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a reference in the Incorporated Agreements to a period relating to a procedure or other administrative matter (such as a review, committee procedure or notification) shall not be affected. ARTICLE 8. Further Provision In Relation to the Association Council and the Association Committee 1. The Association Committee which the Parties establish under incorporated Article 77 shall ensure that this Agreement operates properly. 2. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, any decisions adopted by the Association Council or the Association Committee established by the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement before the EU-Lebanon Agreements ceased to apply to the United Kingdom shall, to the extent those decisions relate to the Parties to this Agreement, be deemed to have been adopted, mutatis mutandis, and subject to the provisions of this Instrument, by the Association Council or the Association Committee established under incorporated Articles 74 and 77, respectively. 3. Nothing in paragraph 2 prevents the Association Council or the Association Committee making decisions which modify, are different to, revoke or supersede the decisions deemed to have been adopted by it under that paragraph. ARTICLE 9. Integral Parts of this Agreement The Annexes to this Instrument are integral to this Agreement. ARTICLE 10. Amendments 1. Upon the request of either Party, the Parties shall discuss such request and may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement, having regard to the objectives set out in Article 1 of this Instrument. An amendment shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date of receipt of the later of the Parties' notifications that they have completed their internal procedures, or on such date as the Parties may agree. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Association Council (or the Association Committee insofar as such powers are delegated to it by the Association Council under incorporated Article 77) may decide that the Annexes, Appendices, Protocols, Joint Declarations and Notes to this Agreement, should be amended. The Parties may adopt such a decision of the Association Council or the Association Committee subject to their internal procedures. ARTICLE 11. Entry Into Force and Provisional Application 1. Articles 92 and 93 of the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement and Article 23 of the EU-Lebanon Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 2. Each of the Parties shall notify the other in writing of the completion of the procedures required by its law for the entry into force of this Agreement. 3. This Agreement shall enter into force on the later of: (a) the date on which the EU-Lebanon Agreements cease to apply to the United Kingdom; and (b) the date of the later of the notifications by which the Parties notify each other that they have completed their respective legal procedures. 4. Pending entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may agree to provisionally apply this Agreement, or provisions of it, by an exchange of notifications signifying the completion of ratification or such other domestic procedures as are required for provisional application. Such provisional application shall take effect on the later of: (a) the date on which the EU-Lebanon Agreements cease to apply to the United Kingdom; and (b) the date of the later of the Parties' notifications. 5. A Party may terminate the provisional application of this Agreement, or provisions of it, by written notification to the other Party. Such termination shall take effect on the first day of the second month following notification. 6. Where this Agreement is, or certain provisions of this Agreement are, provisionally applied, the term "entry into force of this Agreement" in any provisionally applied provisions shall be deemed to refer to the date that such provisional application takes effect. 7. The United Kingdom shall submit notifications under this Article to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon. Lebanon shall submit notifications under this Article to the United Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office or its successor. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement. Done at London on this nineteenth day of September 2019 in duplicate in the English and Arabic languages, both texts being equally authoritative. In the event of any divergence, the English version shall prevail. For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland: CONOR BURNS For the Government of the Republic of Lebanon: GEBRAN BASSIL

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX I The incorporation of the provisions of the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement into this Agreement is further modified as follows and as set out in Annex I: 1. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE I POLITICAL DIALOGUE (a) In Article 5(2) for the word "shall" substitute "may". 2. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE II FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS (a) In Article 15(1) for "Five" substitute "Three". (b) In Article 19: (i) in paragraph 1 for the words "the day of conclusion of the negotiations" substitute "10 January 2002"; (ii) in paragraph 3 for the words "the day of conclusion of the negotiations" substitute "10 January 2002"; (iii) in paragraph 4 for the words "of conclusion of the negotiations" substitute "preceding the signature of this Agreement". (c) Article 20 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) In Article 22(2) the final sentence shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (e) Article 24(1) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (f) In Article 24(2) the words "Until the necessary rules referred to in Article 35(2) are adopted," shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 3. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE III RIGHT OF ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES (a) In Article 30(1) for the words ". This provision shall take effect from the date of the final accession of Lebanon to the WTO" substitute ", from the date that the GATS applies to both Parties". (b) In Article 30(5) for the words "Lebanon's accession to the WTO" substitute "the date that the GATS applies to both Parties". 4, MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE IV PAYMENTS, CAPITAL, COMPETITION AD OTHER ECONOMIC PROVISIONS (a) In Article 35(2) for "five" substitute "two". 5. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE V ECONOMIC AND SECTOR COOPERATION (a) In Article 44(a) the first and second bullet points shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) Article 44(d) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) Article 49 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) In Article 52 the following shall not be incorporated into this Agreement: (i) in paragraph (a) the words "linked to the main trans-European lines of communication"; and (ii) paragraphs (b) and (c). (e) Article 53(2)(e) shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. In Article 54(d) the words "and the interconnection of such networks with Community networks" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 6. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VI COOPERATION IN SOCIAL AND CULTURAL MATTERS (a) For Article 68(2) substitute: "In respect of the United Kingdom the obligation in this Article applies only in respect of: (a) British citizens; (b) British subjects with the right of abode in the United Kingdom; and (c) British Overseas Territories citizens who acquire their citizenship from a connection with Gibraltar.". (b) In Article 69(1) the second sentence, which commences "These agreements shall also cover...", shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 7. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VII FINANCIAL COOPERATION (a) In Article 72 the words "Within the framework of Community instruments intended to buttress structural adjustment programmes in the Mediterranean countries - and" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 8. MODIFICATIONS TO TITLE VII INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS (a) In Article 81 the words ", and between the Economic and Social Committee of the Community and its counterpart in Lebanon" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (b) In Article 82(1) immediately after the words "this Agreement" insert ", taking into account the provisions of Article 2 of the EU-Lebanon Dispute Settlement Mechanism Protocol specified in Article 3 of this Instrument". (c) In the first paragraph of Article 82(4) the final sentence shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) Article 88 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (e) In Article 89(2) after the words "other Party" insert "in writing". (f) Article 91 shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 9. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNEX 2 INTELLECTUAL, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTY REFERRED TO IN article 38 (a) In paragraphs 1 and 2, the words "By the end of the fifth year after the entry into force of this Agreement," and "or which are de facto applied by Member States" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. 10. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL 1 CONCERNING ARRANGEMENTS APPLICABLE TO IMPORTS INTO THE COMMUNITY OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS ORIGINATING IN LEBANON REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 14(1) (a) After paragraph 2 insert the following as a new paragraph: "2. bis. Subject to paragraph 3, for import tariff quotas listed in this Protocol that increase over time, the basic volume of each tariff quota during the year this Agreement enters into force shall be: (i) should this Agreement enter into force in 2019, the volume specified in Column B ("Tariff quota"); or (ii) should this Agreement enter into force after 2019, the volume specified in Column B ("Tariff quota") combined with the applicable volume specified in Column E ("Annual increase") for each administration period after 2019 until and including the year of entry into force.". (b) At the start of paragraph 3 insert "Except where otherwise provided, the administration period for tariff quotas applied under this Protocol shall be 1 January to 31 December for each year this Agreement is in force." (c) For the table of tariff quotas, including the footnotes, substitute: (table of tariff quotas) 11. MODIFICATIONS TO PROTOCOL 5 ON MUTUAL ASSISTANCE BETWEEEN ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES IN CUSTOMS MATTERS (a) In Article 10 the following shall not be incorporated into this Agreement: Gi) "in paragraph 2, the words", including, where appropriate, legal provisions in force in the Member States of the Community". (b) In Article 13(1) the words "the competent services of the Commission of the European Communities and" and "as appropriate" shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (c) In Article 14(1) the words "Taking into account the respective competencies of the European Community and the Member States," and the third bullet point shall not be incorporated into this Agreement. (d) In Article 14(2) for the words "or may be concluded between individual Member States and Lebanon" substitute "concluded between the United Kingdom and Lebanon prior to the date this Agreement is signed".
