MainText:
The Governments of the Republics of Panama and Guatemala, committed to strengthening the traditional ties of fraternal friendship that exist between both countries and committed to the need to expand their markets, to increase production in such a way as to maximize trade between the two countries, so that the It tends to produce equitable economic benefits and to ensure, as far as possible, that the magnitudes of these benefits are similar so that they ensure the active, voluntary and permanent participation of both parties, as well as raising the standards of living and employment of their respective towns,have decided to enter into this Free Trade and Preferential Exchange Agreement. ARTICLE 1 The Contracting States agree to establish a regime of free trade and preferential exchange in accordance with this Treaty. ARTICLE 2 The natural or manufactured products originating in the territories of the Contracting Parties that appear in the lists annexed to this Treaty, or that are added hereinafter, shall enjoy free trade, preferential treatment, or be subject to quantitative controls. Products originating from the Contracting Parties will not be considered those that are simply assembled, packaged, packaged, mixed, cut or diluted in the exporting country. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when there is doubt about the origin of a merchandise and the problem has not been resolved by bilateral management, it will correspond to the Permanent Mixed Commission that is established later, Both the annexed lists and the additions or modifications to them, are part of this Agreement and must be coded with seven digits in accordance with the tariff nomenclatures that are officially used in both countries.ARTICLE 3 Merchandise exchanged under the free trade regime will be exempt from payment of import and export duties. ARTICLE 4 Merchandise exchanged under the preferential treatment regime will only be subject to the payment of a percentage of the customs duties established in the respective general tariffs. Said percentage will be specified in the annexed lists and in their additions. Preferential treatment should be established for each product. ARTICLE 5 Merchandise exchanged under the Free Trade or Preferential Treatment regime will be exempt from payment of consular fees and all other taxes, surcharges and fiscal contributions caused by import and export or that are collected due to them. . ARTICLE 6 The exemptions referred to in the previous articles do not include the rates or rights of barrage, wharfage, storage and handling of merchandise, nor any others that are legally enforceable for port services of storage, custody, transport or other services of a specific nature. Similary. ARTICLE 7 The Contracting Parties undertake to examine, every two years, through the Permanent Mixed Commission, the result of the commercial exchange corresponding to the immediately preceding biennium, with the purpose of evaluating their behavior and reviewing the lists so that, if necessary, adopt the pertinent measures required to increase reciprocal commercial exchange or to comply with the spirit of equity that this Agreement inspires. ARTICLE 8 To add one or more products to the lists referred to in Article 2, or to modify the preferential treatment previously agreed, the interested Contracting Party must present a written request for consideration of the other, at least thirty days before it is examined. by the Permanent Mixed Commission. If the resolution is favorable, the Commission will notify the two Governments of the addition to the lists of approved products or the modification of the preferential treatment, and this will enter into force after the corresponding exchange of notes from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs has been verified.ARTICLE 9 When one of the Signatory States faces serious competition problems for a company or industrial branch, in particular, the affected Party will submit the matter to the attention of the Permanent Mixed Commission, which may agree to adopt or modify quantitative measures applied to products. included in the exchange list or the exclusion of items from it. These agreements will enter into force from the date established by said Commission. At the request of one of the Contracting Parties, the Mixed Commission must meet within a period of no more than 30 calendar days to decide on the adoption of the measures referred to in this Article. If they do not meet within this term, the interested Party will consider that it has not been possible to reach an agreement and may decide on unilateral measures. In the event that the Mixed Commission meets and does not reach an agreement, the affected Party may resort to the establishment of transitory measures, such as the suspension of free trade in the affected product, or the establishment of a quota or other restrictions, until such time as the Mixed Commission take the pertinent measures. In the event of suspension of free trade, the adopted measure will enter into force one year after its adoption. In the case of quotas or other restrictions, they will enter into force 60 calendar days from the date of adoption of said measure. In no case, the adoption of these measures will tend to nullify the exchange that is being carried out between the Parties.ARTICLE 10 Products originating from one of the Contracting Parties that are deposited in free zones located in the territory of the other, will enjoy the regime indicated in the lists referred to in Articles 3 and 4 when entry into the customs territory of the importing country is definitive. ARTICLE 11 The goods that are exchanged in accordance with this Treaty will be covered by a customs form signed by the exporter that must contain the declaration of origin and will be subject to the visa of the customs officials of both the country of dispatch and destination. ARTICLE 12 With the exception of the provisions of Article 13, natural or manufactured products originating in the territory of one of the signatory States shall enjoy national treatment in the territory of the other in terms of taxes, fiscal or municipal contributions on production, sale, trade or consumption. They will not be subject to any type of quantitative measure, with the exception of health, security or police controls applicable in the territories of the Contracting Parties. In the case of internal taxes established or established on specific products that are not produced in the importing country, such taxes will be prevented from becoming an import levy that tends to nullify trade. In any case, the importing country must tax, at least in the same amount and for the same concepts, the importation of similar products from third countries. ARTICLE 13 The participation of the Republic of Panama in this Treaty shall be subject to the condition that it shall be in force throughout the territory of the Republic of Panama, excluding lands and lands covered by water that are subject to jurisdictional limitations, for the end of the validity of international treaties or agreements entered into with third countries.ARTICLE 14 The Contracting Parties undertake not to grant the concessions that they have mutually agreed or that will be agreed by virtue of this Treaty, to non-Central American third countries with which they enter into commercial agreements or treaties, on the basis of the most favored nation clause. ARTICLE 15 Taking into account that unfair trade undermines the purposes for which this Treaty is signed, each of the Contracting Parties will avoid, by the legal means at its disposal, the export of merchandise at a price lower than its normal value, in order to avoid distortions in production and trade in the importing country. When either of the Contracting Parties considers that there is evidence of unfair trade, it will submit the case to the consideration of the Permanent Mixed Commission so that it, within five days following receipt of the request, rules on the matter or authorizes a temporary suspension of free trade. trade or preferential treatment, allowing exchange then only by depositing a bond for the amount of customs duties established in the respective general tariffs. The suspension will be authorized for a maximum period of 30 days, during which the Commission will issue its final resolution. If the opinion of the Commission has not been obtained within the aforementioned five days, the affected State may in any case demand the deposit of the bond. In the event that the Mixed Commission verifies the existence of unfair trade, the affected Party will make the bond effective and will also collect the value of customs duties retroactively one month from the date on which it filed the complaint. In the event that the same unfair trade conditions remain, the payment of the tax established in the corresponding tariffs will continue to be required. ARTICLE 16 The Contracting States agree to provide the necessary facilities so that the established trade, and that which may be established between them, is carried out as smoothly as possible, avoiding any discriminatory practice of an administrative or customs nature. ARTICLE 17 In order to facilitate the trade operations derived from this Agreement and improve the conditions of competitiveness between the two countries, the Contracting Parties will timely establish the necessary mechanisms to achieve full use of the financial, transport, storage and free zone facilities, as well as to implement a payment clearing system.ARTICLE 18 When one of the Parties modifies its current exchange regime, it will notify the other Party in the most expeditious manner possible. If one of the Parties considers that a company or industrial branch would be affected by the adoption of measures of this nature, it will submit the problem to the knowledge of the Permanent Mixed Commission for the adoption of the pertinent measures to correct such situation. These measures may be of a transitory nature and in no case shall they exceed what is necessary to re-establish the existing competitive relationship prior to the entry into force of the exchange measures. ARTICLE 19 Each signatory State will grant full freedom of transit throughout its territory to goods destined for or coming from the other State. Said transit will not be subject to discrimination or quantitative restriction of any kind. In cases of cargo congestion or force majeure, each Contracting Party will equitably attend both to the mobilization of merchandise destined to supply its own population and to that of merchandise in transit for the other State. Transit operations will be carried out through the routes legally authorized for this purpose and subject to the customs laws and regulations applicable in the territory of passage. Notwithstanding this, efforts will be made to expedite the procedures for goods in transit. Goods in transit, even when they are not included in free trade and preferential treatment, will be exempt from payment of all kinds of rights, taxes or fiscal and municipal contributions, whatever their destination, but will remain subject to both the payment of the applicable rates for the provision of services as well as compliance with health, security and police measures.ARTICLE 20 The signatory States undertake to improve their communication systems to the extent possible, to facilitate and increase traffic between them; They also agree to negotiate the equalization of transport rates between their respective territories and the legal or regulatory provisions on the matter. ARTICLE 21 This Treaty and the rules derived from it will be administered by a Permanent Mixed Commission made up of the Ministers of Economy and Commerce and Industry or their representatives, and by the advisers from the public and private sectors designated by each Contracting Party. The decisions of said Commission shall bind the signatory States. ARTICLE 22 The Permanent Mixed Commission will have the following powers: Approve the lists of products subject to free trade and their additions; Approve the lists and percentages of the products subject to tariff preferences, their additions and their modifications; Examine and approve quotas or import controls and other quantitative measures, for products that enjoy free trade or tariff preferences; Study and resolve problems and conflicts related to the application of this Agreement, and unfair trade practices that affect the exchange regime established in this Agreement; Propose to the signatory States the modification or expansion of this Treaty; Meet when called by one of the Parties, but by their own right, every two years, in order to comply with the provisions of Article 7; Set the criteria and standards that will be adopted to determine the origin of the goods;Recommend mechanisms that tend to promote joint investments for the development of new activities of particular interest to both countries. In addition, encourage the adoption of industrial complementarity agreements tending to facilitate and increase reciprocal trade; Promulgate within a period of 120 days from the validity of this treaty, the regulation by which its own organization and operation is regulated; Y Carry out the functions, works and studies entrusted to it by the Signatory States, as well as those derived from this Treaty. ARTICLE 23 The Signatory States agree to resolve, within the spirit of this Treaty and in accordance with the provisions of its Regulations, any differences that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of any of its clauses. In the event that an agreement is not reached through the procedure established in the Regulation, the Contracting Parties undertake to appoint an Arbitration Commission to accept the ruling. As long as the ruling does not occur, the effects of the matter in divergence will be suspended. ARTICLE 24 This Treaty will take effect from the exchange of the ratification instruments and will remain in force until one of the signatory States denounces it. The complaint will take effect three years after its presentation. ARTICLE 25 The Signatory States agree to review this Treaty every five years.ARTICLE 26 This Treaty shall be submitted for ratification in accordance with the procedures established in each of the Signatory States. The instruments of ratification will be exchanged in Panama City, Republic of Panama, and a certified copy will be sent to the General Secretariat of the United Nations Organization for the purposes of the registry indicated in Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Treaty, in duplicate, in the city of Guatemala, on the twentieth day of the month of June, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-four.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
CHAPTER I : DEFINITIONS ARTICLE 1: For all purposes, when the following terms are used in this Regulation, they must be given the meanings indicated below: 1. "Treaty": The Free Trade and Preferential Exchange Agreement between the Republics of Guatemala and Panama signed in Guatemala City on June 20, 1974. 2. "Party", "Parties", "Contracting Parties", "Signatory States": the Republics of Guatemala and Panama. 3. "The Governments": The Governments of the Republics of Guatemala and Panama. 4. "The Permanent Mixed Commission", "The Mixed Commission", "The Commission": The Permanent Mixed Commission established in Article 21 of the Treaty. 5. "Administrative Authorities": The Directorate of Economic Integration of the Ministry of Economy of Guatemala and the Panamanian Institute of Foreign Trade. 6. "List" or "Lists": The list of products subject to commercial exchange under the Agreement. 7. "National Treatment", "Equal Treatment": Refers to the treatment received by originating goods in the territory of each of the Contracting Parties, as indicated in Articles 12 and 19 of the Treaty. 8. "Minister" or "Ministers": the Minister of Economy of Guatemala and the Minister of Commerce and Industry of Panama. 9. "Representative": The public official who represents the minister by designation of the latter before the Permanent Mixed Commission. 10. "Advise": Public Officials and Private Sector Representatives who accompany the Minister or his Representative in the Meetings of the Permanent Mixed Commission and who have been duly accredited as such. 11. "Normal Value": It is made up of the cost of production, plus sales expenses for the product in question and the profit. CHAPTER II : OF THE SYSTEM OF EXCHANGE OF PRODUCTS ARTICLE 2: The products originating in the territories of the Contracting Parties, which appear on the list annexed to the Treaty, shall exclusively enjoy the treatment indicated therein. The products that are added in the future, and the modifications that are made on the list of products subject to exchange, will enjoy the treatment agreed by the Mixed Commission, in accordance with the provisions of Article 2 of the Treaty. ARTICLE 3: The exchange lists annexed to the Treaty, as well as their additions or modifications, shall form an integral part thereof. The specific products subject to exchange must be coded with at least seven (7) digits, in accordance with the tariff nomenclatures officially used in both countries. For exchange purposes, the specific description of the product prevails, which must be consistent with its tariff classification. When there is no coincidence between what the fraction of the tariff nomenclature indicates and what the lists indicate, they will be included in the commercial exchange. Paragraph : The Administrative Authorities of the Contracting Parties will manage the breakdown of the tariff groups and subgroups, which identify the products included in the exchange list that is attached to the Treaty. For items at the level of groups and subgroups of the Tariff, tariff breakdowns will be made so that all the products covered by said groups and subgroups are included. As long as the conversion established herein is not carried out, the current regulations that were used at the time the product in question was included in the exchange lists will be applied and, in any case, what has already been negotiated prevails. ARTICLE 4: In order to add one or more products to the annexed lists referred to in the Treaty or to modify the exchange regime previously agreed upon, the interested Contracting Party, through its Administrative Authority, must submit a request for the consideration of the other. written accompanied by the necessary basic information, consisting of the specific description of the product, tariff classification corresponding to a minimum of seven digits and the name of the requesting company, at least thirty days before it is examined by the Permanent Mixed Commission. If the resolution of the Commission is favourable, This will notify the Governments of the addition to the lists of approved products or the modifications to the preferential treatment that they manage to agree on. These agreements will enter into force after the corresponding exchange of notes from the Ministries of Foreign Relations has been verified. ARTICLE 5: With the exception of the provisions of Article 13 of the Treaty, natural or manufactured products originating in the territory of one of the Parties shall enjoy national treatment in the territory of the other Party, in terms of the amounts, forms and terms of payment of taxes, fiscal or municipal contributions on production, sale, trade or consumption and any other taxes, whatever their class or denomination. They will not be subject to any type of quantitative measure, with the exception of health, security or police controls applicable in the territories of the Contracting Parties. In the case of internal taxes established or established on specific products that are not produced in the importing country, such taxes will be prevented from becoming an import levy that tends to nullify trade. In any case, the importing country must tax, at least in the same amount and for the same concepts, the importation of similar products from third countries. Paragraph : When one of the Parties establishes internal taxes that constitute a lien on the import of products covered by the Treaty and said taxes do not affect the products manufactured in that country, the Mixed Commission in a term not exceeding 30 calendar days to from the date of the call, it will determine and specify the measures that correct the problem. If it is not possible to establish corrective measures through the Mixed Commission, the affected Party may, in this sense, adopt transitory measures that tend to normalize commercial exchange, until the Mixed Commission adopts a final decision. ARTICLE 6: Originating products on the exchange lists under the Treaty, coming from one of the Contracting Parties, which are deposited in free zones located in the territory of the other, will enjoy the regime indicated in Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty. , as the case may be, when entry into the customs territory of the importing country is final. The Administrative Authorities of the importing country will establish the necessary mechanisms for the adequate admission of the products covered by the Treaty that are deposited in free zones. CHAPTER III : OF THE ORIGIN OF THE PRODUCTS ARTICLE 7: Originating products are those that are natural or manufactured in the territories of the Contracting Parties, as well as products made by hand, made fundamentally with national materials. Products originating from the Contracting Parties are not considered to be those that are simply assembled, packaged, packaged, mixed, cut or diluted in the exporting country. ARTICLE 8: Products originating from each of the Signatory Parties are considered: 1. Products extracted from its atmosphere, soil, subsoil, or continental platform; 2. Agricultural products grown or harvested in any of them; 3. Animals born or raised in said countries; 4. The products obtained from hunting and fishing referred to in the previous literal; 5. The products obtained from hunting and fishing that has been carried out within their respective territories; 6. The products of the sea extracted from ships owned or at the service of any of the Signatory States or from persons, natural or legal, nationals of the same. 7. The products made on board factory ships, from the products mentioned in the previous paragraph, provided that said ships are owned or are at the service of the Contracting States or national natural or legal persons thereof. 8. Unused and nationalized items that are only useful for the recovery of their raw materials, provided they have been used within the territory of the signatory countries; and 9. By-products, waste and waste resulting from manufacturing operations carried out in the territory of the Contracting Countries. ARTICLE 9: For the purposes of Article 7, it is considered that a manufactured product originates from one of the Parties when it meets the minimum manufacturing products, subject to verification when necessary. ARTICLE 10: The goods that are exchanged in accordance with this Treaty, will be covered by a customs form signed by the exporter that must contain the declaration of origin and will be subject to the visa of the customs officials of both the country of dispatch and destination. . The customs form must contain the specific description of the product, as well as the gross and net weight in kilos and its FOB and CIF value per product. ARTICLE 11: The products that are exchanged under the Treaty must display in a visible place and directly on them, at least the legend in Spanish "Made in ... (country of origin)" or "Produced in ... (country of origin)". originally)". Notwithstanding the foregoing, if due to the nature of the products, their size or the way in which they are marketed, it is not possible for them to bear the legend of origin, it must appear on the wrappers, boxes, containers, packages or containers that contain it. contain. The provisions of this article are not applicable to products that are marketed in bulk or without packaging, box or wrapping, and the presentation of the customs form will suffice. For products for human consumption, the sanitary registry of the importing country will also be required. ARTICLE 12: In case of doubt about the origin of a merchandise, the customs office of entry will immediately transfer the matter to the respective Administrative Authority, whose decision will be binding. To resolve cases of doubt about the origin of a merchandise, the Administrative Authority of the importing country will have a period of no more than 30 calendar days, including any action before the Administrative Authority of the exporting country. If an agreement is not reached between the Administrative Authorities, the Administrative Authorities will convene the Permanent Mixed Commission so that, within a term of no more than 30 calendar days from the Summons, it will definitively rule on the origin of said merchandise. Failing to do so, it will be considered that the Parties have not reached an agreement and the affected party may opt for unilateral measures in relation to the product that is the object of the problem while the doubt is clarified, and at the request of the interested party, customs will allow the clearance of the product, subject to the granting of a bond or deposit that guarantees the amount of import taxes and other surcharges typical of the entry of the merchandise into the country. ARTICLE 13: It will be understood that there is doubt about the origin of a product, if in the country of destination there is sufficient rational indication that it is not originating due to the presence of some of the following circumstances: 1. When it seems evident that the merchandise in question does not meet the origin requirement; 2. When it is generally known that the good in question is not produced in any of the Signatory States; 3. When the containers, packaging or products bear legends other than those ordered by Article II of this Regulation; 4. When such legends show obvious signs of having been altered or are superimposed on others that identify the product as originating from third countries; 5. When the customs form that covers them has been subject to alterations such as amendments, interlineations or any other correction that has not been saved before the corresponding signature, or the declarations that appear in the original of that document and their respective copies are not identical; Y 6. Any other analogous to the above. ARTICLE 14: For the purposes of this Chapter, the Contracting Parties, the producers and/or exporters will collaborate by providing the essential data to verify the origin of the products, allowing the inspections deemed appropriate for this purpose. Producers will not be required to provide specific information on formulas that constitute trade secrets. CHAPTER IV : PROBLEMS OF COMPETITION ARTICLE 15: When any of the Signatory States, after verification by the affected country, faces serious competition problems for a company or industrial branch in particular, due to measures that place it at a competitive disadvantage, the affected Party shall submit the matter to the attention of the Permanent Mixed Commission, which may agree on the adoption or modification of quantitative measures applied to the product or products subject to the problem included in the exchange list to the exclusion of these items from it. These agreements will enter into force from the date established by said Commission. At the request of one of the Contracting Parties, the Mixed Commission must meet within a period of no more than 30 calendar days from the date of the Call, to decide on the adoption of the Measures referred to in this Article. If they do not meet within this term, the interested Party will consider that it has not been possible to reach an agreement and may decide on temporary unilateral measures that tend to normalize the exchange of affected products. In the event that the Mixed Commission meets and does not reach an agreement, the affected Party may resort to the establishment of transitory measures, such as the suspension of the treatment that the lists contemplate, for the affected product or the establishment of a quota or other restrictions. until the Mixed Commission takes the pertinent measures. In the event of suspension of free trade, the adopted measure will enter into force one year after its adoption. In the case of quotas or other restrictions, they will enter into force 60 calendar days from the date of adoption of said measure. In no case, the adoption of these measures will tend to nullify the exchange that is being carried out between the Parties. ARTICLE 16: Taking into account that unfair trade undermines the purposes for which the Treaty was signed, each of the Contracting Parties will avoid, by legal means available, the export of merchandise at a price lower than its normal value, in order to to avoid distortions in production and trade in the importing country. When either of the Contracting Parties considers that there is evidence of unfair trade, it will submit the case to the consideration of the Permanent Mixed Commission so that it, within five business days following receipt of the request, rules on the matter or authorizes a temporary suspension of trade. treatment granted, meanwhile allowing import only by depositing a bond for the amount of customs duties established in the respective general tariffs. The suspension will be authorized for a maximum period of 30 days during which the Commission must issue its final resolution. In the event that the Mixed Commission verifies the existence of unfair trade, the affected Party will make the bond effective and will also collect the value of customs duties retroactively one month from the date on which it filed the complaint. In the event that the same unfair trade conditions remain, the payment of the tax established in the corresponding tariffs will continue to be required. ARTICLE 17: For the purposes of Articles 15 and 16 of this Regulation, when a company faces competition or unfair trade problems, it must submit a study in writing to the Administrative Authority of its country, demonstrating the existence and degree of intensity of the problem. Said Authority must verify the evidence of the case and if it verifies the problem, the Signatory State to which said Authority belongs will submit the matter to the Mixed Commission, which will resolve it in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty. At the time of convoking the Mixed Commission, the affected Party will send to the other Signatory State a written study related to the existing problem. ARTICLE 18: When one of the Parties modifies its current exchange regime, it will formally communicate it in writing to the other Party in the most expeditious manner possible. If one of the Parties considers that a company or industrial branch would be affected by the adoption of measures of this nature, it will submit the problem to the knowledge of the Permanent Mixed Commission for the adoption of the pertinent measures to correct such situation, which must meet within a period of no more than ten calendar days from the date of the call to make a decision on the matter. If this is not done, or if the corrective measures of the case are not agreed upon, the affected Party may take transitory measures that tend to normalize the commercial exchange affected by the aforementioned exchange measures, until the Mixed Commission adopts a final decision to correct such situation. CHAPTER V : OF THE PERMANENT MIXED COMMISSION ARTICLE 19: The Permanent Mixed Commission will be made up of the Ministers of the Economy of Guatemala and of Commerce and Industry of Panama, or their respective representatives, and by the advisers from the public and private sectors designated by each Contracting Party. The members of the Commission must be duly accredited. In the meetings that the Mixed Commission celebrates and at the request of one of the Parties, other people and those who are affected by the problems under consideration by the Commission may participate, in order to provide all the information that contributes to making the decision. best decision about the problem. ARTICLE 20: The Permanent Mixed Commission will have the following powers: 1. Administer the Treaty, this Regulation and the Rules derived from them; 2. Approve the lists of products subject to free trade and their additions; 3. Approve the lists and percentages of the products subject to tariff preferences, their additions and their modifications; 4. Examine and approve quotas or import controls and other quantitative measures, for products that enjoy free trade or tariff preferences; 5. Study and resolve problems and conflicts related to the application of the Treaty and this Regulation and unfair trade practices that affect the exchange regime established in the Treaty; 6. Propose to the Signatory States: 1. The modification or extension of the Treaty 2. The modification of this Regulation 7. Meet every time one of the Parties convenes it, at an alternate venue; 8. Meet every two years to examine the result of commercial exchange, in accordance with Article 7 of the Treaty; 9. Set the criteria and standards that will be adopted to determine the origin of the goods; 10. Recommend mechanisms that tend to promote joint investments for the development of new activities of particular interest to both countries; 11. Encourage the adoption of industrial complementation agreements tending to facilitate or increase reciprocal exchange; 12. Propose to the Competent Authorities of both countries the adoption of pertinent measures for the proper functioning of the Compensation and Reciprocal Credit Agreement signed between the two Parties; 13. Carry out all the functions, works and studies entrusted to it by the Signatory States, derived from the Treaty or from this Regulation; Y 14. Evaluate and ensure compliance with any agreement signed between the Parties, to maintain or improve commercial exchange under the Agreement. ARTICLE 21: The Permanent Mixed Commission must meet ordinarily and obligatorily every two (2) years, to study the result of the commercial exchange corresponding to the immediately preceding biennium, with the purpose of evaluating its behavior and reviewing the lists so that, if necessary, the pertinent measures required to increase reciprocal commercial exchange or to comply with the spirit of equity inspired by the Treaty are adopted. The biennial meetings will be held during the second semester of the corresponding year. The Permanent Mixed Commission may hold extraordinary meetings at the request of one of the Contracting Parties. Once the date of the meeting has been agreed, it can only be changed by mutual agreement and for justified cause, except in the cases for which this Regulation determines specific terms. ARTICLE 22: To resolve any matter within its competence, the Permanent Mixed Commission must meet at the request of one of the Contracting Parties, within a period of no more than thirty calendar days, counted from the day after receiving the summons. Once the meeting date has been agreed, it can only be changed by mutual agreement and for justified cause. ARTICLE 23: The calls for the meetings of the Commission will be made by certified letter, radiogram, telex and even by telephone, but in these last three cases they must be ratified by certified letter, so that it is received with at least forty and eight (48) hours before the date of the meeting. The call and ratification will include the issues to be discussed. ARTICLE 24: The Minister of the host country or his Representative will preside over the meetings of the Permanent Mixed Commission, and exercise the functions of his position to achieve the best development of the same. During the meetings of the Permanent Mixed Commission, the Secretariat will be in charge of the Administrative Authority of the host country. ARTICLE 25: The advisers of the Minister of each Contracting Party or of their resolutely accredited Representative, will have a voice in the meetings of the Commission. The representatives of the affected companies will have a voice when the president deems it appropriate or when requested by the Minister of the other Contracting Party or his Representative. ARTICLE 26: The decisions and agreements of the Permanent Mixed Commission must be signed by the Ministers or their Representatives. Said decisions and agreements are binding on the Signatory States and will enter into force on the date on which the exchange of notes from the Foreign Ministry is carried out in the cases in which the Treaty so provides, in all other cases, the decision or agreement will enter into force on the date agreed by the Permanent Mixed Commission. ARTICLE 27: The Permanent Mixed Commission may create and designate on a permanent or temporary basis, Working Groups that are in charge of preparing the studies or carrying out the tasks that the Commission requests. Said groups will be made up of the persons that the Commission deems appropriate and must submit a report to the Commission, within the term that the Commission has indicated. ARTICLE 28: Of all the meetings of the Permanent Mixed Commission, a Minute will be drawn up in two originals that will be signed by the Minister of each Contracting Party or by his Representative. Any correction or amendment that is proposed to be introduced in the Minutes must be made before their signatures. ARTICLE 29: In the cases referred to in the second paragraph of Article 12 of these Regulations, the Commission must meet within 30 calendar days following receipt of the request, which must contain at least the following: 1. Description and characteristics, class, trade name, brand, if applicable, and any other data that serves to identify the merchandise whose origin is requested to be verified; 2. Origin of raw materials, semi-finished products and packaging used; 3. The description of the phases of the production process that are fulfilled in the elaboration of the corresponding product; 4. Concrete expression of what is requested; Y 5. Place, date and signature of the Minister or his corresponding Representative. ARTICLE 30: In order to facilitate trade operations derived from the Agreement and improve the conditions of competitiveness between the two countries, the Contracting Parties will establish in a timely manner the necessary mechanisms to achieve full use of financial, transport, storage and free zone facilities. . CHAPTER VI : CONCLUSION SOLUTIONS ARTICLE31: The differences and conflicts that arise between the Parties in the interpretation or application of the Treaty and the Regulations, in the first instance will be resolved by the Signatory States through direct settlement between the Administrative Authorities. If the arrangement is not possible, it will go to the Mixed Commission. Persons with a direct interest in the matter in dispute will not be able to take cognizance of it as members of the Commission. ARTICLE 32: The formulation of the problem and its direct settlement between the Administrative Authorities may be raised in the following ways: 1. Verbal, telephone, telegraphic or any other similar communications ratified in writing by certified letter; 2. In meetings that the Administrative Authorities agree to hold. ARTICLE 33: The requested Administrative Authority must address the matter raised by its counterpart and provide a response within twenty (20) calendar days following the date of the written communication. If after said term, a satisfactory settlement has not been reached, the matter may be brought by either Party to the knowledge and decision of the Mixed Commission, in accordance with the procedure previously established in these Regulations. ARTICLE 34: The agreements resulting from the direct settlement, as well as the issues that remain pending solution and the arguments of the Administrative Authorities, must be recorded in writing. Said agreements must contain a concise account of the facts and their legal grounds. ARTICLE 35: In the event that an agreement is not reached by the Mixed Commission through the procedure established in this Regulation, the Arbitration Contracting Parties that definitively resolve the differences of interpretation or application of the rules that regulate the exchange between the two countries, carried out under the Treaty and its Regulations. The Arbitration Commission will be made up of three (3) members: An arbitrator appointed by each of the Governments of the Contracting Parties and a third arbitrator, with the functions of president, chosen by the arbitrators representing the Governments. While the award is produced, the effects of the matter in divergence will be suspended. CHAPTER VII : CUSTOMS FACILITIES ARTICLE 36: The Contracting States, through the Administrative Authorities, agree to provide each other with the necessary facilities so that the established trade and that which may be established between them, is carried out with the greatest fluidity, avoiding any discriminatory practice of an administrative or customs. Both Parties will exchange updated information on all aspects related to the operation of the Treaty and its Regulations and the activities originating from said instruments. CHAPTER VIII : TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE 37: Each Signatory State shall grant full freedom of transit throughout its territory to goods destined for or coming from the other State. Said transit will not be subject to discrimination or restriction of any kind, with the exception of health, security or police controls applicable in the territories of the Contracting Parties. In cases of cargo congestion or force majeure, each Contracting Party will equitably attend both to the mobilization of merchandise destined to supply its own population and to that of merchandise in transit for the other State. Transit operations will be carried out through the routes legally authorized for this purpose and subject to the customs laws and regulations applicable in the territory of passage. Notwithstanding this, efforts will be made to expedite the procedures for goods in transit. Goods in transit, even when they are not included in free trade and preferential treatment, will be exempt from payment of all kinds of rights, taxes or fiscal and municipal contributions, whatever their destination, but will remain subject to both the payment of the applicable rates for the provision of services, such as compliance with health, security and police measures. ARTICLE 38: The Signatory States undertake to improve their communication systems to the extent possible, to facilitate and increase traffic between them. They also agree to negotiate the equalization of transportation rates between their respective territories and the legal or regulatory provisions on the matter. CHAPTER IX : FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 39: This Regulation will enter into force once it has been promulgated by the Signatory States, in accordance with the formalities of their internal legislation, and the Exchange of Foreign Ministry Notes has been carried out. These Regulations have been approved by the Permanent Mixed Commission of the Free Trade Agreement and Preferential Exchange between the Republics of Guatemala and Panama, at its Thirteenth Meeting held in Guatemala City, on September twenty-second, nineteen hundred and eighty six.
