MainText:
Economic Complementation Agreement No. 22 signed between the Republic of Venezuela and the Cooperative Republic of Guyana The Plenipotentiaries of the Republic of Venezuela and the Cooperative Republic of Guyana, duly authorized by their respective Governments. CONSIDERING That the Republic of Venezuela is a signatory to the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, that its Articles 7, 8 and 9 of Section III refer to partial scope agreements and Article 25 of the same instrument authorizes the conclusion of said agreements with other non-governmental countries. members of ALADI and economic integration areas of Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as the provisions of Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers that establishes the general rules for these agreements; That the results of the Second Meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Latin American Integration Association addressed the recommendations of the Quito Action Plan, approved during that Latin American Economic Conference on economic cooperation, expansion and diversification of trade, and the elimination of non-tariff restrictions; That the Republic of Guyana is a Contracting Party to the 1973 Chaguaramas Agreement, which establishes the Caribbean Community and Common Market. (CARICOM); That both countries are signatories to the Agreement establishing the Global System of Trade Preferences (GSTP) among developing countries signed in Belgrade on April 13, 1988, as well as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT); That the provisions of this partial scope Agreement do not contravene the commitments acquired by virtue of the agreements in force; and That both countries are of different levels of economic development, AGREE: CHAPTER I Object of the Agreement ARTICLE 1. The purpose of this Agreement is to stimulate trade between the signatory countries through the granting of tariff preferences and the elimination or reduction of non-tariff restrictions. CHAPTER II Definitions ARTICLE 2.- "Charges" shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether of a fiscal, monetary or exchange nature, or of any nature, that affect imports. Similar rates and surcharges will not be included in this concept when they respond to the cost of the services rendered. ARTICLE 3.- "Restrictions" shall be understood as any non-tariff measure, of any nature, through which a signatory country unilaterally prevents or hinders imports from another signatory country. CHAPTER III Tariff Preferences and Non-Tariff Restrictions ARTICLE 4.- The signatory countries agree to grant each other, on the taxes in force in their national import tariff for third countries, the tariff preferences indicated for the products included in Annexes I and II that form an integral part of this Agreement. The agreed preferences may be permanent during the term of the Agreement, or of a temporary or seasonal nature, be subject to import quotas, or fall on products from one or more sectors of their respective tariff nomenclatures. ARTICLE 5.- In this Agreement, the tariff preferences granted consist of percentage reductions, whose magnitudes will be applied to the import tariffs applicable to third countries. ARTICLE 6.- The signatory countries will refrain from applying new non-tariff restrictions to the import of negotiated products, or from making those declared more restrictive, except for measures aimed at: a) Protection of public morality; b) Application of safety laws and regulations; c) Regulation of imports or exports of arms, ammunition and other war materials and, under exceptional circumstances, of all other military articles; d) Protection of life and health of people, animals and plants; e) Import and export of metallic gold and silver; f) Protection of the national patrimony of artistic, historical or archaeological value; and g) Export, use and consumption of nuclear materials, radioactive products and any other material usable in the development or use of nuclear energy. CHAPTER IV Preservation of Tariff Preferences ARTICLE 7.- The signatory countries undertake to maintain the application of the agreed percentage preferences. Whatever the level of taxes in force for imports from third countries. ARTICLE 8.- In the event that one of the Parties raises or lowers its tariff for third countries, it shall simultaneously proceed to adjust the levy for the importation of the negotiated products, in order to maintain the agreed percentage preference. CHAPTER V Origin Regime ARTICLE 9.- The concessions registered in Annexes I and II will be applied exclusively to products originating from and coming from the territory of the signatory countries, in accordance with the provisions of Annex III, which forms an integral part of this Agreement. CHAPTER VI Safeguard Clauses ARTICLE 10.- Once the first year of validity of this Agreement has ended, the signatory countries may unilaterally impose, on a transitory basis, restrictions on the imports of products subject to tariff preferences, when imports are made in quantities and conditions such that they cause or threaten to cause serious harm to domestic producers of similar or directly competitive goods. It will be considered that there are serious damages whenever imports of products or negotiated products occur, in quantities or values ​such that they cause or threaten to cause a reduction in the national productive activity, measured by the employment index of the sector in question and by the relative drop in its production for the domestic market compared to the product imported under the preferences granted. ARTICLE 11.- The restrictions referred to in the previous article will have a maximum extension period of one year upon which expiration, if the situation that motivated its application persists, the signatory countries will proceed to review the respective concession, with a view to achieve specific solutions. ARTICLE 12.-The signatory country interested in invoking safeguard clauses will communicate it to the other affected country within seven (7) days of the entry into force of the measure, attaching the corresponding grounds and information. A safeguard clause will not be applied to products that are conclusively proven to have been shipped before the measure was applied. ARTICLE 13.- In order to preserve an adequate value or volume of exports of products affected by the safeguard clause, within thirty days (30) following the communication referred to in the previous article, the signatory countries will carry out negotiations for the purposes to establish a quota that will apply during the application of the measure. CHAPTER VII Withdrawal of Preferences ARTICLE 14.- During the term of this Agreement, the unilateral withdrawal of the agreed preferences shall not proceed. ARTICLE 15.- The exclusion of a preference that may occur as a consequence of the negotiations for the revision of this Agreement, does not constitute unilateral withdrawal. Nor does the removal of preferences agreed to term constitute withdrawal, if at the expiration of the respective terms of validity the renewal has not been carried out. CHAPTER VIII Evaluation and Review ARTICLE 16.- The signatory countries, from the entry into force of this Agreement, will annually make a joint assessment of its progress, in order to evaluate the results obtained and introduce the necessary adjustments that, by mutual agreement, they consider convenient for its best performance. ARTICLE 17.- The commitments derived from the measures and adjustments referred to in the previous article must be formalized by signing Additional or Modifying Protocols. CHAPTER IX Accession ARTICLE 18.- This Agreement is open to the adhesion of the remaining member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) and the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), after negotiation. The accession will be formalized once the terms and conditions of the same have been negotiated between the signatory countries and the acceding country, through the signing of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement. ARTICLE 19.- The tariff preferences granted by the member countries of the Latin American Integration Association in this Agreement will be automatically extended without the granting of compensation to Bolivia, Ecuador and Paraguay, regardless of negotiation or adherence to it. CHAPTER X Validity ARTICLE 20.- This Agreement will enter into force in a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, from the date of its signing, will last for three (3) years and will be automatically extended for the same number of years, unless expressly stated to the contrary by one of its signatories, six (6) months prior to its expiration ARTICLE 21.- This Agreement shall enter into force once both Governments have notified, through diplomatic channels, that they have complied internal legal requirements. CHAPTER XI Complaint ARTICLE 22.- Any of the signatory countries of this Agreement may denounce it after one year has elapsed since its entry into force. For this purpose, it must communicate its decision to the other signatory country, at least sixty (60) days in advance. Once the complaint is formalized, the rights acquired and obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country, except those referring to preferences received and granted, which will continue in force for a term of one year from the date of deposit of the instrument of denunciation. CHAPTER XII Administration of the Agreement ARTICLE 23.- For the administration and effective operation of this Agreement, the signatory countries agree to establish an Administrative Commission made up of government representatives of both countries and representatives of the private sector designated by the respective Governments. ARTICLE 24.- The Administrative Commission will meet within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, it will establish its regulations and will subsequently meet as many times as necessary. The Commission, with a view to promoting an equitable balance of trade flows between both countries, will have the following attributions, among others: 1) Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. 2) Propose to the signatory countries the inclusion of new products or the granting of greater preferences on the negotiated products. 3) Formulate to the Governments of the signatory countries the recommendations it deems appropriate to resolve the differences that may arise from the interpretation or application of this Agreement. 4) Recommend to the signatory governments any necessary amendments to this Agreement. 5) Proceed in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement, to periodically review the lists of products included in Annexes I and II. 6) Examine origin requirements and determine specific standards when necessary. 7) Periodically submit to the signatory governments a report on the evaluation and operation of this Agreement. 8) Encourage businessmen from the signatory countries to make effective use of this Agreement and propose to both governments the necessary measures in this regard. 9) Any other attribution that the signatory governments consider necessary and that results from the application of this Agreement. CHAPTER XIII Commercial Promotion ARTICLE 25.- In order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement in the most efficient way, and in particular through the Administrative Commission, the signatory Governments agree to grant each other the greatest possible facilities for commercial promotion in their respective territories, such as the exchange of missions and commercial delegations, as well as the participation in fairs and exhibitions that are held in the territory of the other signatory country. Similarly, both countries will promote business meetings and support the initiatives of the Venezuela-Guyana Mixed Commission, in order to promote and facilitate trade relations between the two countries. Through their competent official institutions, they will make effective the exchange of information on the prospects offered by the markets of each country, in order to strengthen commercial exchange. Signed in Caracas, on the twenty-seventh day of October, one thousand nine hundred and ninety, in two originals in Spanish and English, both texts equally valid. (Signed.) For the Government of the Republic of Venezuela, Reinaldo Figueredo Planchart, Minister of Foreign Affairs. For the Government of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana, Rashleigh E. Jackson, Minister for Foreign Affairs.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
ANNEX III Qualification of Origin FIRST.- The following will be considered originating from the signatory countries: a) Products made entirely in the territory of any of them, when exclusively materials originating from the signatory countries of this Agreement are used in their preparation. b) The following shall be considered as produced in the territory of a signatory country: i) The products of the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, including those of hunting and fishing, extracted, harvested or collected in its territory or in its territorial waters. ii) Sea products extracted outside their territorial waters by ships under their flag or leased by companies established in their territory; Y iii) The products that result from operations or processes carried out in its territory by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed, except when said processes or operations consist only of simple assemblies or assemblies, packaging, fractioning into batches or volumes, selection and classification, marking, composition of assortments of merchandise or other operations or equivalent processes. c) Products in the production of which materials that do not originate from the signatory countries of this Agreement are used, when they result from a transformation process carried out in the territory of one of them, which gives them a new individuality, characterized by the fact that be classified in the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature, in a position different from that of said materials. However, the products resulting from operations or processes carried out in the territory of a signatory country by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed will not be considered originating, when in said operations or processes exclusively materials or inputs are used that do not They originate from their respective countries and consist only of assemblies or assemblies, division into lots of volumes, selection, classification, marking, composition of assortments of merchandise or other similar operations or processes. d) Products resulting from assembly and assembly operations carried out in the territory of a signatory country, using materials originating from the signatory countries and from third countries when the CIF value of the destination port or CIF maritime port of the materials originating from third countries , does not exceed 50 percent of the FOB value of said products. SECOND.- The signatory countries may establish, by mutual agreement, specific origin requirements for the qualification of the negotiated products. The specific requirements of origin will prevail over the general qualification criteria established in the first article. THIRD.- In determining the origin requirements referred to in the second article, as well as in the revision of those that have been established, the signatory countries will take as a basis, individually or jointly, among others, the following elements: I ) Materials and other inputs used in production: a) Raw materials: i) Preponderant raw material or that gives the product its essential characteristic; and ii) Main raw materials. b) Parts or pieces: i) Part or piece that gives the product its essential characteristic; ii) Main parts or pieces; and iii) Percentage of the parts or pieces in relation to the total weight. c) Other inputs. II) Process of transformation or elaboration carried out. III) Maximum proportion of the value of materials imported from non-signatory countries in relation to the total value of the product, resulting from the valuation procedure agreed upon in each case. Any of the signatory countries may request the revision of the origin requirements established in accordance with the first article. In your application you must propose and justify the requirements applicable to the product or products in question. FIFTH.-. For the purposes of compliance with the origin requirements established in this annex, the materials and other inputs, originating in the territory of one of the signatory countries incorporated by another of the signatory countries to the elaboration of a certain product, will be considered as originating in the territory of the latter. SIXTH.- The criterion of maximum use of materials or other inputs originating from the signatory countries may not be used to set requirements that imply the imposition of materials or other inputs from said signatory countries, when in their opinion, they do not meet the conditions adequate supply, quality and price. SEVENTH.-It will be understood that the expression "materials" includes the raw materials, intermediate products and the parts or pieces used in the manufacture of the products. EIGHTH.- In order for the importation of the products included in this agreement to be able to benefit from the reductions in taxes and restrictions granted among themselves by the signatory countries, the documentation corresponding to the exportation of said products must include a declaration proving compliance of the origin requirements established in accordance with the provisions of the preceding articles. NINETH.-The declaration referred to in the preceding article will be issued by the final producer or exporter of the merchandise and certified by an official institution or entity authorized by the exporting signatory country. TENTH.- In all cases, the form that appears in the Annexes of this Agreement will be used. ELEVENTH.- The signatory countries will inform each other of the respective government entities that will authorize the declarations of origin and of the signatures and stamps respectively authorized. Any modification of these conditions, signatures and seals, must be communicated at least thirty (30) days in advance. TWELFTH.-Whenever a signatory country considers that the certificates issued by an institution authorized by the exporting country do not comply with the provisions contained in this regime, it will notify the aforementioned exporting country so that it can adopt the measures it deems necessary to solve the problem. the problems raised. In no case shall the importing country stop the import process for the products covered by the certificates referred to in the preceding paragraph, but it may, in addition to requesting the additional information that corresponds to the governmental authorities of the exporting country, adopt the measures it deems necessary to guarantee tax interest. In case of doubt about the origin of the merchandise, and if the problem has not been resolved by bilateral management, the import of the goods in question will not be prevented, provided that a bond is granted that guarantees the importing country the payment of taxes and other surcharges that may be caused by its importation, as if it originated from third countries. The bond will be effective or not as resolved.
