MainText:
Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of the Lebanese Republic The governments of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Lebanese Republic, desiring to Organizing economic and commercial relations between their two countries and consolidating them on foundations that are suitable for ties They agreed on the following: the brotherhood that exists between them in light of the economic, industrial and agricultural development in the two countries ARTICLE 1 In accordance with the provisions contained in this agreement and the laws and regulations in force in each of the two countries. The two contracting parties shall endeavor to develop economic and trade relations between their two countries second subject The Jordanian government allows the import of agricultural and animal products and natural resources - exporting these products. Of Lebanese origin imported directly to Jordan and allowed by the Lebanese government The Lebanese government allows the import of agricultural and animal products and natural resources - exporting these products. Of Jordanian origin imported directly to Lebanon and the Jordanian government allows - The Jordanian and Lebanese governments exempt vegetables and fruits from all customs duties Other fees and taxes imposed in the two countries when imported directly without Obtaining an import license (licence) provided that this is done in light of the calendar agriculture in both countries. - Products of vegetables and fruits imported directly from one of the parties shall be attached to the country The other party with a certificate of origin issued by the competent authorities and certified by the authorities related in both countries. - Prior coordination takes place between the two parties concerned with regard to exporting And the import of vegetables and fruits in light of the agricultural calendar in force in Kala In this regard, the two sides agreed to hold a meeting of specialists from both countries To put in place the necessary mechanism to implement the provisions of Article 2 of this agreement. ARTICLE 3 - The Jordanian government exempts live animals, animal and plant products, and wealth Natural, unprocessed products of Lebanese origin imported directly to Jordan from Customs tariff fee and other fees and taxes of similar effect. - The Lebanese government exempts live animals, animal and plant products, and wealth Natural, unprocessed products of Jordanian origin imported directly to Lebanon from Customs tariff fees and other fees and taxes of similar effect. ARTICLE 4 - The Lebanese government allows the import of industrial products of Jordanian origin within The conditions stipulated in Article 5 of this agreement and imported directly To Lebanon and the Jordanian government allows the export of these products. - The Jordanian government allows the import of industrial products of Lebanese origin within The conditions stipulated in Article 5 of this agreement and imported directly To Jordan and the Lebanese government allows the export of these products. 3 ARTICLE 5 Exempting both the Lebanese government and the Jordanian government from customs duties and fees And other taxes on products originating in one of the two contracting countries and listed on Table No. ( ) attached to this agreement . - Industrial products originating from one of the two contracting countries listed in Table No ( ) annexed to this Agreement at a rate of one-third of the normal customs tariff applied in both countries the two countries. ARTICLE 6 Industrial products are considered to be manufactured by one of the contracting parties when they are of value Local raw materials from the origin of that country involved in the production of that material with costs The local industry is less than 40% of the production costs of these products. - Products of local origin imported directly from the country of either party shall be attached Contracting parties to the country of the other party with a certificate of origin issued and certified by the competent authorities In both countries, certificates of origin are not approved after the summarization for the purposes of applying articles This agreement and the import and export operations are subject to the usual customs procedures The customs authorities in the importing country shall verify the conformity of the goods. The provisions of this agreement apply to industrial, agricultural and animal commodities and products And the natural resources manufactured in or imported through the free zones in any of the In this case, the aforementioned goods and products are not considered directly imported From the country of one party to the country of the other party. 4 ARTICLE 7 The two parties agreed to allow each of them to hold specialized exhibitions in each country The other party is among the following: - Each party shall provide the other with all facilities to hold these exhibitions in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in both countries. Goods and products originating in either of the two countries for contracting parties are exempted from customs duties And other fees and taxes that are sold during the exhibition period according to the lists Listed in Table No. ( ) within a total amount of five million US dollars For each party, provided that the share of each commodity exceeds 1% of the total value Allocations for each exhibition. - Allocations for exhibitions shown in paragraph ( ) above can be distributed to one or more exhibitions More by agreement between the Lebanese Ministry of Economy and Trade and the Ministry of Industry and Trade Jordanian. ARTICLE 8 The two contracting parties agree to establish technical cooperation and exchange studies and research To develop their economies and stimulate tourism between them. ARTICLE 9 The two parties agreed to encourage the exchange of visits and cooperation between private sector entities Both countries and provide all facilities to achieve this in a manner that serves the common interest of both the two countries including: - Establishment of joint sectoral bodies. - Establishing joint industrial, agricultural and tourism projects in both countries. - Developing exports from both countries to third party countries. ARTICLE 10 Payments shall be made in accordance with this Agreement in freely convertible currencies through banks commercial approved by the two countries, according to Ch The rents and the special systems in effect in each of them. ARTICLE 11 Desiring to facilitate the implementation of this agreement and the exchange of products between the two countries The two contracting parties to form: - A joint committee of representatives of the two countries whose mission is to: - Exchanging views on any matter arising from or related to this agreement. Work to overcome all difficulties arising from the implementation of this agreement. Presenting proposals that lead to the development of trade relations between the two countries. Both countries for ratification, and these amendments shall become effective from the date of exchanging proposals for amendments to the tables attached to this agreement and submitting them to the competent authorities in Notices between the two parties include their agreement to these amendments. e- The joint committee shall meet at least once a year alternately between the two contracting countries It can meet at any time at the request of one of the parties. - Formation of a joint follow-up committee that meets in the capitals of the two countries alternately between the two countries once Every six months with a view to evaluating the proper implementation of this agreement and to address any difficulties that may arise The committee can also meet at the request of either party. ARTICLE 12 This Agreement replaces the Amended Agreement Regulating Economic Exchange, Transit and Transport And signed between the two countries on 25/1965, with the exception of the provisions of the articles related to transit. All transfers and books exchanged in this regard, which remain valid until a contract A separate agreement regulates matters relating to transit and transportation between the two countries 6 ARTICLE 13 This Agreement shall become effective from the date of exchange of my government's documents of ratification It shall remain valid for one year and shall be renewed automatically unless one wishes The two parties terminate it by submitting a written notice three months prior to its expiry date. This agreement was done in Amman on the first of October 1992 corresponding to the fourth

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
