Agreement Between The Kingdom Of Belgium And The Grand Duchy Of Luxembourg On The Waters Of The Sauer The Kingdom of Belgium and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg Anxious to preserve the quality of the waters of the Sauer, Convinced that this quality can only be preserved through concerted action, Wishing to use natural resources to ensure the development of the regions located on either side of the border, Conscious of the efforts made at the international level, in particular within the framework of the Benelux Economic Union, the European Communities and the Council of Europe, with a view to protecting the environment and to solving, to this end, the problems of pollution cross-border, Have agreed as follows: TITLE I Works to be performed ARTICLE 1 Luxembourg and Belgium will see to the joint evacuation and treatment of waste water from the municipalities located on either side of the Sauer, from Bodange to Grumelange. ARTICLE 2 1. In order to carry out the operations referred to in Article 1, the following works shall be constructed: a) a collector with three pumping stations, from the Martelange bridge to the treatment plant referred to below; c) a wastewater treatment plant, including a pumping station, on Luxembourg territory. 2. All other infrastructure works will also be carried out, such as the development of the road system and the development of the Grumelange bridge, made necessary by the construction of the works referred to in the preceding paragraph. ARTICLE 3 The works referred to in article 2 must allow the evacuation and treatment of waste water in accordance with the conditions set out in the appendix to this Agreement. TITLE II Preparation and execution of works ARTICLE 4 1. Belgium will be responsible for drawing up the projects, acquiring the necessary buildings and placing the works for the collector and the pumping stations referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, a), as well as only for the section in Belgian territory of the common collector referred to in the same paragraph, b). 2. Luxembourg will do the same for the sections in Luxembourg territory of the common collector referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, b), for the pumping station attached to this collector as well as for the treatment and pumping stations referred to in the same paragraph, c). 3. Each of the two countries will take charge, on its territory and after consultation with the other, of the works referred to in Article 2, paragraph 2, as well as of the works which may be necessary to connect drainage networks. to the collectors referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1. This will apply in particular to the connection of the campsite located in Grumelange in Belgian territory to one of the Luxembourg sections of the common collector referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, b). ARTICLE 5 Luxembourg and Belgium will each appoint an official to direct and supervise the preparation and execution of the works in Luxembourg and Belgian territory respectively. These officials will consult each other on any question of common interest which may arise during the preparation or execution of the work. They may be assisted by experts whom they feel they should call upon. ARTICLE 6 Contracts will be awarded by way of general call for tenders or public adjudication, in accordance with the rules applied in the country where they are awarded. ARTICLE 7 The tender documents relating to the work must be approved, on the proposal of the two officials referred to in Article 5, by the Ministers or Secretaries of State of the two countries having wastewater treatment in their attributions. ARTICLE 8 1. Additional work and modifications to the works contract having a financial impact must be approved by the Ministers to the Secretaries of State referred to in Article 7. However, any modification resulting in an expenditure of less than 200,000 F shall only receive the approval of the two officials referred to in Article 5. 2. If work not provided for in the specifications or the company contracts proves to be urgent, the rule of mutual agreement referred to in the preceding paragraph may not be applied. The official of the country where the work will take place will, however, inform the official of the other country sooner. ARTICLE 9 The provisional and final acceptance of the works will be carried out by the two officials referred to in article 5, regardless of the country where the countries were carried out. TITLE III Maintenance and operation of structures ARTICLE 10 Luxembourg and Belgium will ensure, each on its territory, the maintenance and operation of the works referred to in Article 2 and Article 4, paragraph 4. TITLE IV cost sharing ARTICLE 11 1. The costs relating to the preparation and execution of the works for the construction of the collector and the pumping stations referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, a), shall be borne by Belgium. 2. The costs relating to the preparation and execution of the construction work for the common sewer and the pumping station referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, b), shall be borne up to 85% by Belgium and 15% by Luxembourg. 3. The costs relating to the preparation and execution of the works for the construction of the treatment plant referred to in article 2, paragraph 1, c), designed for the primary and secondary treatment of waste water, will be borne at competition of 85% by Belgium and 15% by Luxembourg. 4. The costs relating to the development of the said treatment plant for the tertiary treatment of waste water will be borne by Luxembourg. ARTICLE 12 1. The costs relating to the work referred to in Article 2, paragraph 2, shall be borne by Belgium or Luxembourg or shall be shared between the two countries according to the rules laid down in Article 11 for the works which will make this work necessary. 2. The costs relating to the connection works referred to in Article 4, paragraph 3, shall be borne by the country in whose territory the drainage networks to be connected to the collectors referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1 are located. ARTICLE 13 1. The maintenance costs for the works referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, a) and b), in paragraph 2, of the same article as well as in Article 4, paragraph 3, shall be borne by Belgium in territory and by Luxembourg into Luxembourg territory. 2. Maintenance expenses, including expenses for the replacement of parts, and operating expenses, including expenses for energy and consumable materials as well as labor, the work referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, c), shall be borne by Luxembourg. ARTICLE 14 Each of the two Governments will pay directly to third parties the amount of the costs relating to the work for which it assumes responsibility in accordance with the provisions of Article 4. ARTICLE 15 At the end of each quarter, each of the two Governments shall forward to the other a declaration of claim relating to the share of the other Government in the payments made during the quarter. This part will be calculated without value added tax. ARTICLE 16 The Belgian government will pay the reimbursements due to the Luxembourg governments within six months of receipt of the declarations of claim referred to in article 15. The Belgian government will deduct from these reimbursements the sums which would be due to it by the Luxembourg government in respect of share in the costs referred to in Articles 11, paragraph 2, and 12, paragraph 1. TITLE V Disputes ARTICLE 17 Any disputes that may arise between Luxembourg and Belgium regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement will, as far as possible, be settled amicably. Disputes that cannot be settled amicably will be settled in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of Conciliation, Arbitration and Judicial Settlement concluded between the two countries on October 17, 1927. TITLE VI Final provisions ARTICLE 18 This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification shall be exchanged in Luxembourg. ARTICLE 19 This Convention shall enter into force one month after the date of the exchange of the instruments of ratification. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have affixed their signatures below this Agreement. DONE in Brussels, on March 17, 1980, in duplicate, in French and in Dutch, both texts being equally authentic. For the Kingdom of Belgium, H.Simonet For the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, P Würth
NA
ANNEX Conditions to be met by the works referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1 1. Collectors The collectors will be designed in such a way as to - Avoid deposits for the dry weather average flow of wastewater (Q24/18) at commissioning, - Be able to evacuate a flow corresponding to the dry weather flow (Q24/18) multiplied by 10 (minimum dilution rate), - Prevent the flow rate corresponding to the maximum flow velocity from damaging the structures, - Guarantee the tightness of the pipes. 2. Wastewater treatment plant a) The treatment plant will be designed in such a way that it can absorb the maximum pollution load foreseeable for the period of 20 years from the entry into force of this agreement. b) The treatment plant must be able to biologically treat in rainy weather a flow equivalent to three times the dry weather flow (daily flow spread over 18 hours) and physically an additional twice this flow. c) The final effluent will meet, in dry weather, the following conditions: - the biochemical oxygen demand in 5 days, at 20ºC (BOD-5) will not exceed 20 mg/l; - the content of suspended solids will not exceed 30 mg/l; - the content of sedimentable matter after static sedimentation for 2 hours will not exceed 0.5 ml/l; - the phosphate content, expressed in P, will not exceed 2 mg/l will be. d) The organic matter content of the sludge produced will be less than 50%. e) The treatment plant and the sludge produced must not give off an unpleasant odor.
