MainText:
The Plenipotentiaries of the Republic of Nicaragua and the Republic of Venezuela, duly authorized by their respective Governments, according to powers presented in good and due form. WHEREAS The Republic of Venezuela is a signatory to the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, which in Articles 7, 8 and 9 of Section III refer to partial scope agreements and Article 25 of the same instrument authorizes the conclusion of such agreements with other countries not members of ALADI and areas of economic integration in Latin America; as well as the provisions of Resolution 2 of the Council of Ministers that establishes the general rules for these agreements; Y That the Republic of Nicaragua is an integral part of the General Treaty of Central American Economic Integration and of the Agreement on the Central American Tariff and Customs Regime and that the execution of this partial scope Agreement does not contravene the commitments acquired by virtue of the current regional agreements. AGREE: CHAPTER I Object of the Agreement ARTICLE 1.- The purpose of this Agreement is, taking into account the degree of economic development of both parties, the granting of tariff preferences and the elimination or reduction of non-tariff restrictions that allow strengthening and boosting their trade flows, in a compatible manner. with their respective economic policies, contribute to the consolidation of the integration process in Latin America. CHAPTER II Definitions ARTICLE 2.- In this Agreement: 2.1. Taxes shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether of a fiscal, monetary or exchange nature, that affect imports. Unless otherwise decided by the signatory countries for the purposes of their negotiation, similar rates and surcharges will not be included in this concept when they respond to the approximate cost of the services rendered. 2.2. Preferences will be understood as the advantages granted to the signatory countries, consisting of percentage reductions whose magnitudes are agreed upon in this Agreement and will be applied on the level of the national tariff. 23. Non-tariff restrictions shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial or any other nature, through which a signatory country prevents or hinders its imports by unilateral decision. CHAPTER III Tariff and non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 3.- The signatory countries agree, within the spirit of article 1, to reduce or eliminate the taxes and other restrictions applied to the importation of the products included in this Agreement and its respective Annexes in the terms, scope and modalities established in them. . ARTICLE 4.- The signatory countries agree to grant each other, on the current taxes, the tariff preferences indicated for the products included in the Annexes. ARTICLE 5.-The Annexes that are part of this Agreement record the preferences agreed by the signatory countries for the importation of the negotiated products, originating and coming from their respective territories, classified in accordance with their National Tariff Nomenclature. ARTICLE 6.- The signatory countries will refrain from modifying the tariff preferences registered in said Annexes, when this means a less favorable situation than the one existing at the entry into force of this Agreement. ARTICLE 7.- In the cases in which validity periods have been established for the tariff preferences, once this has ended, what is established in the respective national legislations will be applied. NON-TARIFF RESTRICTIONS ARTICLE 8.- The signatory countries may negotiate non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 9.- The Annexes record the terms of the conditions agreed upon in the negotiation of non-tariff restrictions. ARTICLE 10.- The signatory countries will refrain from applying non-tariff restrictions to the import of negotiated products, making those declared more limiting, except for measures aimed at: a) Protection of public morality; b) Application of safety laws and regulations; c) Regulation of imports or exports of arms, ammunition, and other war materials and, in exceptional circumstances, of all other military articles; d) Protection of life and health of people, animals and plants; e) Import and export of metallic gold and silver; f) Protection of the national patrimony of artistic, historical or archaeological value; and g) Export, use and consumption of nuclear materials, radioactive products and any other material usable in the development or use of nuclear energy. ARTICLE 11.- The signatory countries will periodically review the non-tariff restrictions applied under the terms of this Agreement in order to proceed by mutual agreement to their elimination or reduction. PRESERVATION OF AGREED PREFERENCES ARTICLE 12.- The signatory countries undertake to maintain the application of the agreed percentage preference regardless of the level of their current tariff for third countries. In the event that one of them raises or lowers its tariff for third countries, it must adjust the tax for the importation of the negotiated products from the other signatory countries, in order to maintain the agreed percentage preference. ARTICLE 13.- If a signatory country grants a developing country that is not a member of ALADI a tariff or non-tariff preference higher than that agreed with the other signatory country in a way that affects it, it will be readjusted immediately in order to maintain between the signatories the agreed preference. ARTICLE 14.- The signatory countries agree that the agreed concessions do not mean consolidation of tariffs against third countries. CHAPTER IV Origin Regime. ARTICLE 15.- The benefits derived from the preferences granted in this Partial Tariff Agreement will be applied exclusively to products originating in and coming from the territory of the signatory countries in accordance with the following provisions. ARTICLE 16.- The following will be considered originating from the signatory countries: a) Those goods that have been totally produced within their territories using inputs originating from them. b) Those goods that belong to the animal, vegetable or mineral kingdom and have been extracted, harvested, collected, or have been born or cultivated in the territory of the signatory countries or in their territorial waters. c) Those goods made with inputs from third countries, when these have undergone substantial transformation in the territory of the signatory countries and as long as the final product is classified in a different four-digit position in the Tariff Nomenclature of the exporting country. However, when such processes consist exclusively of simple assembly, packaging, separation, classification, brands or other equivalents, such goods will not be considered originating. d) Those goods assembled in any of the signatory countries that use inputs imported from third countries, when the CIF value of the latter is less than 50% of the FOB value of the former. e) Those goods for which either of the parties uses in their production inputs originating from the other party and/or from Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras. ARTICLE 17.- The signatory countries may adopt by common agreement Origin requirements that differ from those established in the previous numeral. ARTICLE 18.- The signatory countries may agree on specific origin requirements for those products that require it, in order to adapt them to their productive structures and to those commitments assumed with other countries. ARTICLE 19.- The criterion of maximum use of materials originating from the signatory countries of this Agreement may not be used to set requirements that imply their imposition when they do not meet adequate supply, quality and price conditions in the opinion of the signatory countries. It will be understood that the expression "materials" includes in all cases, the raw materials, intermediate products and the parts and pieces, used in the elaboration of the merchandise in question. ARTICLE 20.- The products resulting from operations or processes carried out in their respective territories by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed will not be considered originating from the signatory countries, when in said processes they exclusively use materials that originate from non-EU countries. signatories and from third countries and consist solely of assemblies or assemblies, division of lots or volumes, selection, classification, marking, composition of merchandise assortments or other similar operations and processes. ARTICLE 21.- In the documentation corresponding to the imports of the negotiated products, there must be a declaration that accredits compliance with the origin requirements established in this Agreement. Said declaration must be issued by the final producer of the goods in question, certified by an official body or authorized entity, with legal status and that works with legal authorization from the exporting country. ARTICLE 22.-The signatory countries will inform each other of the respective government entities that will authorize the declarations of origin and of the signatures and seals respectively authorized. Any modification of these conditions, signatures and seals, must be communicated within thirty (30) days following the modification. ARTICLE 23.- In case of doubt about the authenticity of the certificates of origin or presumption of non-compliance with the origin requirements declared in accordance with this Agreement, the importing country may request the corresponding additional tests and adopt the measures that considered necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest, but without stopping the processing of imports of the product or products in question. The additional tests that are required may be provided by the final producer or by the exporter, as appropriate, through the competent authorities of their country, which will send them the information resulting from the verifications that they carry out on a confidential basis. ARTICLE 24.- In all cases, the standard form that appears in the Annexes will be used. CHAPTER V Safeguard Clauses ARTICLE 25.- For the purposes of this Chapter, directly interested countries shall be understood as those that have signed this Agreement. The Safeguard Clauses will only be applicable one year after the entry into force of the concession in question or its last revision. ARTICLE 26.- The signatory countries of this Agreement may temporarily impose restrictions on the import of negotiated products, when imports occur in quantities or under such conditions that cause or threaten to cause serious damage. It will be considered that there are serious damages whenever imports of the negotiated product or products occur, in quantities or values ​such that they cause or threaten to cause a reduction in the activity of national producers, measured by the occupancy rate of the company in question. and due to the relative drop in its production for the domestic market compared to the product imported under the protection of the preferences granted. ARTICLE 27.- The signatory countries may extend to the importation of negotiated products, temporarily and in a non-discriminatory manner, the general measures that they have adopted in order to correct the imbalances in their Balance of Payments. In the application of the safeguard clause for reasons of Balance of Payments, the different degrees of development will be taken into account, for which purpose the necessary consultations will be carried out. In said consultations, the amount of the commercial exchange of the products negotiated in this Agreement will be taken into account. ARTICLE 28.-Said restrictions may be adopted, in case of emergency, unilaterally for a period of one year, upon expiration of which the interested countries will carry out consultations with the purpose of reaching definitive solutions if their application were to be prolonged for more than one year. If the cause that gave rise to its application is overcome, before the expiration of the previous term, the country invoking the clause will immediately notify the other signatory country. ARTICLE 29.- The safeguard clauses adopted unilaterally must be immediately communicated to the affected country within a period of 72 hours. Said communication must specify the restrictive measures adopted, as well as the grounds that determined their adoption. The unilateral adoption of safeguard clauses commits the importing country to make efforts to maintain an import quota subject to the agreed preferences. ARTICLE 30.- The consultations referred to in article 28 must be made to the directly affected country as a prerequisite for obtaining the extension. In its consultation, the importing country must present information that allows for an exhaustive analysis of the situation that motivates it, fundamentally of the imports that cause or threaten to cause serious damage to its national production, indicating the origin and provenance of the same. By agreement, the period during which the adopted measures that have been agreed will continue to be applied will be established. ARTICLE 31.- The safeguard clauses will expire at the expiration of the term agreed in accordance with the previous paragraph. If at the expiration of the extension period referred to in the previous numeral the causes that motivated the adoption of safeguard clauses persist, with respect to the affected products, the importing country must initiate the procedures related to negotiation or withdrawal of the agreed preferences. For these purposes, you will have a period of thirty (30) days from the aforementioned expiration, maintaining the safeguard clauses until their solution. ARTICLE 32.-The measures provided for in the previous articles will not be applied to the goods already shipped abroad on the date of their communication. Nor will it be applied to those goods whose bills of lading or air waybills are dated on or before the date of adoption of said measure. Likewise, those products whose tariff preferences have been agreed, with quota conditions or with validity less than the period foreseen for the revision of the Agreement will be exempted from the application of the measures provided for in said provisions. CHAPTER VI Differential Treatments ARTICLE 33.- In this Agreement, differential treatment is understood as the application of a principle of community solidarity that allows the equitable use of benefits, taking into account the degree of economic development of the countries, especially those with less relative economic development, to take advantage of the stimuli of integration. ARTICLE 34.-If any of the signatory countries grants an equal or greater tariff preference, on one of the products negotiated in this Agreement, to a non-signatory country with a higher degree of development than the country receiving the preference, it will be adjusted in favor of the country signatory, in such a way as to maintain a differential margin with respect to the country with the highest degree of development that preserves the effectiveness of the preference. The magnitude of said differential margin will be agreed through negotiations between the signatory countries, which will begin within thirty (30) days from the date of the claim by the affected country and will be concluded within sixty (60) days from said date. date. Differential treatment may be reinstated, indistinctly, through negotiations on any other element of the Agreement. ARTICLE 35.- If a more favorable treatment is granted to an ALADI member country of the same development category as the preference beneficiary, negotiations will be held between the signatory countries to grant the beneficiary an equivalent treatment within the terms established in the previous article. ARTICLE 36.- If no agreement is reached in the negotiations provided for in the previous articles, the signatory countries will proceed to review this Agreement. CHAPTER VII Withdrawal of Concessions ARTICLE 37.- During the term of this Agreement, the withdrawal of the agreed concessions shall not proceed, except as provided in the previous articles. ARTICLE 38.- The exclusion of a concession that may occur as a consequence of the negotiations for the revision of this Agreement does not constitute withdrawal. Nor does the withdrawal of concessions establish the elimination of the preferences agreed to term, if the renewal has not been carried out at the expiration of the respective terms of validity. CHAPTER VIII Accession ARTICLE 39.- This Agreement will be open to the accession of any Latin American country after negotiation. ARTICLE 40.- The accession will be formalized, once the terms of the same have been negotiated between the signatory countries and the adhering country, through the signing of a legal instrument of the same nature as the present one. For the purposes of this Agreement and of the additional legal instruments that are signed, the signatory country will be understood as the admitted adherent. CHAPTER IX Validity ARTICLE 41.- This Agreement will enter into force once the legal provisions established in the respective laws of the signatory countries are fulfilled. ARTICLE 42.- This Agreement will have a duration of three (3) years automatically extendable for equal periods, unless expressly notified to the contrary by one of the signatory countries made (6) months before its expiration. CHAPTER X Review ARTICLE 43.- Every year from the validity of this Agreement and during the course of the last month, the signatory countries will carry out a joint appreciation of the progress of the same, in order to evaluate the results obtained, making them compatible with the objectives set and introducing the adjustments necessary for such purposes. ARTICLE 44.- Without prejudice to what is established in the previous article, at the request of the party and at any time, the signatory countries of this Agreement may make the adjustments they deem appropriate, considering, among others, the modification of the lists of products, the establishment of new preferences and, in general, of any aspect that contributes to its better functioning and development. CHAPTER XI Complaint ARTICLE 45.- Any of the signatory countries of this Agreement may denounce it after one year has elapsed since its participation in it. For this purpose, it must communicate its decision to the other signatory countries, at least 60 days in advance. Once the denunciation has been formalized, the rights acquired and obligations contracted under this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country, except those referring to preferences received or granted, which will continue in force for a term of one year from the date of the deposit of the instrument of denunciation. CHAPTER XII Administration of the Agreement ARTICLE 46.- For the administration and in order to achieve the best functioning of this Agreement, the signatory countries agree to establish a Mixed Commission made up of government representatives from both countries. ARTICLE 47.- The Commission referred to in the previous article will meet as many times as necessary and will have the following attributions, among others: 1. Propose to the signatory countries the inclusion of new products or the granting of greater preferences on the negotiated products. 2. Formulate to the governments of the signatory countries the recommendations it deems appropriate to resolve the differences that may arise from the interpretation and application of this Agreement. 3. Proceed in accordance with the provisions of the articles, regarding the review of the products granted. 4. Analyze the origin requirements and other rules established in this Agreement. 5. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement. 6. Submit to the governments of the signatory countries a periodic report on the evaluation and operation of this Agreement. 7. Any other attribution that the parties consider necessary and that results from the application of this Agreement. CHAPTER XIII Commercial Promotion ARTICLE 48.- In order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement in the most efficient way, the parties agree to grant each other the greatest possible facilities for commercial promotion in their respective territories, such as the exchange of missions and commercial delegations, as well as such as participation in fairs and exhibitions held in the territory of the other signatory party. Similarly, both countries will promote business meetings in order to promote and facilitate trade relations between the two countries. Through their competent official institutions, they will make effective the exchange of information on the perspectives offered by the markets of the Parties, in order to strengthen commercial exchange. CHAPTER XIV Final Provisions ARTICLE 49.- Modifications to this Agreement must be formalized by signing additional protocols. ARTICLE 50.- The commitments derived from the review and adjustments in the annexes of this Agreement, will be made through the Exchange of Notes of the respective administrative institutions, following the opinion of the Mixed Commission. ARTICLE 51.- With the purpose of establishing a direct information channel that facilitates the application and better achievement of the objectives of this Agreement, the governments of the signatory countries will name a contact body, so that it permanently attends to the queries of any of the the Parties and administer the provisions of this Agreement. ARTICLE 52.-When a signatory country considers itself affected by dumping and other unfair trade practices carried out from third countries, it will resort to the Commission where the situation will be analyzed and the adoption of the pertinent measures will be suggested to resolve the situation. ARTICLE 53.- The tariff preferences granted by the member countries of the Latin American Integration Association in this Agreement, will be automatically extended without the granting of compensation, to Bolivia, Ecuador and Paraguay, regardless of negotiations or adherence to it. Done in Nicaragua on the fifteenth day of August, one thousand nine hundred and eighty-six. For the Government of the Republic of Venezuela: Faustino Pulgar Gruber, Ambassador of the Republic of Venezuela in Nicaragua. For the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua, Orlando Solorzano Delgadillo, Vice Minister of Foreign Trade of the Republic of Nicaragua.

AppendixText:
NA

AnnexText:
NA
