FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN CROATIA AND ALBANIA
_______________
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
AND THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA
PREAMBLE
 Desirous to develop and strengthen friendly relations, especially in the fields of economic cooperation and trade, with an aim to contribute to the progress of economic co-operation between the
two countries and to increase the scope of mutual trade exchange,
The Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Albania (hereinafter "the Parties").
 Confirming their intention to participate actively in the process of economic integration in
Europe and expressing their preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways and means to strengthen this
process;
 Having regard to the experience gained from the co-operation developed between the Parties
to this Agreement as well as between them and their main trading partners;
 Declaring their readiness to undertake activities with a view to promoting harmonious
development of their trade as well as to expanding and diversifying their mutual co-operation in the
fields of joint interest, including fields not covered by this Agreement, thus creating a framework and
supportive environment based on equality, non discrimination, and a balance of rights and obligations;
 Referring to the mutual interest of the Parties in the continual reinforcement of the
multilateral trading system and considering that the provisions and instruments of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (hereinafter "GATT 1994") and the World Trade Organisation
(hereinafter "WTO") constitute a basis for their foreign trade policy;
 Resolved to lay down for this purpose provisions aimed at the progressive abolition of the
obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of these instruments, in
particular those concerning the establishment of free trade areas;
 Considering that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting the
Contracting Parties from their obligations under other international agreements.
 Have Decided, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the following Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement"):
Article 1
Objectives
1. The Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area in a transitional period of six years,
starting from the entry into force of this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement and in conformity with the definition, set out in Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the
Agreement establishing WTO on substantially all their bilateral trade. 
Page 2
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to increase and enhance the economic co-operation between the Parties and to raise
the standard of living of the population of the two countries,
(b) to gradually eliminate restrictions on trade in goods,
(c) to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Parties,
(d) to contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade,
(e) to create conditions for further promotion of investments, particularly for the
development of joint investment in both countries,
(f) to promote trade and co-operation of the Parties on third countries’ markets.
Article 2
Basic Duties
1. In the trade between the Parties covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall apply their
respective Customs Tariffs on the classification of goods for imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which successive reductions set out in this Agreement are
to be applied shall be the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) rate of duty in force on the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.
3. If after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes
basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff negotiations in the WTO, such reduced duties
shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 2 as from that date when such reductions are
applied.
4. The reduced duties, calculated in accordance with paragraph 2, shall be rounded without
decimal numbers, in accordance with arithmetical rules. This, decimal additions from 0.1 - 0.4 should
be avoided, while decimal 0.5 - 0.9 shall increase the principal by 1.
5. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective basic duties.
CHAPTER I : INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
Article 3
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products, originating in one of the
Parties.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement, the term "industrial products" means products, falling
within Chapters 25 to 97 of Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System with the
exception of the products, listed in Annex I to this Agreement. 
Page 3
Article 4
Customs Duties On Imports And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties on imports or
charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased in
trade between the Parties.
2. Customs duties on imports into the Republic of Albania of products originating in the
Republic of Croatia other than those specified in Annex II shall be abolished upon the entry into force
of this Agreement.
3. Customs duties on imports into the Republic of Croatia of products originating in the
Republic of Albania other than those specified in Annex III shall be abolished upon the entry into
force of this Agreement.
Article 5
Fiscal Duties
 The provisions of Article 4 shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
Article 6
Customs Duties On Exports And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new customs duties on exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced in
trade between the Parties as from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall abolish all customs duties
on exports and charges having equivalent effect between them.
Article 7
Quantitative Restrictions On Exports And Imports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new quantitative restrictions on exports and imports or measures, having equivalent effect,
shall be introduced nor shall the existing be made more restrictive in the trade between the Parties as
from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and imports from the Parties and measures having
equivalent effect shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 8
Technical Barriers To Trade
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties, relating to technical barriers to trade (technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures) and the respective measures, shall be
governed by the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Parties shall cooperate and exchange information in the field of standardisation,
metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation, with the aim of eliminating technical barriers to
trade. 
Page 4
3. Each Party, upon a request from the other Party, shall submit information on particular
individual cases of standards, technical rules or similar measures.
4. The Parties will, where appropriate, enter into negotiations for the conclusion of agreements
on mutual recognition in the field of conformity assessment, in the spirit of the recommendations of
the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
CHAPTER II : AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
Article 9
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products originating in the Parties.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "agricultural products" means the products falling
within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System, including the
products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.
Article 10
Exchange Of Concessions
1. The Parties shall grant each other the concessions specified in Protocol 1 to this Agreement
(hereinafter "Protocol 1") as laid down in that Protocol and in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. Taking account of:
 - the role of agriculture in their economies,
 - the development of trade in agricultural products between the Parties,
 - the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products,
 - the rules of their agricultural policies,
 - the results of the multilateral trade negotiations under the WTO.
the Parties shall examine within the framework of the Joint Committee referred in Article 33 to this
Agreement (hereinafter "Joint Committee") the possibilities of granting each other further concessions
in trade in agricultural products.
Article 11
Quantitative Restrictions On Exports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new quantitative restrictions on exports or measures, having equivalent effect, shall be
introduced nor shall the existing be made more restrictive in the trade between the Parties from the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports from the Parties and measures, having equivalent
effect, shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 
Page 5
Article 12
Concessions And Agricultural Policies
1. Without prejudice to the concessions granted under Article 10 to this Agreement the
provisions of this Chapter shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective agricultural
policies of the Parties or the taking of any measures under such policies, including the implementation
of the respective provisions under the WTO.
2. The Parties shall notify to the Joint Committee changes in their respective agricultural
policies pursued or measures applied, which may affect the conditions of trade in agricultural products
between them as provided for in this Agreement. On the request of any Party, prompt consultations
shall be held to examine the situation.
Article 13
Specific Safeguards
 Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Article 19 to this
Agreement, and given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, if imports of products
originating in a Party, which are subject to concessions granted under this Agreement, cause serious
disturbances to the markets of the other Party, the Party concerned shall immediately enter into
consultations to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Party concerned may take the
measures it deems necessary. The type and duration of the measure should not go beyond what is
strictly necessary to remedy the situation.
Article 14
Sanitary And Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Parties shall apply their regulations in sanitary and phytosanitary matters in a nondiscriminatory fashion and shall not introduce any measures that have the effect of unduly obstructing
trade.
2. The veterino-sanitary measures and the work of the veterinary services will be in accordance
with international conventions in this field.
3. The phytosanitary measures and the work of the plant protection service will be in accordance
with international conventions in this field.
CHAPTER III : GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 15
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measures or practices of internal fiscal nature establishing,
whether directly or indirectly, discrimination against products originating in the Parties.
2. Products exported to territory of the Parties shall not benefit from repayment of internal taxes
in excess of the amount of indirect taxes imposed on them. 
Page 6
Article 16
Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas And Frontier Trade
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free
trade areas or frontier trade arrangements to the extent that these do not negatively affect the trade
regime of the Parties and in particular the provisions, concerning rules of origin, provided for in this
Agreement.
2. Upon request the Parties shall inform each other of any agreement establishing customs union
or free trade areas.
Article 17
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration, derogating from the provisions of Article 4, may be
taken by any of the Parties in the form of increased customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important
social problems.
3. Customs duties on imports, applicable in the Party concerned to products, originating in the
other Party, introduced by these measures may not exceed 25% ad valorem and shall maintain an
element of preference for products, originating in the other Party. The total value of imports of the
product, subject to these measures, may not exceed 15% of total imports of industrial products from
the other Party, as defined in Article 4, during the last year for which statistical data is available.
4. The Party concerned shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures it intends
to take and, upon request of the other Party, consultations shall be held within the Joint Committee on
such measures and the sectors to which they apply, before they are applied. When taking such
measures, the Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination
of the customs duties, introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a phasing out of
these duties, starting at the latest two years after their introduction, at equal annual rates. The Joint
Committee may decide upon a different schedule.
Article 18
Antidumping And Countervailing Measures
 Nothing in this Agreement shall prejudice or affect in any way the taking, by either Party of
anti-dumping or countervailing measures in accordance with the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Subsides and Countervailing Measures.
Article 19
General Safeguards
 Where any product is being imported into either of the Parties in such increased quantities and
under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injuries to domestic producers of a like or directly competitive products in the
territory of the importing Party, or 
Page 7
(b) serious disturbances to any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could
bring about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region, the Party
concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance
with the procedure, laid down in Article 22.
Article 20
Re-Export And Serious Shortage
1. Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 6 and 7 leads to:
(a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Parties maintains for
the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or
charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise, to major difficulties for
the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance
with the procedures, laid down in Article 22.
2. Measures, taken as a result of the situation referred to in paragraph 1, shall be applied in a
non-discriminatory manner and be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
Article 21
State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall adjust progressively any state monopoly of a commercial character so as to
ensure that by the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the
conditions under which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals of the Parties.
2. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to implement this
objective.
Article 22
Procedure For The Application Of Safeguard Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures, set out in the
following paragraphs of this Article, the Parties shall endeavor to solve any differences between them
through direct consultations.
2. If a Party subjects imports of products, liable to give rise to the situation, referred to in
Article 19, to an administrative procedure, the purpose of which is the rapid provision of information
on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other Party.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 7 of this Article a Party which considers resorting to
safeguard measures shall promptly notify the other Party thereof and supply all relevant information.
Consultations between the Parties shall take place without delay in the Joint Committee with a view to
finding a mutually acceptable solution.
4. (a) As regard Articles 18, 19 and 20 to this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall
examine the case of the situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to
the difficulties notified by the Party concerned. In the case of the absence of such 
Page 8
decision within thirty days of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the
Party concerned may adopt the measures necessary in order to remedy the situation,
(b) As regard Article 36 to this Agreement, the Party concerned may take appropriate
measures after the consultations have been concluded or after a period of three
months has elapsed from the date of the first notification to the other Party,
(c) As regards Article 27 and 28 to this Agreement, the Party concerned shall give the
Joint Committee all the assistance required in order to examine the case and, where
appropriate, eliminate the practice objected to. If the other Party fails to put an end to
the practice objected to within the period fixed by the Joint Committee, or if the Joint
Committee fails to reach an agreement within thirty working days on the matter,
being referred to it, the Party concerned may adopt appropriate such measures to deal
with the difficulties, resulting from the practice in question.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Party. They shall be
limited, with regard to their extent and to their duration, to what is strictly necessary to remedy the
situation, giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury, caused by the practice
or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures that will least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement.
6. The safeguard measures taken shall be an object of periodic consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view to their relaxation or abolition when conditions no longer justify their
maintenance.
7. Where exceptional circumstances, requiring immediate action, make prior examination
impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 18, 19 and 20 to this Agreement, apply
forthwith the provisional measures, strictly necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be
notified without delay and consultations between the Parties shall take place as soon as possible
within the Joint Committee.
Article 23
General Exceptions
 This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in
transit, justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security, the protection of
health and life of humans, animals or plants and environment; the protection of national treasures
possessing artistic, historic or archeological value; the protection of intellectual property or rules,
relating to gold or silver or the conservation of exhaustible natural resources, if such measures are
made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption. Such
prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a
disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 24
Rules Of Origin And Co-Operation In Customs Administration
1. Protocol 2 of this Agreement lays down the rules of origin and related methods of
administrative co-operation.
2. The Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews in the Joint Committee,
and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the provisions of Protocol 2 and 
Page 9
Articles 2 to 8, 12, 15 and paragraph 1 of Article 16 of this Agreement are effectively and
harmoniously applied, and to reduce, as far as possible, the formalities, imposed on trade, and to
achieve mutually satisfactory solutions to any difficulties, arising from the operation of those
provision.
Article 25
Restriction Authorised
 Both Parties agree to co-operate to reduce the potential for fraud in the application of the
trade provisions of this Agreement.
 Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Articles 13, 19 and 25
Protocol 2, where one Party finds that there is sufficient evidence of fraud such as a significant
increase in trade of products by one Party to the other Party, beyond the level reflecting economic
conditions such as normal production and exports capacities, or failure to provide administrative cooperation as required for the verification of evidence of origin by the other Party, both Parties shall
enter into consultations immediately to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Party
concerned may take the appropriate measures it deems necessary. In the selection of the measures
priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the arrangements established in
this Agreement.
Article 26
Payments
 Any payment arising from trade of goods, services and rights to non material goods between
the Parties shall be made in convertible currency, in accordance with the respective national
legislation of the Parties.
Article 27
Rules Of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in so far as
they may affect trade between the Parties:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the
Parties as a whole or in substantial part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to the activities of all undertakings including public
undertakings and undertakings to which the Parties grant special or exclusive rights. Undertakings
entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest or having the character of a
revenue-producing monopoly, shall be subject to provisions of paragraph 1 in so far as the application
of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in law or fact, of the particular public tasks
assigned to them.
3. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II to this Agreement the provisions stipulated
in paragraph 1 (a) shall not apply to such agreements, decisions and practices which form an integral
part of a national market organization. 
Page 10
4. If a Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this
Article or if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Party or
material injury to its domestic industry, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the
conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 22 of this Agreement.
Article 28
State Aid
1. Any aid granted by a Party or through state resources in any form whatsoever which distorts
or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain
goods shall, in so far as it may affect trade between the Parties, be incompatible with the proper
functioning of this Agreement.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to products covered by Chapter II to this
Agreement.
3. The Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid, inter alia, by reporting annually
to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given and by providing to
the other Party, upon request, information on aid schemes and on particular individual cases of state
aid.
4. If a Party considers that a particular practice:
 - is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1, or
 - causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Party or material
injury to its domestic industry,
it may take appropriate measures under the conditions of and in accordance with the provisions laid
down in Article 22 of this Agreement.
 Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with the procedures and under
the conditions laid down by the Agreement establishing WTO, particularly the GATT 1994 and any
other relevant instrument negotiated under their auspices, which are applicable between the Parties.
Article 29
Balance Of Payments Difficulties
 Where one of the Parties is in serious balance of payments difficulties, or under imminent
threat thereof, the Party concerned may, in accordance with the conditions established under the
GATT 1994 and Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, adopt
restrictive measures, including measures related to imports, which shall be of limited duration and
may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The measures shall
be progressively relaxed as balance of payments conditions improve and they shall be eliminated
when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The Party concerned shall inform the other Party
forthwith of their introduction and, whenever practicable, of a time schedule for their removal.
Article 30
Intellectual Property Rights
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual property
rights on a non-discriminatory basis, including effective measures for enforcing such rights against 
Page 11
infringement, and particularly against counterfeiting and piracy. Parties agree to comply with the
substantive standards of the multilateral agreements listed in Annex IV.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "intellectual property" refers to:
protection of copyright and related rights, including computer programs and databases, the rights of
inventors, design creators, the patent rights and inventions or utility models, trade marks, industrial
designs and topographies of integrated circuits, geographical indications including mark of origin, as
well as undisclosed information including "know-how".
3. In fulfilment of their commitments under international agreements and legislation in the field
of intellectual property rights, the Parties to this Agreement shall not grant to nationals of the state of
the other Party treatment less favourable than that accorded to nationals of any third state.
4. The Parties shall co-operate in matters of intellectual property. Upon request of a Party, they
shall hold expert consultations on these matters, in particular on activities relating to the existing or to
future international conventions concerning the harmonisation, administration and enforcement of
intellectual property and on activities in international organisations, such as the WTO, World
Intellectual Property Organisation, as well as on the relations of the Parties with any third country on
intellectual property matters.
5. The implementation of this article shall be regularly assessed by the Parties. Upon difficulties
in trade in relation with the rights of intellectual property, any of the Parties may request urgent
consultations for finding mutually satisfactory solution.
Article 31
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement markets as an
objective of this Agreement. The Parties aim at opening up of the award of public procurement on the
basis of non-discrimination and reciprocity.
2. The Parties will progressively develop their respective rules, conditions and practices on
public procurement and shall grant suppliers of the other Party access to contract award procedures on
their respective public procurement markets not less favourable than that accorded to companies of
any third country.
3. The Joint Committee shall examine developments related to the achievement of the objectives
of this Article and may recommend practical modalities of implementing the provisions of
paragraph 2 so as to ensure free access, transparency and full balance of rights and obligations.
During the examination referred to this paragraph from this article, the Joint Committee may consider,
especially in the light of international regulations in this area, the possibility of extending the
coverage and/or the degree of the market opening provided for in paragraph 2.
4. The Parties shall endeavour to accede to the relevant Agreements negotiated under the
auspices of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement establishing the WTO.
Article 32
Services And Investment
1. The Parties to this Agreement recognise the growing importance of certain areas, such as
services and investments. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden their co-operation, in
particular in the context of the European integration, they will co-operate with the aim of achieving a 
Page 12
progressive liberalisation and mutual opening of their markets for investments and trade in services,
taking into account relevant provisions of the General Agreement on Trade and Services.
2. The Parties will discuss in the Joint Committee this co-operation with the aim of developing
and deepening of their relations governed in this Article.
CHAPTER IV : INSTITUTIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 33
The Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established and shall be composed of representatives of the
Parties.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administered by the Joint
Committee.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall exchange
information and, at the request of any Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee. The
Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between
the Parties.
4. The Joint Committee may take decisions in cases provided for in this Agreement. On other
matters the Committee may make recommendations.
Article 34
Procedures Of The Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet whenever
necessary, but at least once a year. Each Party may request that a meeting to be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall act by consensus.
3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Party has accepted a decision, subject to the
fulfilment of internal legal requirements, the decision shall enter into force, if no later date is
contained therein, on the date of receipt of the written notification about the fulfilment of such
requirements.
4. For the purpose of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure
which shall, inter alia, contain provisions for convening meetings and for the designation of the Chair
person and its term of office.
5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working groups, as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
Article 35
Security Exceptions
 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures which it considers
necessary: 
Page 13
(a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies:
(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided
that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of
products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in
other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
(ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
(iii) taken in time of war or other serious international tension, constituting threat
of war.
Article 36
Fulfillment Of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the objectives and
the fulfilment of the obligations under this Agreement.
2. If any Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under this
Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 22.
Article 37
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where a Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the economies of the Parties
to develop and deepen the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not
covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Party. The Parties may instruct the
Joint Committee to examine such request and, where appropriate, to make recommendations to them,
particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be subject to
ratification or approval by the Parties in accordance with their national legislation.
Article 38
Amendments
 Amendments to this Agreement other than those decided upon in accordance with paragraph
3 of Article 34, and which are approved by the Joint Committee, shall enter into force on the date of a
receipt of the later diplomatic note, confirming that all procedures required by the national legislation
of each Party for entry into force of the amendments have been completed.
Article 39
Annexes And Protocols
1. Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement are an integral part of it. 
Page 14
2. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 34.
3. In this case the amendments shall enter into force on the date of a receipt of the
last written notification through diplomatic channels confirming that the internal legal requirements
for the entry into force of the amendments have been fulfilled.
Article 40
Duration And Denunciation
1. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Each Party may denounce this Agreement by a written notification through diplomatic
channels to the other Party. The denunciation shall enter into force on the first day of the seventh
month after the date of receipt the notification of denunciation.
3. The Parties agree that in the event of any Party becoming a member of the European Union,
that Party will withdraw from this Agreement at the latest the day before membership takes effect and
without any compensation to the other Party subject to the altered conditions of trade.
Article 41
Entry Into Force
 This Agreement is subject to ratification. It shall enter into force on the first day of the second
month following the date of the receipt of the last written notification by which Parties inform each
other through diplomatic channels that all necessary requirements foreseen by their internal legislation
for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.
 IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorised thereto,
have signed the present Agreement.
 DONE in Zagreb, on 27th September 2002, in two originals each in the Croatian, Albanian
and English languages, all three texts being equally authentic. In case of divergence in interpretation
the English text shall prevail. 