FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA
AND
THE EFTA STATES1

1 As amended by the Protocol amending the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Albania and
the EFTA States, signed on 18 September 2015 and entered into force on 1 June 2017
III
PREAMBLE2
The Republic of Albania (hereinafter referred to as “Albania”), on the one part,
and Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway and the Swiss
Confederation (hereinafter referred to as “the EFTA States”), on the other,
hereinafter each individual State referred to as a “Party” or collectively as the “Parties”:
RECOGNISING the common wish to strengthen the links between Albania on the one
part and the EFTA States on the other by establishing close and lasting relations;
RECALLING their intention to participate actively in the process of EuroMediterranean economic integration and expressing their preparedness to co-operate in
seeking ways and means to strengthen this process;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to democracy, human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and to the political and economic freedoms, in accordance with their
obligations under international law, including the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
RECALLING their rights and obligations under multilateral environmental agreements
to which they are a party, and the respect for the fundamental principles and rights at
work, including the principles set out in the relevant International Labour Organisation
(hereinafter referred to as the “ILO”) Conventions to which they are a party;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to pursue the objective of sustainable development
and recognising the importance of coherence and mutual supportiveness of trade,
environment and labour policies in this respect;
AIMING to create new employment opportunities, and improve health and living
standards in their respective territories;
DESIRING to create favourable conditions for the development and diversification of
trade between them and for the promotion of commercial and economic cooperation in
areas of common interest on the basis of equality, mutual benefit, non-discrimination
and international law;
DETERMINED to promote and further strengthen the multilateral trading system,
building on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organisation (hereinafter referred to as “the WTO”) and
the other agreements negotiated thereunder, thereby contributing to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade;

2 As amended by the Protocol amending the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Albania and
the EFTA States, signed on 18 September 2015 and entered into force on 1 June 2017
IV
CONSIDERING that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting
the Parties from their obligations under other international agreements, especially the
Marrakesh Agreement establishing the WTO and the other agreements negotiated
thereunder;
DETERMINED to implement this Agreement in line with the objective to preserve and
protect the environment through sound environmental management and to promote an
optimal use of the world’s resources in accordance with the objective of sustainable
development;
AFFIRMING their commitment to the rule of law, to prevent and combat corruption in
international trade and investment and to promote the principles of transparency and
good governance;
ACKNOWLEDGING the importance of good corporate governance and corporate
social responsibility for sustainable development, and affirming their aim to encourage
enterprises to observe internationally recognised guidelines and principles in this
respect, such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, the OECD
Principles of Corporate Governance and the UN Global Compact;
DECLARING their readiness to examine the possibility of developing and deepening
their economic relations in order to extend them to fields not covered by this
Agreement;
CONVINCED that this Agreement will enhance the competitiveness of their firms in
global markets and create conditions encouraging economic, trade and investment
relations between them;
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as “this Agreement”):
V
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. Albania and the EFTA States shall establish a free trade area by means of this
Agreement and the complementary agreements on trade in agricultural products,
concurrently concluded between Albania and each individual EFTA State, with a view
to spurring prosperity and economic development in their territories.
2. The objectives of this Agreement, which is based on trade relations between
market economies and on the respect of democratic principles and human rights, are:
(a) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in goods, in conformity with Article
XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (hereinafter
referred to as “the GATT 1994”);
(b) to mutually increase investment opportunities between the Parties, and to
gradually develop an environment conducive to enhanced trade in
services;
(c) to develop international trade in such a way as to contribute to the
objective of sustainable development and to ensure that this objective is
integrated and reflected in the Parties’ trade relationship;3
(d) to provide fair conditions of competition for trade between the Parties
and to ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual property
rights;
(e) to gradually achieve further liberalisation on a mutual basis of the
government procurement markets of the Parties; and
(f) to contribute in this way to the harmonious development and expansion
of world trade.
ARTICLE 2
Trade Relations Governed by this Agreement

3 As amended by the Protocol amending the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Albania and
the EFTA States, signed on 18 September 2015 and entered into force on 1 June 2017
VI
This Agreement shall apply to trade relations between Albania, on the one side,
and the individual EFTA States, on the other side, but not to the trade relations between
individual EFTA States, unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement.
ARTICLE 3
Territorial Application
1. Without prejudice to Protocol B, this Agreement shall apply:
(a) to the land territory, internal waters, and the territorial sea of a Party, and
the air-space above the territory of a Party, in accordance with
international law; as well as
(b) beyond the territorial sea, with respect to measures taken by a Party in
the exercise of its sovereign right or jurisdiction in accordance with
international law.
2. This Agreement shall not apply to the Norwegian territory of Svalbard, with the
exception of trade in goods.
ARTICLE 4
Central, Regional and Local Government
Each Party shall ensure within its territory the observance of all obligations and
commitments under this Agreement by its respective central, regional and local
governments and authorities, and by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
governmental powers delegated to them by central, regional and local governments or
authorities.
ARTICLE 5
Transparency
1. The Parties shall publish or otherwise make publicly available their laws,
regulations, judicial decisions, administrative rulings of general application and their
respective international agreements that may affect the operation of this Agreement.
2. Each Party commits to make every effort to publish in advance, in particular on
the Internet, the laws relevant for international trade in goods and related services that it
aims to adopt and shall offer interested persons the opportunity to submit comments
prior to such an adoption.
VII
3. The Parties shall promptly respond to specific questions and provide, upon
request, information to each other on matters referred to in paragraph 1. They are not
required to disclose confidential information.
4. The Parties shall administer in a uniform and impartial manner all their laws,
regulations and administrative decisions relevant for international trade in goods and
related services.
VIII
CHAPTER 2 TRADE IN GOODS
ARTICLE 6
Scope
1. This Chapter applies to the following products originating in Albania or in an
EFTA State:
(a) all products classified under Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System (HS), excluding the
products listed in Annex I;
(b) processed agricultural products specified in Protocol A, with due regard
to the arrangements provided for in that Protocol; and
(c) fish and other marine products as provided for in Annex II.
2. Albania and each EFTA State have concluded agreements on trade in
agricultural products on a bilateral basis. These agreements form part of the instruments
establishing a free trade area between Albania and the EFTA States.
ARTICLE 7
Rules of Origin
and Methods of Administrative Co-operation
1. The provisions on rules of origin and methods of administrative co-operation are
set out in Protocol B.
2. The Parties agree to consider favourably requests for negotiations aiming at
concluding bilateral Agreements on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs
Matters.
ARTICLE 8
Customs Duties
1. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall abolish all customs
duties on imports and exports of products originating in Albania or in an EFTA State
covered by paragraph 1 of Article 6, except as otherwise provided for in the relevant
Annexes and Protocols. No new customs duties shall be introduced, nor shall those 
IX
already applied be increased in trade between the Parties from the entry into force of
this Agreement, except as provided for in Article 1 of Protocol A.
2. A customs duty includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection
with the importation or exportation of a product, including any form of surtax or
surcharge, but does not include any charge imposed in conformity with Articles III and
VIII of the GATT 1994.
ARTICLE 9
Import and Export Restrictions
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of export and import
restrictions shall be governed by Article XI of the GATT 1994, which is hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 10
Internal Taxation and Regulations
1. The Parties commit themselves to apply any internal taxes and other charges and
regulations in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994 and other relevant WTO
Agreements.
2. Exporters may not benefit from repayment of internal taxes in excess of the
amount of indirect taxation imposed on products exported to the territory of a Party.
ARTICLE 11
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures.
2. The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of contact points with sanitary
and phytosanitary expertise in order to facilitate communication and the exchange of
information.
X
ARTICLE 12
Technical Regulations
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Parties shall strengthen their co-operation in the field of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment, with a view to increasing the mutual
understanding of their respective systems and facilitating access to their respective
markets.
ARTICLE 13
Trade Facilitation
The Parties, in accordance with the provisions set out in Annex III, with the aim
to facilitate trade between Albania and the EFTA States, shall:
(a) simplify, to the greatest extent possible, procedures for trade in goods
and related services;
(b) promote co-operation among them in order to enhance their participation
in the development and implementation of international conventions and
recommendations on trade facilitation; and
(c) co-operate on trade facilitation within the framework of the Joint
Committee.
ARTICLE 14
Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation
1. With reference to Articles 7, 8 and 13, a Sub-Committee of the Joint Committee
on Rules of Origin, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation (hereinafter referred to
as “the Sub-Committee”) is hereby established.
2. The mandate of the Sub-Committee is set out in Annex IV.
XI
ARTICLE 15
State Trading Enterprises
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of state trading enterprises
shall be governed by Article XVII of the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the
Interpretation of Article XVII of the GATT 1994, which are hereby incorporated into
and made part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 16
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to subsidies and countervailing
measures shall be governed by Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994 and the WTO
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, except as provided for in
paragraph 2.
2. Before Albania or an EFTA State, as the case may be, initiates an investigation
to determine the existence, degree and effect of any alleged subsidy in Albania or in an
EFTA State, as provided for in Article 11 of the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures, the Party considering initiating an investigation shall notify in
writing the Party whose goods are subject to investigation and allow for a 45 day period
with a view to finding a mutually acceptable solution. The consultations shall take place
in the Joint Committee if any Party so requests within 20 days from the receipt of the
notification.
ARTICLE 17
Anti-dumping
1. A Party shall not apply anti-dumping measures as provided for under Article VI
of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the
GATT 1994 in relation to products originating in another Party.
2. The Parties recognise that the effective implementation of competition rules may
address economic causes leading to dumping.
ARTICLE 18
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in
so far as they may affect trade between Albania and an EFTA State:
XII
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of
undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have
as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of
competition; and
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territory
of a Party as a whole or in a substantial part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to the activities of public undertakings
and undertakings for which the Parties grant special or exclusive rights, in so far as the
application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of
the particular public tasks assigned to them.
3. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not be construed to create any direct
obligations for undertakings.
4. If a Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with the provisions of
paragraphs 1 and 2, the Parties concerned shall give to the Joint Committee all the
assistance required in order to examine the case and, where appropriate, eliminate the
practice objected to. If the Party concerned fails to put an end to the practice objected to
within the period set by the Joint Committee, or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an
agreement after consultations, or after thirty days following referral for such
consultations, the other Party may adopt appropriate measures to deal with the
difficulties resulting from the practice in question.
ARTICLE 19
General Safeguard Measures
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of general safeguards shall be
governed by Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards. In
taking measures under these WTO provisions, a Party shall exclude imports of an
originating product from one or several Parties if such imports do not in and of
themselves cause or threaten to cause serious injury. The Party taking the measure shall
demonstrate that such exclusion is in accordance with WTO jurisprudence.
ARTICLE 20
Bilateral Safeguard Measures
1. Where, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this
Agreement, any product originating in a Party is being imported into the territory of
another Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic
production, and under such conditions as to constitute a substantial cause of serious 
XIII
injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry of like or directly competitive products
in the territory of the importing Party, the importing Party may take bilateral safeguard
measures to the minimum extent necessary to remedy or prevent the injury, subject to
the provisions of paragraphs 2 to 10.
2. Bilateral safeguard measures shall only be taken upon clear evidence that
increased imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury pursuant to an
investigation in accordance with the procedures laid down in the WTO Agreement on
Safeguards.
3. The Party intending to take a bilateral safeguard measure under this Article shall
immediately, and in any case before taking a measure, make notification to the other
Parties and the Joint Committee. The notification shall contain all pertinent information,
which shall include evidence of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased
imports, a precise description of the product involved and the proposed measure, as well
as the proposed date of introduction, expected duration and timetable for the progressive
removal of the measure. A Party that may be affected by the measure shall be offered
compensation in the form of substantially equivalent trade liberalisation in relation to
the imports from any such Party.
4. If the conditions set out in paragraph 1 are met, the importing Party may take
measures consisting in increasing the rate of customs duty for the product to a level not
to exceed the lesser of:
(a) the MFN rate of duty applied at the time the action is taken; or
(b) the MFN rate of duty applied on the day immediately preceding the date of
the entry into force of this Agreement.
5. Bilateral safeguard measures shall be taken for a period not exceeding one year.
In very exceptional circumstances, after review by the Joint Committee, measures may
be taken up to a total maximum period of three years. No measure shall be applied to
the import of a product which has previously been subject to such a measure.
6. The Joint Committee shall within 30 days from the date of notification examine
the information provided under paragraph 3 in order to facilitate a mutually acceptable
resolution of the matter. In the absence of such resolution, the importing Party may
adopt a measure pursuant to paragraph 4 to remedy the problem, and, in the absence of
mutually agreed compensation, the Party against whose product the measure is taken
may take compensatory action. The bilateral safeguard measure and the compensatory
action shall be immediately notified to the other Parties and the Joint Committee. In the
selection of the bilateral safeguard measure and the compensatory action, priority must
be given to the measure which least disturbs the functioning of this Agreement. The
compensatory action shall normally consist of suspension of concessions having
substantially equivalent trade effects or concessions substantially equivalent to the value
of the additional duties expected to result from the bilateral safeguard measure. The
Party taking compensatory action shall apply the action only for the minimum period 
XIV
necessary to achieve the substantially equivalent trade effects and in any event, only
while the measure under paragraph 4 is being applied.
7. Upon the termination of the measure, the rate of customs duty shall be the rate
which would have been in effect but for the measure.
8. In critical circumstances, where delay would cause damage which would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional emergency measure pursuant to a
preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports constitute a
substantial cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to the domestic industry. The Party
intending to take such a measure shall immediately notify the other Parties and the Joint
Committee thereof. Within 30 days of the date of the notification, the procedures set out
in paragraphs 2 to 6, including for compensatory action, shall be initiated. Any
compensation shall be based on the total period of application of the provisional
emergency measure and of the emergency measure.
9. Any provisional measure shall be terminated within 200 days at the latest. The
period of application of any such provisional measure shall be counted as part of the
duration of the measure set out in paragraph 5 and any extension thereof. Any tariff
increases shall be promptly refunded if the investigation described in paragraph 2 does
not result in a finding that the conditions of paragraph 1 are met.
10. Five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall
review in the Joint Committee whether there is need to maintain the possibility to take
safeguard measures between them. If the Parties decide, after the first review, to
maintain such possibility, they shall thereafter conduct biennial reviews of this matter in
the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 21
General Exceptions
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of general exceptions shall be
governed by Article XX of the GATT 1994, which is hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 22
Security Exceptions
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of security exceptions shall
be governed by Article XXI of the GATT 1994, which is hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement.
XV
CHAPTER 3 PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 23
Protection of Intellectual Property
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non-discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, and provide for measures for the enforcement
of such rights against infringement thereof, counterfeiting and piracy, in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, Annex V and the international agreements referred to
therein.
2. The Parties shall accord to each other’s nationals treatment no less favourable
than that they accord to their own nationals. Exemptions from this obligation must be in
accordance with the substantive provisions of Articles 3 and 5 of the WTO Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (hereinafter referred to as “the
TRIPS Agreement”).
3. The Parties shall grant to each other’s nationals treatment no less favourable
than that accorded to nationals of any other State. Exemptions from this obligation must
be in accordance with the substantive provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular
Articles 4 and 5 thereof.
4. The Parties agree, upon request of any Party to the Joint Committee, to review
the provisions on the protection of intellectual property rights contained in the present
Article and in Annex V, with a view to further improving the level of protection they
provide for and to avoiding or remedying trade distortions caused by actual levels of
protection of intellectual property rights.
XVI
CHAPTER 4 INVESTMENT, SERVICES AND GOVERNMENT
PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE 24
Investment
1. The Parties shall endeavour to provide in their territories stable, equitable and
transparent investment conditions for investors of the other Parties that are making or
seeking to make investments in their territories.
2. The Parties shall admit investments by investors of the other Parties in
accordance with their laws and regulations. They recognise that it is inappropriate to
encourage investment by relaxing health, safety or environmental standards.
3. The Parties recognise the importance of promoting investment and technology
flows as a means for achieving economic growth and development. Co-operation in this
respect may include:
(a) appropriate means of identifying investment opportunities and
information channels on investment regulations;
(b) exchange of information on measures to promote investment abroad; and
(c) the furthering of a legal environment conducive to increased investment
flows.
4. The Parties affirm their commitment to review issues related to investment in the
Joint Committee no later than five years after the entry into force of this Agreement,
including the right of establishment of investors of one Party in the territory of another
Party.
5. Albania, on the one part, and Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, and the
Swiss Confederation, on the other, shall refrain from arbitrary or discriminatory
measures regarding investments by investors of another Party mentioned in this
paragraph and shall observe any obligation they have entered into with regard to a
specific investment by an investor of another Party mentioned in this paragraph.
XVII
ARTICLE 25
Trade in Services
1. The Parties shall aim at achieving gradual liberalisation and the opening of their
markets for trade in services in accordance with the provisions of the General
Agreement on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred to as “the GATS”), taking into
account ongoing work under the auspices of the WTO.
2. If a Party grants to a non-Party, after the entry into force of this Agreement,
additional benefits with regard to the access to its services markets, it shall afford
adequate opportunities for negotiations with a view to extending these benefits to
another Party on a reciprocal basis.
3. The Parties undertake to keep under review paragraphs 1 and 2 with a view to
establishing an agreement on liberalisation of trade in services in accordance with
Article V of the GATS.
ARTICLE 26
Government Procurement
1. The Parties shall enhance their mutual understanding of their government
procurement laws and regulations with a view to progressively liberalising their
respective procurement markets on the basis of non-discrimination and reciprocity.
2. In order to improve transparency, the Parties shall publish their laws, or
otherwise make publicly available their laws, regulations and administrative rulings of
general application as well as their respective international agreements that may affect
their procurement markets. The Parties shall promptly respond to specific questions and
provide, upon request, information to each other on matters referred to in this paragraph.
3. If a Party grants to a non-Party, after the entry into force of this Agreement,
additional benefits with regard to the access to its procurement markets, it shall agree to
enter into negotiations with a view to extending these benefits to another Party on a
reciprocal basis.
XVIII
CHAPTER 5 PAYMENTS AND CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
ARTICLE 27
Payments for Current Transactions
Subject to the provisions of Article 29, the Parties undertake to allow all
payments for current transactions to be made in a freely convertible currency.
ARTICLE 28
Capital Movements
1. The Parties shall ensure that capital for investments made in companies formed
in accordance with their laws, any returns stemming therefrom, and the amounts
resulting from liquidations of investments are freely transferable.
2. The Parties shall hold consultations with a view to facilitating the movement of
capital between Albania and the EFTA States and achieve its complete liberalisation as
soon as conditions permit.
ARTICLE 29
Balance of Payments Difficulties
Where Albania or an EFTA State is in serious balance of payments difficulties,
or under threat thereof, Albania or the EFTA State concerned, respectively, may, in
conformity with the conditions laid down within the framework of the GATT and in
Articles VIII and XIV of the Statutes of the International Monetary Fund, take
restrictive measures with regard to current payments if such measures are strictly
necessary. Albania or the EFTA State concerned, as the case may be, shall inform the
other Parties immediately of such measures and shall provide as soon as possible a
timetable for their removal.
ARTICLE 30
Clarifications
It is understood that the obligations stated in this Chapter are without prejudice
to the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of measures pursuant to
court orders or judgements and administrative proceedings. It is also understood that the
right of an investor to freely transfer amounts in relation to his investment is without
prejudice to any fiscal obligation such an investor may have.
XIX
CHAPTER 6
4
TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 31
Context and Objectives
1. The Parties recall the Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment of
1972, the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992, Agenda 21 on
Environment and Development of 1992, the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles
and Rights at Work and its Follow-up of 1998, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation on Sustainable Development of 2002, the Ministerial Declaration of the
UN Economic and Social Council on Full Employment and Decent Work of 2006 and
the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization of 2008.
2. The Parties recognise that economic development, social development and
environmental protection are interdependent and mutually supportive components of
sustainable development. They underline the benefit of cooperation on trade-related
labour and environmental issues as part of a global approach to trade and sustainable
development.
3. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to promote the development of
international trade in such a way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable
development and to ensure that this objective is integrated and reflected in the Parties’
trade relationship.
ARTICLE 32
Scope
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, this Chapter applies to measures
adopted or maintained by the Parties affecting trade-related and investment-related
aspects of labour5
and environmental issues.

4
 As amended by the Protocol amending the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of
Albania and the EFTA States, signed on 18 September 2015 and entered into force on 1 June 2017.
The numbers of the below chapters and their respective articles have been renumbered, in
accordance with the aforementioned Protocol.
5 When labour is referred to in this Chapter, it includes the issues relevant to the Decent Work
Agenda as agreed on in the ILO.
XX
ARTICLE 33
Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection
1. Recognising the right of each Party, subject to the provisions of this Agreement,
to establish its own level of environmental and labour protection, and to adopt or
modify accordingly its relevant laws and policies, each Party shall seek to ensure that its
laws, policies and practices provide for and encourage high levels of environmental and
labour protection, consistent with standards, principles and agreements referred to in
Articles 35 and 36, and shall strive to further improve the level of protection provided
for in those laws and policies.
2. The Parties recognise the importance, when preparing and implementing
measures related to the environment and labour conditions that affect trade and
investment between them, of taking account of scientific, technical and other
information, and relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations.
ARTICLE 34
Upholding Levels of Protection in the Application and Enforcement of Laws,
Regulations or Standards
1. A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental and labour laws,
regulations or standards in a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.
2. Subject to Article 33, a Party shall not:
(a) weaken or reduce the level of environmental or labour protection
provided by its laws, regulations or standards with the sole intention to
encourage investment from another Party or to seek or to enhance a
competitive trade advantage of producers or service providers operating
in its territory; or
(b) waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise
derogate from, such laws, regulations or standards in order to encourage
investment from another Party or to seek or to enhance a competitive
trade advantage of producers or service providers operating in its
territory.
XXI
ARTICLE 35
International Labour Standards and Agreements
1. The Parties recall the obligations deriving from membership of the ILO and the
ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up
adopted by the International Labour Conference at its 86th Session in 1998, to respect,
promote and realise the principles concerning the fundamental rights, namely:
(a) the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to
collective bargaining;
(b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;
(c) the effective abolition of child labour; and
(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and
occupation.
2. The Parties reaffirm their commitment, under the Ministerial Declaration of the
UN Economic and Social Council on Full Employment and Decent Work of 2006, to
recognising full and productive employment and decent work for all as a key element of
sustainable development for all countries and as a priority objective of international
cooperation and to promoting the development of international trade in a way that is
conducive to full and productive employment and decent work for all.
3. The Parties recall the obligations deriving from membership of the ILO to
effectively implementing the ILO Conventions which they have ratified and to make
continued and sustained efforts towards ratifying the fundamental ILO Conventions as
well as the other Conventions that are classified as “up-to-date” by the ILO.
4. The violation of fundamental principles and rights at work shall not be invoked
or otherwise used as a legitimate comparative advantage. Labour standards shall not be
used for protectionist trade purposes.
ARTICLE 36
Multilateral Environmental Agreements and Environmental Principles
The Parties reaffirm their commitment to the effective implementation in their
laws and practices of the multilateral environmental agreements to which they are a
party, as well as their adherence to environmental principles reflected in the
international instruments referred to in Article 31.
XXII
ARTICLE 37
Promotion of Trade and Investment Favouring Sustainable Development
1. The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote foreign investment, trade in and
dissemination of goods and services beneficial to the environment, including
environmental technologies, sustainable renewable energy, energy efficient and ecolabelled goods and services, including through addressing related non-tariff barriers.
2. The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote foreign investment, trade in and
dissemination of goods and services that contribute to sustainable development,
including goods and services that are the subject of schemes such as fair and ethical
trade.
3. To this end, the Parties agree to exchange views and may consider, jointly or
bilaterally, cooperation in this area.
4. The Parties shall encourage cooperation between enterprises in relation to goods,
services and technologies that contribute to sustainable development and are beneficial
to the environment.
ARTICLE 38
Cooperation in International Fora
The Parties shall strive to strengthen their cooperation on trade and investment
related labour and environmental issues of mutual interest in relevant bilateral, regional
and multilateral fora in which they participate.
ARTICLE 39
Implementation and Consultations
1. The Parties shall designate the administrative entities which shall serve as
contact point(s) for the purpose of implementing this Chapter.
2. A Party may through the contact point(s) referred to in paragraph 1 request
expert consultations or consultations within the Joint Committee regarding any matter 
XXIII
arising under this Chapter. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually
satisfactory resolution of the matter. Where relevant, subject to the agreement of the
Parties, they can seek advice of the relevant international organisations or bodies.
3. If a Party considers that a measure of another Party does not comply with the
obligations under this Chapter, it may have recourse to consultations according to
Article 42, except for the last sentence of paragraph 3.
ARTICLE 40
Review
The Parties shall periodically review in the Joint Committee progress achieved
in pursuing the objectives set out in this Chapter, and consider relevant international
developments to identify areas where further action could promote these objectives.
XXIV
CHAPTER 7 INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 41
The Joint Committee
1. The Parties hereby establish the Albania-EFTA Joint Committee. It shall be
composed of representatives of the Parties, which shall be headed by Ministers or by
senior officials delegated by them for this purpose.
2. The Joint Committee shall:
(a) supervise and review the implementation of this Agreement, inter alia by
means of a comprehensive review of the application of the provisions of
this Agreement, with due regard to any specific reviews contained in this
Agreement;
(b) keep under review the possibility of further removal of barriers to trade
and other restrictive measures concerning trade between Albania and the
EFTA States;
(c) oversee the further development of this Agreement;
(d) supervise the work of all sub-committees and working groups established
under this Agreement;
(e) endeavour to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation
or application of this Agreement;
(f) oversee the implementation of Article 5; and
(g) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this
Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. Except where
otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the sub-committees and working groups shall
work under a mandate established by the Joint Committee.
4. The Joint Committee shall take decisions as provided for in this Agreement, and
may make recommendations, by consensus.
XXV
5. The Joint Committee shall meet within one year of the entry into force of this
Agreement. Thereafter, it shall meet whenever necessary upon mutual agreement but
normally every two years. Its meetings shall be chaired jointly by Albania and one of
the EFTA States. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules of procedure.
6. Each Party may request at any time, through a notice in writing to the other
Parties, that a special meeting of the Joint Committee be held. Such a meeting shall take
place within 30 days of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
7. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Annexes and Protocols to this
Agreement. Subject to paragraph 8, it may set a date for the entry into force of such
decisions.
8. If a representative of a Party in the Joint Committee has accepted a decision
subject to the fulfilment of constitutional requirements, the decision shall enter into
force on the date that the last Party notifies that its internal requirements have been
fulfilled, unless the decision itself specifies a later date. The Joint Committee may
decide that the decision shall enter into force for those Parties that have fulfilled their
internal requirements, provided that Albania is one of those Parties. A Party may apply
a decision of the Joint Committee provisionally until such decision enters into force for
that Party, subject to its constitutional requirements.
XXVI
CHAPTER 8 DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
ARTICLE 42
Consultations
1. In case of any divergence with respect to the interpretation, implementation and
application of this Agreement, the Parties shall make every attempt through cooperation and consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory solution.
2. Any Party may request in writing consultations with any other Party regarding
any actual or proposed measure or any other matter that it considers might affect the
operation of this Agreement. The Party requesting consultations shall at the same time
notify the other Parties in writing thereof and supply all relevant information.
3. The consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee if any of the Parties so
requests within 20 days from the receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2,
with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution. If the Party to which a request
in accordance with paragraph 2 or this paragraph is made does not reply within ten days
or does not enter into consultations within 20 days after receipt of the request, the Party
making the request is entitled to request the establishment of an arbitration panel in
accordance with Article 43.
6
ARTICLE 43
Arbitration
1. Disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation of rights and
obligations under this Agreement, which have not been settled through direct
consultations or in the Joint Committee within 60 days from the date of the receipt of
the request for consultations, may be referred to arbitration by the complaining Party by
means of a written notification addressed to the Party complained against. A copy of
this notification shall be communicated to all other Parties so that each of those Parties
may determine whether to participate in the dispute.
2. Where more than one Party requests the establishment of an arbitration panel
relating to the same matter, a single arbitration panel may, whenever feasible, be
established to consider such disputes. 7

6 As amended by the Protocol amending the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of
Albania and the EFTA States, signed on 18 September 2015 and entered into force on 1 June
2017
7 For the purpose of this Chapter, the terms ”Party” and ”party to the dispute” are used regardless
of whether two or more Parties are involved in a dispute.
XXVII
3. A Party that is not a party to the dispute shall be entitled, on delivery of a written
request to the parties to the dispute, to make written submissions to the arbitration panel,
receive written submissions, including annexes, from the parties to the dispute, attend
hearings and make oral statements.
4. The arbitration panel shall comprise three members. In its written notification
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article the Party referring the dispute to arbitration shall
designate one member, who may be its national or resident. Within 30 days from the
receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Party to which it
was addressed shall, in turn, designate one member, who may be its national or resident.
5. Within 60 days from the receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 1 of
this Article, the two members already designated shall agree on the designation of a
third member. The third member shall not be a national of either party to the dispute,
nor permanently reside on the territory of either party to the dispute. The member thus
appointed shall be the President of the arbitration panel.
6. If all three members have not been designated or appointed within 60 days from
the receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 1, either party to the dispute may
request the Secretary–General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at the Hague to
designate an appointing authority.
7. The arbitration panel shall examine the matter referred to it in the request for the
establishment of an arbitration panel in light of the provisions of this Agreement applied
and interpreted in accordance with the rules of interpretation of public international law.
The award of the arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the parties to the
dispute.
8. Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement or agreed between the parties to
the dispute, the Optional Rules for Arbitrating Disputes between Two States of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), effective 20 October 1992, shall apply.
ARTICLE 44
Implementation of the Award
1. The Party concerned shall promptly comply with the award of the arbitration
panel. If it is impracticable to comply immediately, the parties to the dispute shall
endeavour to agree on a reasonable period of time to do so. In the absence of such
agreement within 30 days from the date of the award, either party to the dispute may,
within 10 days from the expiration of such period, request the original arbitration panel
to determine the length of the reasonable period of time.
2. The Party concerned shall notify the other party to the dispute of the measure
adopted in order to implement the award.
XXVIII
3. If the Party concerned fails to comply with the award within a reasonable period
of time and the parties to the dispute have not agreed on any compensation, the other
party to the dispute may, until the award has been properly implemented or the dispute
has been otherwise resolved, and subject to a prior notification of 30 days, suspend the
application of benefits granted under this Agreement, but only equivalent to those
affected by the measure that the arbitration panel has found to violate this Agreement.
4. Any dispute regarding the implementation of the award or the notified
suspension shall be decided by the arbitration panel upon request of either party to the
dispute before compensation can be sought or suspension of benefits can be applied.
The arbitration panel may also rule on the conformity with the award of any
implementing measures adopted after the suspension of benefits and whether the
suspension of benefits should be terminated or modified. The ruling of the arbitration
panel under this paragraph shall normally be given within 45 days from the date of
receipt of the request.
XXIX
CHAPTER 9 FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 45
Fulfilment of Obligations
The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their
obligations under this Agreement.
ARTICLE 46
Annexes and Protocols
The Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement, including their Appendices, are
an integral part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 47
Evolutionary Clause
1. The Parties undertake to review this Agreement in light of further developments
in international economic relations, inter alia, in the framework of the WTO, and to
examine in this context and in light of any relevant factor the possibility of further
developing and deepening their co-operation under this Agreement and to extend it to
areas not covered therein. The Joint Committee may examine this possibility and, where
appropriate, make recommendations to the Parties, particularly with a view to opening
up negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by the Parties in accordance with their
own procedures.
ARTICLE 48
Amendments
1. The Parties may agree on any amendment to this Agreement. Unless otherwise
agreed by the Parties, amendments shall enter into force on the first day of the third
month following the deposit of the last instrument of ratification, acceptance or
approval.
XXX
2. The text of the amendments as well as the instruments of ratification, acceptance
or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
ARTICLE 49
Relation to Other International Agreements
1. The provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to the rights and
obligations of the Parties under the WTO Agreement and the other agreements
negotiated thereunder, to which they are a party, and any other international agreement,
to which they are a party.
2. This Agreement shall not preclude the maintenance or establishment of customs
unions, free trade areas, arrangements for frontier trade and other preferential
agreements insofar as they do not have the effect of altering the trade arrangements
provided for in this Agreement.
3. When a Party enters into a customs union or free trade agreement with a third
party it shall, upon request by any other Party, be prepared to enter into consultations
with the requesting Party.
ARTICLE 50
Accession
1. Any State, becoming a Member of the European Free Trade Association may
accede to this Agreement, provided that the Joint Committee approves its accession, on
terms and conditions to be agreed upon by the Parties. The instrument of accession shall
be deposited with the Depositary.
2. In relation to an acceding State, this Agreement shall enter into force on the first
day of the third month following the deposit of its instrument of accession, or the
approval of the terms of accession by the existing Parties, whichever is later.
ARTICLE 51
Withdrawal and Expiration
1. Each Party may withdraw from this Agreement by means of a written
notification to the Depositary. The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the date
on which the notification is received by the Depositary.
2. If Albania withdraws, this Agreement shall expire when its withdrawal becomes
effective.
XXXI
3. Any EFTA State which withdraws from the Convention establishing the
European Free Trade Association shall, ipso facto on the same day as the withdrawal
takes effect, cease to be a Party to this Agreement.
ARTICLE 52
Entry into Force
1. This Agreement is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval in accordance
with the respective constitutional requirements of the Parties. The instruments of
ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
2. This Agreement shall enter into force on 1 April 2010 in relation to those Parties
which have deposited their instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval, or
notified provisional application to the Depositary, at least two months before that date,
and provided that Albania is among those Parties.
3. In case this Agreement does not enter into force on 1 April 2010 it shall enter
into force on the first day of the third month after Albania and at least one EFTA State
have deposited their instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval, or notified
provisional application to the Depositary.
4. In relation to an EFTA State depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval after this Agreement has entered into force, this Agreement shall enter into
force on the first day of the third month following the deposit of its instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval.
5. If its constitutional requirements permit, Albania or any EFTA State may apply
this Agreement provisionally pending ratification, acceptance or approval by that Party.
Provisional application of this Agreement shall be notified to the Depositary.
6. This Agreement shall not enter into force or be applied provisionally between
Albania and an EFTA State unless the complementary agreement on trade in
agricultural products between Albania and that EFTA State enters into force or is
applied provisionally simultaneously. It shall remain in force between Albania and that
EFTA State as long as the complementary agreement remains in force between them.
ARTICLE 53
Depositary
The Government of Norway shall act as Depositary.
XXXII
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed
this Agreement.
Done at Geneva, this 17th day of December 2009, in one original. The Depositary shall
transmit certified copies to all the Parties.
For the Republic of Albania For Iceland
........................................... ...........................................
For the Principality of Liechtenstein
...........................................
For the Kingdom of Norway
...........................................
For the Swiss Confederation
...........................................