AMENDING PROTOCOL TO THE SUBREGIONAL INTEGRATION AGREEMENT
ANDEAN (TRUJILLO PROTOCOL)
The Governments of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela,
AGREE to enter into this Modifying Protocol of the Integration Agreement

Andean Subregional (Cartagena Agreement):

FIRST: Replace Chapter II of the Cartagena Agreement with the following text:
"CHAPTER II
OF THE ANDEAN COMMUNITY AND THE ANDEAN INTEGRATION SYSTEM
Article 5.- The "Andean Community" is hereby created, made up of the sovereign States of
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela, and by the bodies and institutions of the
Andean Integration System, which is established by this Agreement.
Article 6.- The Andean Integration System is made up of the following
bodies and institutions:
- The Andean Presidential Council;

- The Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Relations;

- The Commission of the Andean Community;

- The General Secretariat of the Andean Community;

- The Court of Justice of the Andean Community;

- The Andean Parliament;

- The Business Advisory Council;

- The Labor Advisory Council;

- The Andean Development Corporation;

- The Latin American Reserve Fund;

- The Simón Rodríguez Agreement, the Social Agreements that are attached to the System

Andino de Integración and others that are created within the framework of the same;

- The Simón Bolívar Andean University;

- The Advisory Councils established by the Commission; and,
- The other bodies and institutions created within the framework of the integration

Andean subregional.
Article 7.- The purpose of the System is to allow effective coordination of the
bodies and institutions that comprise it, to deepen subregional integration
Andean region, promote its external projection and consolidate and strengthen the actions
related to the integration process.
Article 8.- The bodies and institutions of the Andean Integration System are governed by
this Agreement, their respective constitutive treaties and their protocols
modifiers.
Article 9.- In order to achieve the best coordination of the Andean System of
Integration, the President of the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
convene and preside over the Meeting of Representatives of the institutions that make up the
System.
The Meeting will have as main tasks:
a) Exchange information on the actions developed by the respective
institutions to comply with the Guidelines issued by the Presidential Council
Andean;
b) Examine the possibility and advisability of agreeing, among all the institutions or among
some of them, the realization of coordinated actions, with the purpose of contributing to the
achievement of the objectives of the Andean Integration System; and,
c) Submit to the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in an extended meeting,
reports on the actions carried out in compliance with the Guidelines received.
Article 10.- The Meetings of Representatives of the institutions that make up the
Andean Integration System will be held ordinarily at least once a
year and, extraordinarily, whenever requested by any of its institutions
members, in the place that is agreed before its convocation.
The General Secretariat of the Andean Community will act as the Secretariat of the Meeting.
Section A - Of the Andean Presidential Council
Article 11.- The Andean Presidential Council is the highest body of the Andean System of

Integration and is made up of the Heads of State of the Member Countries of the

Cartagena Agreement. Issues Guidelines on the different areas of integration

Andean subregional, which are implemented by the bodies and institutions of the

System determined by it, in accordance with the powers and mechanisms established in

their respective Treaties or Constitutive Instruments.

The bodies and institutions of the System will execute the political guidelines contained
in the Guidelines issued by the Andean Presidential Council.

Article 12.- It corresponds to the Andean Presidential Council:

a) Define the Andean subregional integration policy;

b) Guide and promote actions on matters of interest to the Subregion as a whole,

as well as those related to the coordination between the bodies and institutions of the System

Andean Integration;

c) Evaluate the development and results of the Andean subregional integration process;

d) Consider and issue pronouncements on the reports, initiatives and

recommendations presented by the bodies and institutions of the Andean System of

Integration; and,

e) Examine all questions and issues related to the development of the process of the

Andean subregional integration and its external projection.

Article 13.- The Andean Presidential Council will meet regularly once a

year, preferably in the country that exercises its Presidency. In said meeting
will be informed of the actions carried out
or the bodies and institutions of the

Andean Integration System, as well as its plans, programs and suggestions. The
members of the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs, of the Commission and

The representatives of the bodies and institutions of the System may attend, as

of observers, to the meetings of the Andean Presidential Council.
 The Andean Presidential Council may meet extraordinarily, each time it is
it deems appropriate, in the place that is agreed before its call.
Article 14.- The Andean Presidential Council will have a President who will exercise the
highest political representation of the Andean Community and will remain for one year
calendar in its function, which will be exercised successively and in alphabetical order by
each of the Member Countries.
It corresponds to the President of the Andean Presidential Council:

a) Call and preside over the ordinary and extraordinary meetings of the Council;

b) Exercise the representation of the Council and the Andean Community;

c) Supervise compliance by the other bodies and institutions of the System

Andean Integration of the Guidelines issued by the Council; and,

d) Carry out the steps requested by the Council.

Section B - Of the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
Article 15.- The Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs is made up of
by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Member Countries of the Agreement of
Cartagena.
Article 16.- It corresponds to the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs:
a) Formulate the foreign policy of the Member Countries in matters of interest
Subregional, as well as guiding and coordinating the external action of the various bodies and
institutions of the Andean Integration System;
b) Formulate, execute and evaluate, in coordination with the Commission, the general policy of the
Andean subregional integration process;
c) Comply with the Guidelines issued by the Andean Presidential Council and
ensure the execution of those that are addressed to other bodies and institutions
the Andean Integration System;
d) Sign Conventions and Agreements with third countries or groups of countries or with
international organizations on global issues of foreign policy and cooperation;
e) Coordinate the joint position of the Member Countries in forums and negotiations
international, in the areas of its competence;
f) Represent the Andean Community in matters and acts of common interest, within
within the framework of its competence, in accordance with the rules and objectives of the Agreement;
g) Recommend or adopt the measures that ensure the achievement of the purposes and
objectives of the Cartagena Agreement, within the scope of its competence;
h) Ensure harmonious compliance with the obligations derived from this
Agreement and the Treaty of Montevideo of 1980;
i) Approve and modify its own regulations;
j) Approve the Regulations of the General Secretariat and its modifications, at the proposal of
the Commission; and,
k) Know and resolve all other matters of common interest, within the scope of its
competence.
Article 17.- The Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Relations will express itself
through Declarations and Decisions, adopted by consensus. The latter form
part of the legal system of the Andean Community.
Article 18.- The Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Relations will meet in
ordinary form twice a year, preferably, in the country that exercises the presidency of the
same. Likewise, it may meet extraordinarily, whenever it deems it
convenient, at the request of any of its members, in the place agreed before
of your call.
Article 19.- The Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs will be chaired
by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the country that is in charge of the presidency of the
Andean Presidential Council, who will remain in his role for one calendar year.
The coordination work that corresponds to the President of this Council will be
performed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the country whose Head of State
occupies the presidency of the Andean Presidential Council, in the capacity of Secretary Pro
Tempore of both bodies and with the technical support of the General Secretariat of the
Andean Community.
Article 20.- The Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Relations will meet in
expanded form with the titular representatives before the Commission, at least once
per year and, at alternate level, whenever it deems necessary, in order to deal with matters
related to the Cartagena Agreement that are of interest to both bodies, such as:
a) Prepare the meetings of the Andean Presidential Council;
b) Elect and, when appropriate, remove the Secretary General of the Andean Community;
c) Propose to the Andean Presidential Council the modifications to this Agreement;
d) Evaluate the management of the General Secretariat;
e) Consider the initiatives and proposals that the Member Countries or the General Secretariat
submit for your consideration; and,
f) Any other issues that both bodies consider to deal with by mutual agreement.
Section C - Of the Andean Community Commission
Article 21.- The Andean Community Commission is made up of a representative
plenipotentiary of each of the Governments of the Member Countries. each government
It will accredit a regular representative and an alternate.
The Commission will express its will through Decisions.
Article 22.- It corresponds to the Commission of the Andean Community:
a) Formulate, execute and evaluate the Andean subregional integration policy in matters
of trade and investment and when appropriate, in coordination with the Andean Council
of Ministers of Foreign Affairs;
b) Adopt the measures that are necessary to achieve the objectives of the Agreement of
Cartagena, as well as for compliance with the Directives of the Presidential Council
Andean;
c) Coordinate the joint position of the Member Countries in forums and negotiations
international, within the scope of its competence;
d) Ensure harmonious compliance with the obligations derived from this
Agreement and the Treaty of Montevideo of 1980;
e) Approve and modify its own regulations;
f) Approve, not approve or amend the proposals that the Member Countries, individually or
collectively, or the General Secretariat submit for its consideration;
g) Maintain a permanent relationship with the bodies and institutions that make up
the Andean Integration System, with a view to promoting the coordination of programs and
actions aimed at achieving their common objectives;
h) Represent the Andean Community in matters and acts of common interest, within
within the framework of its competence, in accordance with the rules and objectives of the Agreement;
i) Approve the annual budgets and evaluate the budget execution of the Secretariat
General and the Court of Justice of the Andean Community, as well as set the contribution
of each of the Member Countries; and,
j) Submit for consideration of the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs the
Proposal for Regulations of the General Secretariat.
In the fulfillment of its functions, the Commission will consider in a special way the
situation of Bolivia and Ecuador based on the objectives of this Agreement, of the
preferential treatment provided in their favour, and of the geographical confinement of the
first.
Article 23.- The Commission will have a President who will remain in office for one calendar year.
the charge of him. Said function will be exercised by the representative of the country that occupies the
presidency of the Andean Presidential Council.
Article 24.- The Commission will ordinarily meet three times a year and in
extraordinary when called by its President at the request of any of the
Member Countries or the General Secretariat.
Its sessions will be held at the headquarters of the General Secretariat, but may be held
out of it. The Commission shall meet with the presence of an absolute majority.
of the Member Countries.
Attendance at Commission meetings will be mandatory and non-attendance will be
will consider abstention.
Article 25.- The President of the Commission, at the request of one or more of the Countries
Members or the General Secretariat will convene the Commission to meet as
Expanded Commission, in order to deal with issues of a sectoral nature, consider standards
to make possible the coordination of development plans and the harmonization of
economic policies of the Member Countries, as well as to know and resolve all
other matters of common interest.
Said meetings will be chaired by the President of the Commission and will be
formed jointly by the titular representatives before it and the Ministers or
Secretaries of State of the respective area. One vote per country will be exercised to approve their
Decisions, which will form part of the legal system of the Andean Community.
Article 26- The Commission will adopt its Decisions with the favorable vote of the majority
absolute of the Member Countries. The following are excepted from this general rule:
a) The matters included in Annex I of this Agreement, in which the Commission
adopt its Decisions with the favorable vote of the absolute majority of the Countries
Members and without negative vote.
The Commission may incorporate new matters in said Annex with the favorable vote of the
absolute majority of the Member Countries: b) In the cases listed in Annex II, the proposals of the General Secretariat
must be approved with the favorable vote of the absolute majority of the Countries
Members and as long as there is no negative vote. The proposals that will have the vote
favor of the absolute majority of the Member Countries but that were subject to some kind of
negative vote must be returned to the General Secretariat for the consideration of the
antecedents that have given origin in to said negative vote. Within a period of not less than two
months nor more than six, the General Secretariat will once again submit the proposal to the
consideration of the Commission with the modifications it deems appropriate and, in such case,
The proposal thus modified will be considered approved if it has the favorable vote of the
absolute majority of the Member Countries, with no negative vote, but no
The country that has voted negatively at the time will be computed as such.
former;
c) Matters related to the special regime for Bolivia and Ecuador, which are
listed in Annex III. In this case, the Decisions of the Commission will be adopted with
the absolute majority of favorable votes and provided that one of them is that of Bolivia or
Ecuador; and,
d) The Industrial Development Programs and Projects must be approved with the
favorable vote of the absolute majority of the Member Countries and as long as there is no
Negative vote.
Article 27.- The General Secretariat or the Member Countries must present their
proposals at least fifteen days prior to the date of the Council meeting
Andean Ministry of Foreign Affairs or the Commission, as appropriate.
Only in exceptional cases duly justified and in accordance with the
legal system of the Andean Community, the advance notice may be dispensed with
required, provided that the proposer and the other Member Countries agree
agreement.
The proposals that have the favorable vote of the absolute majority of the Countries
Members but that were the object of a negative vote, must be returned to the
proponent for the consideration of the antecedents that may have given rise to that
Negative vote.
In a period of not less than one month nor more than three, the proponent will again raise the
proposal for the consideration of the body that corresponds with the modifications that
deems appropriate and, in such a case, the proposal thus modified shall be deemed approved if
has the favorable vote of the absolute majority of the Member Countries.
Article 28.- The Member Country that incurs a delay greater than four quarters in
the payment of their current contributions to the General Secretariat or to the Court of Justice
of the Andean Community, may not exercise the right to vote in the Commission until
regularize your situation.
In this case, the quorum for attendance and voting will be computed according to the number of
contributing countries.
Section D - Of the General Secretariat of the Andean Community
Article 29.- The General Secretariat is the executive body of the Andean Community and in
such character acts solely based on the interests of the Subregion. The Secretary
General will grant technical support, when appropriate, to the other bodies and
institutions of the Andean Integration System.
The General Secretariat will be headed by the Secretary General. For the performance of your
Functions will be supported by the General Directors, according to the respective regulations.
It will also have the technical and administrative staff necessary for compliance
of their functions. The General Secretariat will express itself through Resolutions.
Article 30.- The functions of the General Secretariat of the Andean Community are:
a) Ensure the application of this Agreement and compliance with the rules that
make up the legal system of the Andean Community;
b) Attend to the orders of the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs and the
Commission;
c) Formulate the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs and the Commission,
Decision proposals, in accordance with their respective powers, as well as
initiatives and suggestions to the extended meeting of the Andean Council of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs, intended to facilitate or accelerate compliance with this Agreement,
in order to achieve its objectives in the shortest possible time;
d) Carry out the studies and propose the necessary measures for the application of the
special treatment in favor of Bolivia and Ecuador and, in general, those concerning
the participation of the two countries in this Agreement;
e) Evaluate and report annually to the Andean Council of Foreign Ministers
Foreign Affairs and the Commission on the results of the application of this Agreement and the achievement
of its objectives, paying special attention to compliance with the principle of
equitable distribution of the benefits of integration, and propose measures
pertinent corrective measures;
f) Carry out the technical studies and the coordination that the others entrust
bodies of the Andean Integration System and others that in their opinion are necessary;
g) Maintain permanent working links with Member Countries, coordinating with
the national integration body that each country designates for this purpose;
h) Prepare its annual work program, which will preferably include the
work entrusted to it by the other organs of the System;
i) Promote periodic meetings of the national bodies in charge of the A
formulation or execution of economic policy and, especially, those that have
his charge the planning;
j) Maintain working ties with the executive bodies of other organizations
regional integration and cooperation in order to intensify their relations and
reciprocal cooperation;
k) Keep the minutes of the extended meetings of the Andean Council of Ministers of
External Relations and those of the Commission, and prepare the tentative agenda of its
meetings, in coordination with the presidents of said bodies;
l) Be the depositary of the minutes of the meetings and other documents of the bodies of the
Andean Integration System and attest to their authenticity;
m) Edit the Official Gazette of the Cartagena Agreement;
n) Act as Secretary of the Meeting of Representatives of the institutions that
make up the Andean Integration System; and,
ñ) Exercise the other powers expressly conferred by the legal system
of the Andean Community.
Article 31.- The General Secretariat will function permanently and its headquarters will be the
city of Lima, Peru.
Article 32.- The General Secretariat will be in charge of a General Secretary who will be
elected by consensus by the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in
extended meeting, for a period of five years, being able to be re-elected only once.
The Secretary General must be a highly representative personality, recognized
prestige and national of one of the Member Countries. He will act solely on the basis of the
interests of the Subregion as a whole.
During his term, the Secretary General may not carry out any other activity;
nor shall it solicit or accept instructions from any Government, national entity or
international.
In the event of a vacancy, the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in meeting
The enlarged body will immediately proceed to designate the new holder by consensus. Until
If such designation is made, the General Secretariat will be temporarily assumed by the Director
Senior General in office.
Article 33.- The Secretary General may be removed, by consensus, upon request
of a Member Country, only when in the exercise of its functions it has incurred
in serious misconduct provided for in the Regulations of the General Secretariat.
Article 34.- The powers of the Secretary General of the Andean Community are:
a) Exercise the legal representation of the General Secretariat;
b) Propose to the Commission or the Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
initiatives related to the Regulations of the General Secretariat;
c) Hire and remove, in accordance with the Regulations of the General Secretariat, the personnel
technical and administrative;
d) Participate with the right to speak in the sessions of the Andean Council of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs, of the Commission and of their respective enlarged meetings and,
when he is invited, in those of the other organs of the System;
e) Submit to the Commission the draft annual budget for its approval; and,
f) Submit an annual report on the activities of the General Secretariat to the Council
Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in an extended meeting.
Article 35.- The Secretary General shall appoint the Directors General, in consultation with
Member Countries and in accordance with the organic-functional structure of the
General Secretary. The General Directors will be high-level professionals,
designated strictly on the basis of their educational background, suitability,
repute and experience, being responsible for a specific technical area.
The General Directors must be nationals of one of the Member Countries and in
the appointment of him the Secretary General will ensure that there is a geographical distribution
balanced subregional The appointment and removal of the General Directors shall be
shall be governed by the provisions of the Regulations of the General Secretariat.
Article 36.- In the execution of the procedures in which the
interests of two or more Member Countries, the Secretary General will have the assistance
technician of special experts, whose designation and form of participation will be made
in accordance with the Regulations of the General Secretariat.
Article 37.- The Secretary General, in hiring technical personnel and
administrative staff, who may be of any nationality, will strictly take into account
the suitability, competence and good repute of the candidates and will try, insofar as this
is not incompatible with the previous criteria, that there is a geographical distribution
balanced subregional The appointment and removal of personnel will be exercised in accordance with the criteria and
grounds established in the Regulations of the General Secretariat, without prejudice to
what is provided for this purpose in the Treaty of Creation of the Court of Justice and its
modifying protocols.
Article 38.- The staff of the General Secretariat will refrain from any action
Incompatible consistent with the nature of their functions, and will not request or accept instructions from
Government, national or international entity some.
Article 39.- In the case of procedures that must culminate in the adoption of a
Resolution or Opinion, natural or legal persons, public or private of the
Member Countries must collaborate with the investigations carried out by the Secretariat
General in the development of their functions and in this sense they must provide the
information requested by the latter.
The General Secretariat will keep the confidentiality of the documents and information
that are supplied to you, in accordance with the regulations established in this regard.
establish.
Section E - Of the Court of Justice of the Andean Community
Article 40.- The Court of Justice is the judicial body of the Andean Community.
Article 41.- The Court of Justice of the Andean Community is governed by the Treaty of its
creation, its amending protocols and this Agreement.
The Tribunal is based in the city of Quito, Ecuador.
Section F - Andean Parliament
Article 42.- The Andean Parliament is the deliberative body of the System, its nature
is communal, represents the peoples of the Andean Community and will be made up of
representatives elected by universal and direct suffrage, according to the procedure
adopted by means of an Additional Protocol that will include the appropriate criteria of
national representation.
Until the Additional Protocol establishing direct election is signed, Parliament
Andino will be made up of representatives of the National Congresses,
accordance with its internal regulations and the General Regulations of the Parliament
Andean.
The permanent headquarters of the Andean Parliament will be in the city of Santafé de Bogotá,
Colombia.
Article 43.- The powers of the Andean Parliament are:
a) Participate in the promotion and orientation of the subregional integration process
Andean, with a view to consolidating Latin American integration;
b) Examine the progress of the Andean subregional integration process and the
compliance with its objectives, requiring periodic information to the bodies
and institutions of the System;
c) Formulate recommendations on the draft annual budgets of the bodies and
Institutions of the System that are constituted with the direct contributions of the Countries
Members;
d) Suggest to the bodies and institutions of the System the actions or decisions that have
by object or effect the adoption of modifications, adjustments or new guidelines in relation to the programmatic objectives and the institutional structure of the
System;
e) Participate in the normative generation of the process through suggestions to the bodies
of the System of projects of norms on subjects of common interest, for its
incorporation into the legal system of the Andean Community;
f) Promote the harmonization of the laws of the Member Countries; and,
g) Promote relations of cooperation and coordination with the Parliaments of the Countries
Members, the bodies and institutions of the System, as well as with the bodies
parliamentarians of integration or cooperation from third countries.
Section G - Consultative Institutions
Article 44.- The Business Advisory Council and the Labor Advisory Council are
consultative institutions of the Andean Integration System. They are made up of
delegates of the highest level, who will be directly elected by the
representative organizations of the business and labor sectors of each of the
Member Countries, in accordance with their respective regulations, and accredited
officially by those.
It will correspond to these Consultative Councils to issue an opinion before the Andean Council of
Ministers of Foreign Affairs, the Commission or the General Secretariat, at the request of
these or on their own initiative, on the programs or activities of the process of the
Andean subregional integration that were of interest to their respective sectors.
They may also be summoned to the meetings of the working groups and experts.
governmental, linked to the elaboration of draft Decisions, and may
participate with the right to speak in the meetings of the Commission.
Section H - Financial Institutions
Article 45.- The Andean Development Corporation and the Latin American Development Fund
Reserves are financial institutions of the System whose purpose is to promote the
Andean subregional integration process.
Article 46.- The General Secretariat and the executive bodies of the Andean Corporation of
Development and the Latin American Reserve Fund, must maintain bonds of
work, in order to establish an adequate coordination of activities and facilitate, in
thus, the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement.
Section I - Dispute Resolution
Article 47.- The solution of controversies that arise due to the application of the
legal system de the Andean Community, will be subject to the rules of the Treaty that
creates the Court of Justice.
Section J - International Legal Status and the

Privileges and Immunities

Article 48.- The Andean Community is a subregional organization with legal status or
international legal personality.
Article 49.- The General Secretariat, the Court of Justice, the Andean Parliament, the
Andean Development Corporation, the Latin American Reserve Fund and the Agreements
Social rights that are part of the System, will enjoy in the territory of each one of the Countries
Members, of the privileges and immunities necessary for the performance of their
purposes. Its representatives and international officials will also enjoy the
privileges and immunities necessary to independently perform their functions,
in connection with this Agreement. Its premises are inviolable and its goods and assets enjoy Immunity against all legal proceedings, unless expressly waived.
However, such waiver shall not apply to any enforceable judicial measure.”
SECOND: The Commission is entrusted with the adoption by Decision of a single text
ordered by the Andean Subregional Integration Treaty (Cartagena Agreement) with the
modifications introduced by this Protocol, for which it may carry out the
necessary adjustments to the numbering of the article.
THIRD: Replace the references: "Commission of the Cartagena Agreement", "Board
of the Cartagena Agreement”, “Court of Justice of the Cartagena Agreement” and
"Legal Regulation of the Cartagena Agreement", contained in the other chapters of
this Agreement, by: "Commission of the Andean Community", "General Secretariat of the
Andean Community”, “Court of Justice of the Andean Community” and “Ordinance
Lawyer of the Andean Community”.
FOURTH: Understand the references "Board" or "Board of the Cartagena Agreement"
contained in the text of the Cartagena Agreement as referring to the body created by the
Andean Subregional Integration Treaty of 1969 and replaced by the General Secretariat
of the Andean Community through this Protocol.
VALIDITY
FIFTH: This Protocol will enter into force when all Member Countries of the
Cartagena Agreement that signs it, have deposited the respective instrument of
ratification in the Board of the Cartagena Agreement.
TRANSITORY DISPOSITIONS
SIXTH: When necessary, the Member Countries will adapt the instruments
articles of incorporation, amending protocols and related and derived provisions, as provided
in this Protocol.
SEVENTH: The elections by universal and direct suffrage of the representatives before the
Andean Parliament must be carried out within a period of up to five years.
EIGHTH: The Board of the Cartagena Agreement will maintain all its powers until the
date on which the Secretary General assumes his position. The Andean Council of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs, in coordination with the Commission, will regulate the transition period,
if this were necessary.
NINTH: At the time it takes office, the General Secretariat will be subrogated
in all the obligations, rights and patrimony that correspond to the Board of
Cartagena Agreement.
TENTH: The Andean Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs will be summoned to its
first meeting within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of
entry into force of this Protocol. At that time, he will approve his
Internal Regulations and those of the General Secretariat, as well as the Regulations of
Corresponding Administrative Procedures.
Done in the city of Trujillo, on the tenth day of the month of March of the year one thousand
nine hundred and ninety-six, in five originals, all of them equally valid.