Economic Complementation Agreement
  signed between the Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil,
the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, States Parties to MERCOSUR
and the Governments of the Republic of Colombia, the Republic of Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Member Countries of the Andean Community (ACE Nº 59)

The Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, States Parties to MERCOSUR and the Governments of the Republic of Colombia, the Republic of Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Member Countries of the Andean Community will be called "Signatory Parties". For the purposes of this Agreement, the "Contracting Parties" are, on the one hand, MERCOSUR and, on the other hand, the Member Countries of the Andean Community that sign the Agreement,

WHEREAS it is necessary to strengthen the integration process in Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, through the conclusion of agreements open to the participation of the other member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) that allow the formation of an expanded economic space;

That it is convenient to offer economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade and investment, in order to promote, in this way, a more active participation of the same in the economic and commercial relations between the Member States of MERCOSUR and the Member Countries of the Andean Community;

That on December 17, 1996, Economic Complementation Agreement No. 36 was signed, establishing a Free Trade Zone between the Republic of Bolivia and MERCOSUR;

That on August 25, 2003, Economic Complementation Agreement No. 58 was signed, establishing a Free Trade Zone between the Republic of Peru and MERCOSUR;

That the formation of free trade areas in Latin America constitutes a relevant means to approximate the existing integration schemes;

That regional economic integration is one of the essential instruments for the countries of Latin America to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples;

That on April 16, 1998, a Framework Agreement was signed between the Andean Community and MERCOSUR that provides for the negotiation of a Free Trade Area between the Parties;

That on December 6, 2002, Economic Complementation Agreement No. 56 was signed between the Andean Community and MERCOSUR, establishing the formation of a Free Trade Area;

That the validity of democratic institutions constitutes an essential element for the development of the regional integration process;

That the States Parties to MERCOSUR, through the signing of the 1991 Treaty of Asunción and the Andean countries through the signing of the 1969 Cartagena Agreement, have taken a significant step towards achieving the objectives of Latin American integration;

That the Marrakesh Agreement, which establishes the World Trade Organization (WTO), constitutes the framework of rights and obligations to which trade policies and the commitments of this Agreement will be adjusted;

That the Parties promote free competition and reject the exercise of restrictive practices thereof;

That the integration process must cover aspects related to the development and full use of the physical infrastructure,
 

AGREE

In celebrating this Economic Complementation Agreement, under the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the ALALC Council of Ministers.
 

TITLE I

OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Article 1.- This Agreement has the following objectives:

- Establish the legal and institutional framework for cooperation and economic and physical integration that contributes to the creation of an expanded economic space that tends to facilitate the free circulation of goods and services and the full use of productive factors, under conditions of competition between the Contracting parts;

- Form a free trade area between the Contracting Parties through the expansion and diversification of commercial exchange and the elimination of tariff and non-tariff restrictions that affect reciprocal trade;

- Achieve harmonious development in the region, taking into account the asymmetries derived from the different levels of economic development of the Signatory Parties;

- Promote the development and use of physical infrastructure, with special emphasis on the establishment of integration corridors that allow the reduction of costs and the generation of competitive advantages in reciprocal regional trade and with third countries outside the region;

- Promote and promote investments among the economic agents of the Signatory Parties;


- Promote complementarity and economic, energy, scientific and technological cooperation;

- Promote consultations, when appropriate, in trade negotiations carried out with third countries and extra-regional groupings of countries.

Article 2.- The provisions of this Agreement will be applied in the territory of the Signatory Parties.
 

TITLE II

TRADE RELEASE PROGRAM

Article 3.- The Contracting Parties will form a Free Trade Zone through a Trade Liberalization Program, which will be applied to products originating in and coming from the territories of the Signatory Parties. Said Program will consist of progressive and automatic reductions, applicable to the tariffs in force for imports from third countries in each Signatory Party, at the time of the application of preferences in accordance with the provisions of their legislation.

Notwithstanding what is established in the previous paragraph, for the products included in Annex I , the deduction will be applied only to the tariffs consigned in said Annex.

For products not listed in Annex I , the preference will be applied to the total tariffs, including additional customs duties.

In the trade of goods between the Contracting Parties, the classification of merchandise will be governed by the Nomenclature of the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System, in its regional version NALADISA 96 and its future updates, which will not modify the scope and conditions of access negotiated, for which the Administrative Commission will define the effective date of said updates.

In order to provide transparency to the application and scope of the preferences, the Signatory Parties will be notified as of the entry into force of this Agreement, the classifying resolutions issued or issued by their respective competent bodies based on the explanatory notes of the Harmonized System. In the event of divergent interpretations, the Parties may resort to the World Customs Organization (WCO), without prejudice to the provisions of subparagraph e) of Article 41 of this Agreement.

This Agreement incorporates the tariff preferences previously negotiated between the Signatory Parties in the Partial Scope Agreements within the framework of ALADI, as reflected in the Trade Liberalization Program.


Likewise, this Agreement incorporates the tariff preferences and other access conditions previously negotiated in the Regional Agreements within the framework of ALADI, as reflected in the Trade Liberalization Program. However, the tariff preferences and other access conditions that are being applied by the Signatory Parties on the date of signing this Agreement will be applicable, under the Regional Agreement Related to the Regional Tariff Preference (PAR) and the Regional Agreements of Opening of Markets in favor of countries with less relative economic development (NAM), to the extent that said preferences and other access conditions are more favorable than those established in this Agreement.

However, the provisions of the Partial Scope Agreements and the Regional Scope Agreements will remain in force when they refer to matters not included in this Agreement.

Article 4.- For the purposes of implementing the Trade Liberalization Program, the Signatory Parties agree among themselves, the specific schedules and their rules and disciplines, contained in Annex IIword .

Article 5.- The Signatory Parties may not adopt levies and charges of equivalent effects other than customs duties that affect trade covered by this Agreement. Regarding those existing on the date of signing the Agreement, only the encumbrances and charges that appear in the Complementary Notes may be maintained, which may be modified but without increasing their incidence. The aforementioned Notes appear in Annex III .

"Charges" shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharge of equivalent effect that affects imports originating from the Signatory Parties. This concept does not include similar rates and surcharges when they are equivalent to the cost of the services rendered, nor antidumping or countervailing duties.

Article 6.- The Signatory Parties will not maintain or introduce new non-tariff restrictions to their reciprocal trade.

"Restrictions" shall be understood as any measure or mechanism that prevents or hinders the imports or exports of a Signatory Party, except those permitted by the WTO.

Article 7.- The Contracting Parties shall keep each other informed, through the competent national bodies, of eventual modifications to customs duties and shall send a copy thereof to the ALADI General Secretariat for its information.

Article 8.- In matters of import licences, the Signatory Parties shall be governed by the provisions of the Agreement on Procedures for Import Licensing of the WTO.

Article 9.- The Contracting Parties, within a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, will exchange lists of measures that affect their reciprocal trade, such as non-automatic licenses, prohibitions or limitations on imports and registration requirements or similar, with the sole purpose of transparency. The inclusion of measures in said list does not prejudge their validity or legal relevance.

In addition, the Contracting Parties will keep each other informed through the competent national bodies of any changes to said measures and will send a copy of them to the General Secretariat of ALADI for their information.

In the case of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment and sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the procedures relating to transparency provided for in the specific annexes apply.

Article 10.- No provision of this Agreement shall be interpreted to prevent a Signatory Party from adopting or applying measures in accordance with Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and/or with Articles XX and XXI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) of 1994.

Article 11.- Used merchandise, even those that are identified as such in headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System, will not benefit from the Trade Liberation Program.
 

TITLE III

ORIGIN REGIME

Article 12.- The Signatory Parties will apply the Origin Regime contained in Annex IV of this Agreement to imports made under the Trade Liberalization Program .



TITLE IV

NATIONAL TREATMENT

Article 13.- In matters of national treatment, the Signatory Parties shall be governed by the provisions of Article III of the GATT of 1994 and Article 46 of the Montevideo Treaty of 1980.



TITLE V

ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING MEASURES

Article 14.- In the application of antidumping or countervailing measures, the Signatory Parties will be governed by their respective legislation, which must be consistent with the Agreement on the Application of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.

Likewise, the Signatory Parties will comply with the commitments assumed with respect to subsidies within the scope of the WTO, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 18.

Article 15.- In the event that one of the Signatory Parties of a Contracting Party applies anti-dumping or countervailing measures on imports from third countries, it will notify the other Contracting Party of them for the evaluation and monitoring of imports in its market. the products subject to the measures, through the competent national bodies.


Article 16.- The Contracting or Signatory Parties must report any modification or repeal of their laws, regulations or provisions on antidumping or countervailing duties, within fifteen (15) days after the publication of the respective regulations in the body of official dissemination. Said communication will be made through the mechanism provided in Title XXIII of the Agreement.

TITLE VI

RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES OF FREE COMPETITION

Article 17.- The Contracting Parties will promote the actions that are necessary to have an adequate framework to identify and sanction eventual practices restrictive of free competition.



TITLE VII

APPLICATION AND USE OF SUBSIDIES

Article 18.- The Signatory Parties condemn all unfair trade practices and undertake to eliminate measures that may cause distortions in bilateral trade, in accordance with the provisions of the WTO.

In this regard, the Signatory Parties agree not to apply subsidies to reciprocal industrial trade that are contrary to the provisions of the WTO.

However, the Signatory Parties agree not to apply any form of export subsidies to reciprocal agricultural trade.

When a Party decides to support its agricultural producers, it will guide its internal support policies towards those that:

a) have no or minimal distorting effects on trade or production; either

b) are exempted from any reduction commitment under Article 6.2 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture and its subsequent amendments.

Products that do not comply with the provisions of this Article will not benefit from the Trade Liberation Program.

The Signatory Party that considers itself affected by any of these measures may request detailed information from the other Signatory Party on the subsidy allegedly applied. The consulted Signatory Party must submit detailed information within fifteen (15) days. Within thirty (30) days after receiving the information, a consultation meeting will be held between the Signatory Parties involved.

After this consultation, if the existence of export subsidies is verified, the affected Signatory Party may suspend the benefits of the Trade Liberation Program for the product or products benefited by the measure.
 

TITLE VIII

SAFEGUARDS

Article 19.- The Contracting Parties adopt the Safeguards Regime contained in Annex V.
 

TITLE IX

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 20.- Controversies arising from the interpretation, application or non-compliance of this Agreement and the Protocols and complementary instruments adopted within its framework, will be settled in accordance with the Dispute Settlement Regime signed through an Additional Protocol to this Agreement. Agreement, which must be incorporated by the Signatory Parties in accordance with the provisions of their domestic legislation.

Said Additional Protocol shall enter into force and be fully applicable to all Signatory Parties from the date of the last ratification.

During the period between the date of entry into force of this Agreement and the date of entry into force of the Additional Protocol, the transitory mechanism that appears as Annex VI . The Parties to the dispute, by mutual agreement, may additionally apply the provisions contained in the Additional Protocol in all matters not provided for in the aforementioned Annex.

The Signatory Parties may provide for the provisional application of the Protocol to the extent that their national legislation so allows.



TITLE X

CUSTOMS VALUATION

Article 21.- In their reciprocal trade, the Signatory Parties will be governed by the provisions of the Agreement regarding the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and by Resolution 226 of the Committee of Representatives of ALADI.
 

TITLE XI

STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT

Article 22.- The Signatory Parties will be governed by what is established in the Regime of Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment, contained in Annex VII .



TITLE XII

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 23. - The Contracting Parties undertake to prevent sanitary and phytosanitary measures from becoming unjustified obstacles to trade.

The Signatory Parties will be governed by the provisions of the Regime of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, contained in Annex VIII .
 

TITLE XIII

SPECIAL MEASURES

Article 24.- The Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Colombia, the Republic of Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, adopt for their respective reciprocal trade, the Regime of Special Measures contained in Annex IX , for the products listed in the Appendices of said Annex. The Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay will continue to evaluate the possible application of the Special Measures Regime, contained in Annex IX , for reciprocal trade with the Republic of Ecuador. Meanwhile, the products included by the Republic of Ecuador in their respective Appendices to Annex IX ,

They will maintain their current preferential levels and conditions and will not benefit from the application of the tariff reduction schedules established in Annex II for reciprocal trade between the countries mentioned in this paragraph.


TITLE XIV

PROMOTION AND EXCHANGE OF COMMERCIAL INFORMATION

Article 25.- The Contracting Parties will support themselves in the programs and tasks of diffusion and commercial promotion, facilitating the activity of official and private missions, the organization of fairs and exhibitions, the holding of informative seminars, market studies and other actions aimed at to the best use of the Commercial Liberalization Program and of the opportunities offered by the procedures agreed upon in commercial matters.

Article 26.- For the purposes provided in the previous Article, the Contracting Parties will schedule activities that facilitate reciprocal promotion by public and private entities in both Contracting Parties, for the products of their interest, included in the Trade Liberalization Program of this Agreement.

Article 27.- The Signatory Parties will exchange information about the regional and global offers and demands of their export products.
 

TITLE XV

SERVICES

Article 28.- The Contracting Parties will promote the adoption of measures tending to facilitate the provision of services. Likewise, and within a period to be defined by the Administrative Commission, the Signatory Parties will establish the appropriate mechanisms for the progressive liberalization, expansion, and diversification of trade in services in their territories, in accordance with the rights, obligations, and commitments derived from the respective participation. in the WTO's General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), as well as in other regional and hemispheric forums.


TITLE XVI

INVESTMENTS AND DOUBLE TAXATION

Article 29.- The Signatory Parties will seek to encourage reciprocal investment, with the aim of intensifying bilateral trade and technology flows, in accordance with their respective national legislation.

Article 30.- The Signatory Parties will examine the possibility of signing new Agreements on Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments. The bilateral agreements signed between the Signatory Parties on the date of this Agreement will remain in full force.

Article 31.- The Signatory Parties will examine the possibility of signing new Agreements to avoid double taxation. The bilateral agreements signed between the Signatory Parties on the date of this Agreement will remain in full force.



TITLE XVII

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

Article 32.- The Signatory Parties will be governed by the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights of the WTO, as well as by the rights and obligations contained in the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity. develop standards and disciplines for the protection of traditional knowledge.



TITLE XVIII

TRANSPORTATION

Article 33.- The Signatory Parties will promote the facilitation of land, river, lake, sea and air transportation services, in order to offer adequate conditions for the best circulation of goods and people, meeting the increased demand that will result from space. expanded economy.


Article 34.- The Administrative Commission will identify those agreements entered into within the framework of MERCOSUR or its State Parties and the Andean Community or its Member Countries whose application by both Contracting Parties is of common interest.

Article 35.- The Contracting Parties may establish specific rules and commitments tending to facilitate land, river, lake, maritime and air transportation services that fall within the framework indicated in the rules of this Title and set the deadlines for their implementation.



TITLE XIX

INFRASTRUCTURE

Article 36.- The Signatory Parties will promote initiatives and cooperation mechanisms that allow the development, expansion and modernization of infrastructure in various fields, in order to generate competitive advantages in reciprocal trade.


TITLE XX

SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL COMPLEMENTATION


Article 37.- The Contracting Parties shall endeavor to facilitate and support forms of collaboration and joint initiatives in the field of science and technology, as well as joint research projects.

For such purposes, they may agree on reciprocal technical assistance programs, aimed at raising the levels of productivity of the aforementioned sectors, obtaining the maximum use of available resources and stimulating the improvement of their competitive capacity, both in the regional and international markets. .

The aforementioned technical assistance will be developed between the competent national institutions.

The Contracting Parties will promote the exchange of technology in the areas of agriculture, industry, technical standards, and matters of animal and plant health and others considered to be of mutual interest.

For these purposes, the agreements signed in scientific and technological matters in force between the Signatory Parties of this Agreement will be taken into account.
 

TITLE XXI

COOPERATION

Article 38.- The Signatory Parties will jointly promote initiatives aimed at promoting productive integration, the competitiveness of companies and their participation in reciprocal trade, with special emphasis on Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).


The Signatory Parties will seek to promote financial cooperation mechanisms and the search for financing mechanisms aimed, among others, at the development of infrastructure projects and the promotion of reciprocal investments.
 

TITLE XXII

FREE TRADE ZONE

Article 39.- The Signatory Parties agree to continue dealing with the issue of free zones and special customs areas.



TITLE XXIII

ADMINISTRATION AND EVALUATION OF THE AGREEMENT

Article 40.- The administration and evaluation of this Agreement will be in charge of an Administrative Commission made up of the MERCOSUR Common Market Group, by a Contracting Party and by the Representatives of the Member Countries of the Andean Community before the Commission, signatories of this Agreement. Agreement, by the other Contracting Party.

The Administrative Commission will be constituted within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this Agreement and at its first meeting it will establish its internal regulations.

The Delegations of both Contracting Parties will be chaired by the representative designated by each of them.

The Administrative Commission will meet in ordinary sessions at least once a year, in a place and on a date determined by mutual agreement, and in extraordinary sessions, when the Contracting Parties, after consultation, so agree.

The Administrative Commission will adopt its decisions by agreement of the Signatory Parties. For the purposes of this Article, it shall be understood that the Administrative Commission has adopted a decision by consensus on a matter submitted to its consideration, if none of the Signatory Parties formally opposes the adoption of the decision, without prejudice to the provisions of Article Dispute Resolution Regime.

Article 41.- The Administrative Commission will have the following powers:

a) Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement and its Additional Protocols and Annexes;

b) Determine in each case the modalities and deadlines in which the negotiations aimed at achieving the objectives of this Agreement will be carried out, being able to establish working groups for that purpose;

c) Periodically evaluate the progress of the Trade Liberalization Program and the general operation of this Agreement;

d) Deepen the Agreement, including accelerating the Trade Liberalization Program, for any product or group of products that, by mutual agreement, the Signatory Parties agree upon;


e) Define the date to put into effect the updates of NALADISA 96 referred to in the fourth paragraph of Article 3 of this Agreement and seek to resolve eventual divergences of interpretation regarding tariff classification;

f) Contribute to the solution of disputes in accordance with the provisions of Annex VI and the Additional Protocol that approves the Dispute Resolution Regime;

g) Monitor the application of the trade disciplines agreed between the Contracting Parties, such as the regime of origin, safeguards regime, anti-dumping and countervailing measures and restrictive practices of free competition;

h) Modify the Rules of Origin and establish or modify specific origin requirements;

i) Establish, when appropriate, procedures for the application of the commercial disciplines contemplated in this Agreement and propose to the Contracting Parties eventual modifications to said disciplines;

j) Establish adequate mechanisms to carry out the exchange of information related to the national legislation provided in Article 16 of this Agreement;

k) Convoke the Signatory Parties to comply with the objectives and provisions established in Annex VII of this Agreement, regarding Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment and those established in Annex VIII on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures;

l) Exchange information on the negotiations that the Contracting or Signatory Parties carry out with third countries to formalize agreements not provided for in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty;

m) Comply with the other tasks entrusted to the Administrative Commission by virtue of the provisions of this Agreement, its Additional Protocols and other Instruments signed within its scope or by the Contracting Parties;

n) Provide in its internal regulations, the establishment of bilateral consultations between the Signatory Parties on the matters contemplated in this Agreement; and

o) Determine the reference values ​​for the fees of the arbitrators referred to in the Dispute Resolution Regime.


TITLE XXIV

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 42.- From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Signatory Parties decide to annul the negotiated tariff preferences and the regulatory aspects related to them, which appear in Partial Scope Agreements for Economic Complementation No. 28, 30, 39 and 48, in Partial Scope Renegotiation Agreements No. 18, 21, 23 and 25 and in Trade Agreements No. 5 and 13, signed within the framework of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty. However, the provisions of said agreements that are not incompatible with this Agreement or when they refer to matters not included in it.


Article 43.- The Party that enters into an agreement not provided for in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, must:

a) Inform the other Signatory Parties, within a period of fifteen (15) days of signing the agreement, accompanying the text thereof and its complementary instruments; and

b) Announce, on the same occasion, the willingness to negotiate, within a period of ninety (90) days, concessions equivalent to those granted and received globally.
 

TITLE XXV

CONVERGENCE

Article 44.- On the occasion of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference, referred to in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the Contracting Parties will examine the possibility of proceeding to the progressive convergence of the treatments provided for in this Agreement.


TITLE XXVI

ACCESSION

Article 45.- In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement is open to adhesion, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries.

The adhesion will be formalized once its terms have been negotiated between the Contracting Parties and the adhering country, through the execution of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement that will enter into force thirty (30) days after being deposited in the General Secretariat of ALADI.
 

TITLE XXVII

VALIDITY

Article 46.- This Agreement will have an indefinite duration and will enter into force, bilaterally between the Signatory Parties that have notified the General Secretariat of ALADI that they incorporated it into their internal law, in the terms of their respective legislation. The General Secretariat of ALADI will inform the respective Signatory Parties of the date of bilateral validity.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 20, the Signatory Parties may apply this Agreement provisionally as long as the necessary steps are taken to incorporate the Agreement into their domestic law. The Signatory Parties will notify the ALADI General Secretariat of the provisional application of the Agreement, which in turn will inform the Signatory Parties of the date of bilateral application when appropriate.


TITLE XXVIII

COMPLAINT

Article 47.- The Signatory Party that wishes to denounce this Agreement must communicate its decision to the Administrative Commission, sixty (60) days prior to the deposit of the respective instrument of denunciation in the General Secretariat of ALADI. The denunciation will take effect for the Signatory Parties, once a year has elapsed from the deposit of the instrument and from that moment the rights acquired and the obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will cease for the denouncing Signatory Party.

Notwithstanding the foregoing and before the expiration of six (6) months after the formalization of the complaint, the Signatory Parties may agree on the rights and obligations that will continue in force for the agreed term.
 

TITLE XXIX

AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS

Article 48.- Amendments or additions to this Agreement may only be made by consensus of the Signatory Parties. They will be submitted for approval by decision of the Administrative Commission and formalized by Protocol.



TITLE XXX

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 49.- The General Secretariat of ALADI will be the depositary of this Agreement, of which it will send duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Parties.

Article 50.- The importation by the Federative Republic of Brazil of the products included in this Agreement will not be subject to the application of the Additional Freight for the Renewal of the Merchant Navy, established by Decree Law No. 2404 of December 23, 1987, in accordance with the provisions of Decree No. 97945 of July 11, 1989, its amendments and supplements.

Article 51.- The import by the Argentine Republic will not be subject to the application of the Statistical Rate reintroduced by Decree No. 389 dated March 23, 1995, its amendments and supplements.

Article 52.- The terms referred to in this Agreement are understood to be expressed in calendar days and will be counted from the day following the act or fact to which it refers, without prejudice to what is provided in the corresponding Annexes.
 

TITLE XXXI

TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

FIRST.- With a view to facilitating the full application of the Additional Protocol referred to in Article 20, the Signatory Parties, within ninety (90) days from the entry into force of this Agreement, shall draw up their list of arbitrators, which will be communicated to the other Signatory Parties, accompanying it with the corresponding detailed curriculum vitae of those designated. The list will be made up of ten (10) jurists of recognized competence in matters that may be the subject of controversy, two (2) of which will not be nationals of any of the Signatory Parties.

The Signatory Parties, within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the communication indicated in the previous paragraph, may request more information about the designated arbitrators. The requested information must be provided as soon as possible. The list of arbitrators presented by a Signatory Party may not be objected to by the other Signatory Parties.

Once the term of fifteen (15) days has elapsed, the list will be deposited in the ALADI General Secretariat.

SECOND.- The Administrative Commission, in its first meeting, will arrange the necessary actions for the elaboration of the Rules of Procedure of the Arbitral Tribunals and the regulation of the Additional Protocol referred to in Article 20, so that they are agreed to the effective date of the latter.

THIRD.- The Additional Protocol referred to in Article 20 will be submitted for ratification by the Signatory Parties that so require before one hundred and eighty (180) days from the entry into force of this Agreement.

FOURTH.- With regard to pharmaceutical products, cosmetics, food and other products for human use, the Signatory Parties undertake to ensure the transparency of their legal provisions and to guarantee to the other Signatory Parties the same treatment granted to their nationals in in relation to their legislation and procedures for technical and scientific evaluation.

The Administrative Commission in its first meeting, with the presence of the corresponding technical representatives, will form a group in charge of carrying out consultations and preparing specific proposals in matters related to the products mentioned in the previous paragraph.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Protocol in the city of Montevideo on the eighteenth day of October two thousand and four, in an original in the Spanish and Portuguese languages, both texts being equally valid. (Signed.:) For the Government of the Argentine Republic: Rafael Antonio Bielsa; For the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil: Celso Amorim; For the Government of the Republic of Colombia: Carolina Barco Isakson; For the Government of the Republic of Ecuador: Leonardo Carrión Eguiguren; For the Government of the Republic of Paraguay: José Martínez Lezcano; For the Government of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay: Didier Opertti; For the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela: Jesús Arnaldo Perez