AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP
AMONG JAPAN AND MEMBER STATES OF THE ASSOCIATION
OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
Table of Contents
Preamble
Chapter 1 General Provisions
 Article 1 General Definitions
 Article 2 Principles
 Article 3 Objectives
 Article 4 Transparency
 Article 5 Confidentiality
 Article 6 Taxation
 Article 7 General Exceptions
 Article 8 Security Exceptions
 Article 9 Non-governmental Bodies
 Article 10 Relation to Other Agreements
 Article 11 Joint Committee
 Article 12 Communications
Chapter 2 Trade in Goods
 Article 13 Definitions
 Article 14 Classification of Goods
 Article 15 National Treatment on Internal Taxation
 and Regulation
 Article 16 Elimination or Reduction of Customs
 Duties
 Article 17 Customs Valuation
 Article 18 Non-tariff Measures
 Article 19 Modification of Concessions
 Article 20 Safeguard Measures 
 Article 21 Measures to Safeguard the Balance of
 Payments
 Article 22 Customs Procedures
Chapter 3 Rules of Origin
 Article 23 Definitions
 Article 24 Originating Goods
 Article 25 Goods Wholly Obtained or Produced
 Article 26 Goods Not Wholly Obtained or Produced
 Article 27 Calculation of Regional Value Content
 Article 28 De Minimis
 Article 29 Accumulation
 Article 30 Non-qualifying Operations
 Article 31 Direct Consignment
 Article 32 Packing Materials and Containers
 Article 33 Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools and
 Instructional or Other Information
 Materials
 Article 34 Indirect Materials
 Article 35 Identical and Interchangeable Materials
 Article 36 Operational Certification Procedures
 Article 37 Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin
Chapter 4 Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
 Article 38 Scope
 Article 39 Reaffirmation of Rights and Obligations
 Article 40 Sub-Committee on Sanitary and
 Phytosanitary Measures
 Article 41 Enquiry Points
 Article 42 Non-application of Chapter 9 
Chapter 5 Standards, Technical Regulations and
 Conformity Assessment Procedures
 Article 43 Objectives
 Article 44 Scope
 Article 45 Reaffirmation of Rights and Obligations
 Article 46 Cooperation
 Article 47 Enquiry Points
 Article 48 Sub-Committee on Standards, Technical
 Regulations and Conformity Assessment
 Procedures
 Article 49 Non-application of Chapter 9
Chapter 6 Trade in Services
 Article 50 Trade in Services
Chapter 7 Investment
 Article 51 Investment
Chapter 8 Economic Cooperation
 Article 52 Basic Principles
 Article 53 Fields of Economic Cooperation
 Article 54 Sub-Committee on Economic Cooperation
 Article 55 Work Programmes for Economic
 Cooperation
 Article 56 Resources for Economic Cooperation
 Article 57 Implementation of Economic Cooperation
 Activities
 Article 58 Non-application of Chapter 9
Chapter 9 Settlement of Disputes
 Article 59 Definitions
 Article 60 Scope of Application
 Article 61 Contact Points 
 Article 62 Consultations
 Article 63 Good Offices, Conciliation and
 Mediation
 Article 64 Establishment of Arbitral Tribunals
 Article 65 Composition of Arbitral Tribunals
 Article 66 Third Parties
 Article 67 Functions of Arbitral Tribunals
 Article 68 Proceedings of Arbitral Tribunals
 Article 69 Draft Award and Award
 Article 70 Suspension and Termination of
 Proceedings
 Article 71 Implementation of Award
 Article 72 Compensation and the Suspension of
 Concessions
 Article 73 Expenses
Chapter 10 Final Provisions
 Article 74 Table of Contents, Headings and
 Subheadings
 Article 75 Review
 Article 76 Annexes and Notes
 Article 77 Amendments
 Article 78 Depositary
 Article 79 Entry into Force
 Article 80 Withdrawal and Termination
Annex 1 Schedules for the Elimination or
 Reduction of Customs Duties
Annex 2 Product Specific Rules
Annex 3 Information Technology Products
Annex 4 Operational Certification Procedures 
Annex 5 Work Programmes for Economic
 Cooperation 
Preamble
 The Governments of Japan, and Brunei Darussalam, the
Kingdom of Cambodia, the Republic of Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Union of
Myanmar, the Republic of the Philippines, the Republic of
Singapore, the Kingdom of Thailand and the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, Member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (hereinafter referred to as
“ASEAN”);
 Recalling the Joint Declaration signed in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia on 5 November 2002 and the Framework for
Comprehensive Economic Partnership between Japan and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations signed in Bali,
Indonesia on 8 October 2003;
 Desiring to deepen the relationship between Japan and
ASEAN, which is built on mutual confidence and trust in
wide-ranging fields covering not only political and
economic areas, but also social and cultural areas;
 Inspired by the continuous development of ASEAN
through economic activities among Japan and ASEAN Member
States, and the significant progress in the relationship
between Japan and ASEAN which has spanned thirty years of
economic ties that have been expanding over a wide range of
areas;
 Confident that a comprehensive economic partnership
between Japan and ASEAN (hereinafter referred to as
“AJCEP”) will strengthen their economic ties, create a
larger and more efficient market with greater opportunities
and larger economies of scale, and enhance their
attractiveness to capital and talent, for mutual benefit;
 Recognising that multi-layered and multi-faceted
bilateral and regional efforts towards strengthening
economic relations among Japan and ASEAN Member States will
facilitate the realisation of such comprehensive economic
partnership;
 Sharing the view that such comprehensive economic
partnership should benefit from, and be complementary to,
the economic integration and integrity of ASEAN;
 Recognising further the various stages of economic
development among the ASEAN Member States;
 Confident that this Agreement, covering areas such as
trade in goods and services, and investment, would serve as
an important building block towards economic integration in
East Asia; 
 Recalling Article XXIV of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade 1994 and Article V of the General
Agreement on Trade in Services in Annex 1A and Annex 1B,
respectively, to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the
World Trade Organization, done at Marrakesh, 15 April 1994
(hereinafter referred to as “WTO Agreement”);
 Recognising the role of regional trade agreements as a
catalyst in accelerating regional and global liberalisation
in the framework of the multilateral trading system;
 Reaffirming the rights and obligations of each Party
under the WTO Agreement and multilateral, regional and
bilateral agreements and arrangements; and
 Determined to establish a legal framework for such
comprehensive economic partnership among the Parties,
 HAVE AGREED as follows:
Chapter 1
General Provisions
Article 1
General Definitions
 For the purposes of this Agreement, the term:
 (a) “ASEAN Member States” means Brunei Darussalam,
the Kingdom of Cambodia, the Republic of
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, the Union of Myanmar, the Republic of
the Philippines, the Republic of Singapore, the
Kingdom of Thailand and the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam collectively;
 (b) “customs authority” means the competent authority
that is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of customs laws and regulations;
 (c) “days” means calendar days, including weekends
and holidays;
 (d) “GATS” means the General Agreement on Trade in
Services in Annex 1B to the WTO Agreement;
 (e) “GATT 1994” means the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement,
references to articles in GATT 1994 include its
Notes and Supplementary Provisions; 
 (f) “Harmonized System” or “HS” means the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System set out
in the Annex to the International Convention on
the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding
System, and adopted and implemented by the
Parties in their respective laws;
 (g) “newer ASEAN Member States” means the Kingdom of
Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
the Union of Myanmar and the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam;
 (h) “Parties” means Japan and those ASEAN Member
States for which this Agreement has entered into
force collectively; and
 (i) “Party” means either of Japan or one (1) of ASEAN
Member States for which this Agreement has
entered into force.
Article 2
Principles
 The Parties reaffirm the importance of realising the
AJCEP through both this Agreement and other bilateral or
regional agreements or arrangements, and are guided by the
following principles:
 (a) the AJCEP shall involve Japan and all ASEAN
Member States and includes a broad range of
sectors focusing on liberalisation, facilitation
and economic cooperation;
 (b) the integrity, solidarity and integration of
ASEAN shall be maintained in the realisation of
the AJCEP;
 (c) special and differential treatment is accorded to
ASEAN Member States, especially the newer ASEAN
Member States, in recognition of their different
levels of economic development; additional
flexibility is accorded to the newer ASEAN Member
States;
 (d) recognition shall be given to the provisions of
the ministerial declarations of the World Trade
Organization on measures in favour of leastdeveloped countries;
 (e) flexibility should also be given to address the
sensitive sectors in Japan and each ASEAN Member
State; and 
 (f) technical assistance and capacity building are
important elements of economic cooperation
provided under this Agreement.
Article 3
Objectives
 The objectives of this Agreement are to:
 (a) progressively liberalise and facilitate trade in
goods and services among the Parties;
 (b) improve investment opportunities and ensure
protection for investments and investment
activities in the Parties; and
 (c) establish a framework for the enhancement of
economic cooperation among the Parties with a
view to supporting ASEAN economic integration,
bridging the development gap among ASEAN Member
States, and enhancing trade and investment among
the Parties.
Article 4
Transparency
1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, make publicly available its laws, regulations,
administrative procedures and administrative rulings and
judicial decisions of general application as well as
international agreements to which the Party is a party,
that pertain to or affect the implementation and operation
of this Agreement.
2. Each Party shall make publicly available the names and
addresses of the competent authorities responsible for
laws, regulations, administrative procedures and
administrative rulings, referred to in paragraph 1.
3. Each Party shall, upon the request by another Party,
respond to specific questions from, and provide information
to, the latter, in the English language, with respect to
matters referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 5
Confidentiality
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall require a Party to
provide confidential information, the disclosure of which
would impede law enforcement of the Party, or otherwise be
contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice
legitimate commercial interests of any particular
enterprise, public or private. 
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to
require a Party to provide information relating to the
affairs and accounts of customers of financial
institutions.
3. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, maintain the confidentiality of information
provided as confidential by another Party pursuant to this
Agreement.
Article 6
Taxation
1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the
provisions of this Agreement shall not apply to any
taxation measures.
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and
obligations of any Party under any tax convention. In the
event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any
such convention, that convention shall prevail to the
extent of the inconsistency.
3. Articles 4 and 5 shall apply to taxation measures, to
the extent that the provisions of this Agreement are
applicable to such taxation measures.
Article 7
General Exceptions
 For the purposes of Chapters 2 through 5, Article XX
of GATT 1994 is incorporated into and forms part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
Article 8
Security Exceptions
 Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
 (a) to require any Party to furnish any information,
the disclosure of which it considers contrary to
its essential security interests; or
 (b) to prevent any Party from taking any action which
it considers necessary for the protection of its
essential security interests:
 (i) relating to fissionable materials or the
materials from which they are derived; 
 (ii) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition
and implements of war and to such traffic in
other goods and materials as is carried on
directly or indirectly for the purpose of
supplying a military establishment;
 (iii) taken so as to protect critical public
infrastructure, including communications,
power and water infrastructures, from
deliberate attempts intended to disable or
degrade such infrastructure;
 (iv) taken in time of domestic emergency, or war
or other emergency in international
relations; or
 (c) to prevent any Party from taking any action in
pursuance of its obligations under the United
Nations Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Article 9
Non-governmental Bodies
 In fulfilling its obligations and commitments under
this Agreement, each Party shall endeavour to ensure their
observance by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
powers delegated by central, regional or local governments
or authorities within the Party.
Article 10
Relation to Other Agreements
1. Each Party reaffirms its rights and obligations vis-àvis another Party under the WTO Agreement and/or other
agreements to which these Parties are parties.
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to
derogate from any obligation of a Party vis-à-vis another
Party under agreements to which these Parties are parties,
if such an obligation entitles the latter Party to
treatment more favourable than that accorded by this
Agreement.
3. In the event of any inconsistency between this
Agreement and the WTO Agreement, the WTO Agreement shall
prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. 
4. In the event of any inconsistency between this
Agreement and any agreement other than the WTO Agreement to
which more than one (1) Party are parties, these Parties
shall immediately consult with each other with a view to
finding a mutually satisfactory solution, taking into
consideration general principles of international law.
5. A Party which is not a party to the WTO Agreement
shall abide by the provisions of the said Agreement in
accordance with its accession commitments to the World
Trade Organization.
Article 11
Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee shall be established under this
Agreement.
2. The functions of the Joint Committee shall be to:
 (a) review the implementation and operation of this
Agreement;
 (b) submit a report to the Parties on the
implementation and operation of this Agreement;
 (c) consider and recommend to the Parties any
amendments to this Agreement;
 (d) supervise and coordinate the work of all SubCommittees established under this Agreement;
 (e) adopt:
 (i) the Implementing Regulations referred to in
Rule 11 of Annex 4; and
 (ii) any necessary decisions; and
 (f) carry out other functions as may be agreed by the
Parties.
3. The Joint Committee:
 (a) shall be composed of representatives of Japan and
ASEAN Member States; and
 (b) may establish Sub-Committees and delegate its
responsibilities thereto.
4. The Joint Committee shall meet at such venues and
times as may be agreed by the Parties. 
Article 12
Communications
 Each Party shall designate a contact point to
facilitate communications among the Parties on, except as
otherwise provided for in Article 61, any matter relating
to this Agreement. All official communications in this
regard shall be done in the English language.
Chapter 2
Trade in Goods
Article 13
Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter, the term:
 (a) “customs duties” means any customs or import duty
and a charge of any kind imposed in connection
with the importation of a good, but does not
include any:
(i) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed
consistently with the provisions of
paragraph 2 of Article III of GATT 1994, in
respect of the like domestic goods or in
respect of goods from which the imported
goods have been manufactured or produced in
whole or in part;
(ii) anti-dumping or countervailing duty applied
consistently with the provisions of Article
VI of GATT 1994, the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, and the
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
or
(iii) fee or any charge commensurate with the cost
of services rendered;
 (b) “customs laws” means such laws and regulations
administered and enforced by the customs
authority of each Party concerning the
importation, exportation, and transit of goods,
as they relate to customs duties, charges, and
other taxes, or to prohibitions, restrictions,
and other similar controls with respect to the
movement of controlled items across the boundary
of the customs territory of each Party; 
 (c) “customs value of goods” means the value of goods
for the purposes of levying ad valorem customs
duties on imported goods;
 (d) “domestic industry” means the producers as a
whole of the like or directly competitive goods
operating in a Party, or those whose collective
output of the like or directly competitive goods
constitutes a major proportion of the total
domestic production of those goods;
 (e) “originating goods” means goods that qualify as
originating in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 3;
 (f) “serious injury” means a significant overall
impairment in the position of a domestic
industry; and
 (g) “threat of serious injury” means serious injury
that, on the basis of facts and not merely on
allegation, conjecture or remote possibility, is
clearly imminent.
Article 14
Classification of Goods
 The classification of goods in trade between the
Parties shall be in conformity with the Harmonized System.
Article 15
National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation
 Each Party shall accord national treatment to the
goods of the other Parties in accordance with Article III
of GATT 1994, which to this end is incorporated into and
forms part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
Article 16
Elimination or Reduction of Customs Duties
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement,
each Party shall, in accordance with its Schedule in Annex
1, eliminate or reduce its customs duties on originating
goods of the other Parties. Such elimination or reduction
shall be applied to originating goods of all the other
Parties on a non-discriminatory basis.
2. The Parties shall endeavour to take further steps
towards liberalisation of trade in goods through
unilateral, bilateral or regional efforts consistent with
GATT 1994. 
3. The Parties reaffirm that, as is provided for in
Article 7, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to
prevent a Party which is a party to the Basel Convention on
the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes
and their Disposal or other relevant international
agreements from adopting or enforcing any measure in
relation to hazardous wastes or hazardous substances based
on its laws and regulations, in accordance with such
international agreements.
Article 17
Customs Valuation
 For the purposes of determining the customs value of
goods traded between the Parties, the provisions of Part I
of the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “the
Agreement on Customs Valuation”) shall apply, mutatis
mutandis.
Note: In the case of the Kingdom of Cambodia, the
Agreement on Customs Valuation, as implemented in
accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on
the Accession of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the
World Trade Organization, shall apply, mutatis
mutandis.
Article 18
Non-tariff Measures
1. Each Party shall not institute or maintain any nontariff measures including quantitative restrictions on the
importation of any good of the other Parties or on the
exportation or sale for export of any good destined for
another Party, except the same measures as those permitted
under the WTO Agreement.
2. Each Party shall ensure transparency of its non-tariff
measures permitted under paragraph 1, including
quantitative restrictions. Each Party which is a member of
the World Trade Organization shall ensure full compliance
with the obligations under the WTO Agreement with a view to
minimising possible distortions to trade to the maximum
extent possible.
Article 19
Modification of Concessions
1. The Parties shall not nullify or impair any of the
concessions under this Agreement, except in cases provided
for in this Agreement. 
2. Any Party may negotiate with any interested Party to
modify or withdraw its concession made under this
Agreement. In such negotiations, which may include
compensatory adjustment with respect to other goods, the
Parties concerned shall maintain a general level of
reciprocal and mutually advantageous concessions not less
favourable to trade than that provided for in this
Agreement prior to such negotiations. In reflecting the
results of such negotiations to this Agreement, Article 77
shall apply.
Article 20
Safeguard Measures
1. A Party which is a member of the World Trade
Organization may apply a safeguard measure to an
originating good of the other Parties in accordance with
Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as
“the Agreement on Safeguards”), or Article 5 of the
Agreement on Agriculture in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as “Agreement on Agriculture”).
Any action taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and
the Agreement on Safeguards, or Article 5 of the Agreement
on Agriculture shall not be subject to Chapter 9 of this
Agreement.
2. Each Party shall be free to apply a safeguard measure
provided for under this Article (hereinafter referred to as
“an AJCEP safeguard measure”), to the minimum extent
necessary to prevent or remedy the serious injury to a
domestic industry of that Party and to facilitate
adjustment, if as an effect of the obligations incurred by
that Party under this Agreement, including tariff
concessions, or if as a result of unforeseen developments
and of the effects of the obligations incurred by that
Party under this Agreement, an originating good of the
other Parties is being imported in such increased
quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic
production, and under such conditions as to cause or
threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry
of the importing Party that produces like or directly
competitive goods in the importing Party. 
3. An AJCEP safeguard measure shall not be applied
against an originating good of a Party which is an ASEAN
Member State, as long as its share of imports of the good
concerned in the importing Party does not exceed three (3)
per cent of the total imports from the other Parties,
provided that those Parties with less than three (3) per
cent import share collectively account for not more than
nine (9) per cent of total imports of the good concerned
from the other Parties.
4. A Party shall not apply an AJCEP safeguard measure to
an originating good imported up to the limit of quota
quantities granted under tariff rate quotas applied in
accordance with its Schedule in Annex 1.
5. A Party applying an AJCEP safeguard measure may:
 (a) suspend the further reduction of any customs duty
on the originating good of the other Parties
provided for under this Chapter; or
 (b) increase the customs duty on the originating good
of the other Parties to a level not to exceed the
lesser of:
(i) the applied most-favoured-nation rate
(hereinafter referred to as “applied MFN
rate”) on the good in effect on the day when
the AJCEP safeguard measure is applied; and
(ii) the applied MFN rate on the good in effect
on the day immediately preceding the date of
entry into force of this Agreement pursuant
to paragraph 1 of Article 79.
6. (a) A Party may apply an AJCEP safeguard measure only
after an investigation has been carried out by
the competent authorities of that Party in
accordance with the same procedures as those
provided for in Article 3 and paragraph 2 of
Article 4 of the Agreement on Safeguards.
 (b) The investigation referred to in subparagraph (a)
shall be completed within one (1) year following
its date of initiation.
7. The following conditions and limitations shall apply
with regard to an AJCEP safeguard measure:
 (a) A Party shall immediately give a written notice
to the other Parties upon: 
(i) initiating an investigation referred to in
subparagraph 6(a) relating to serious
injury, or threat of serious injury, and the
reasons for it;
(ii) making a finding of serious injury or threat
of serious injury caused by increased
imports; and
(iii) taking a decision to apply or extend an
AJCEP safeguard measure.
 (b) The Party giving the written notice referred to
in subparagraph (a) shall provide the other
Parties with all pertinent information, which
shall include:
(i) in the written notice referred to in
subparagraph (a)(i), the reason for the
initiation of the investigation, a precise
description of an originating good subject
to the investigation and its heading or
subheading of the Harmonized System, on
which the Schedules in Annex 1 are based,
the period subject to the investigation and
the date of initiation of the investigation;
and
(ii) in the written notice referred to in
subparagraphs (a)(ii) and (iii), the
evidence of serious injury or threat of
serious injury caused by the increased
imports of the originating good, a precise
description of the originating good subject
to the proposed safeguard measure and its
heading or subheading of the Harmonized
System, on which the Schedules in Annex 1
are based, a precise description of the
AJCEP safeguard measure, the proposed date
of its introduction and its expected
duration.
 (c) A Party proposing to apply or extend an AJCEP
safeguard measure shall provide adequate
opportunity for prior consultations with those
Parties which would be affected by the AJCEP
safeguard measure with a view to reviewing the
information arising from the investigation
referred to in subparagraph (a), exchanging views
on the AJCEP safeguard measure and reaching an
agreement on compensation set out in paragraph 8. 
 (d) No AJCEP safeguard measure shall be maintained
except to the extent and for such time as may be
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and
to facilitate adjustment, provided that such time
shall not exceed a period of three (3) years. An
AJCEP safeguard measure may be extended, provided
that the conditions set out in this Article are
met. The total duration of the AJCEP safeguard
measure, including any extensions thereof, shall
not exceed four (4) years. In order to
facilitate adjustment in a situation where the
expected duration of an AJCEP safeguard measure
is over one (1) year, the Party maintaining the
AJCEP safeguard measure shall progressively
liberalise the AJCEP safeguard measure at regular
intervals during the period of application.
 (e) No AJCEP safeguard measure shall be applied again
to the import of a particular originating good
which has been subject to such an AJCEP safeguard
measure, for a period of time equal to the
duration of the previous safeguard measure or one
(1) year, whichever is longer.
 (f) Upon the termination of an AJCEP safeguard
measure on a good, the rate of the customs duty
for that good shall be the rate that, in
accordance with the Schedule of the Party
applying the AJCEP safeguard measure set out in
Annex 1, would have been in effect had the AJCEP
safeguard measure not been applied.
8. (a) A Party proposing to apply or extend an AJCEP
safeguard measure shall provide to the other
Parties mutually agreed adequate means of trade
compensation in the form of substantially
equivalent level of concessions or other
obligations to that existing under this Agreement
between the Party applying the AJCEP safeguard
measure and the exporting Parties which would be
affected by such a measure.
 (b) In seeking compensation provided for in
subparagraph (a), the Parties shall hold
consultations in the Joint Committee. Any
proceedings arising from such consultations shall
be completed within thirty (30) days from the
date on which the AJCEP safeguard measure was
applied. 
 (c) If no agreement on the compensation is reached
within the time frame specified in subparagraph
(b), the Parties other than the one applying the
AJCEP safeguard measure shall be free to suspend
concessions of customs duties under this
Agreement, which is substantially equivalent to
the AJCEP safeguard measure, on originating goods
of the Party applying the AJCEP safeguard
measure. The Parties may suspend the concessions
only for the minimum period necessary to achieve
the substantially equivalent effects and only
while the AJCEP safeguard measure is maintained.
The right of suspension provided for in this
subparagraph shall not be exercised for the first
two (2) years that an AJCEP safeguard measure is
in effect, provided that the AJCEP safeguard
measure has been applied as a result of an
absolute increase in imports and that such an
AJCEP safeguard measure conforms to the
provisions of this Article.
9. (a) A Party applying a safeguard measure in
connection with an importation of an originating
good of another Party in accordance with Article
XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards,
or Article 5 of the Agreement on Agriculture,
shall not apply the AJCEP safeguard measure to
that importation.
 (b) The period of application of the AJCEP safeguard
measure referred to in subparagraph 7(d) shall
not be interrupted by the Party’s non-application
of the AJCEP safeguard measure in accordance with
subparagraph (a).
10. (a) Within ten (10) years after the entry into force
of this Agreement pursuant to paragraph 1 of
Article 79, the Parties shall review this Article
with a view to determining whether there is a
need to maintain the AJCEP safeguard mechanism.
 (b) If the Parties do not agree to remove the AJCEP
safeguard mechanism during the review pursuant to
subparagraph (a), the Parties shall thereafter
conduct reviews to determine the necessity of the
AJCEP safeguard mechanism, in conjunction with
the general review pursuant to Article 75. 
11. (a) In critical circumstances, where delay would
cause damage which it would be difficult to
repair, a Party may apply a provisional AJCEP
safeguard measure, which shall take the form of
the measure set out in subparagraph 5(a) or 5(b),
pursuant to a preliminary determination that
there is clear evidence that increased imports of
an originating good have caused or are
threatening to cause serious injury to a domestic
industry.
 (b) A Party shall give a written notice to the other
Parties prior to applying a provisional AJCEP
safeguard measure. Consultations by the Parties
in the Joint Committee on the application of the
provisional AJCEP safeguard measure shall be
initiated immediately after the provisional AJCEP
safeguard measure is applied.
 (c) The duration of a provisional AJCEP safeguard
measure shall not exceed two hundred (200) days.
During that period, the pertinent requirements of
paragraph 6 shall be met. The duration of the
provisional AJCEP safeguard measure shall be
counted as a part of the period referred to in
subparagraph 7(d).
 (d) Paragraph 3 and subparagraph 7(f) shall apply,
mutatis mutandis, to the provisional AJCEP
safeguard measure.
 (e) The customs duty imposed as a result of the
provisional AJCEP safeguard measure shall be
refunded if the subsequent investigation referred
to in subparagraph 6(a) does not determine that
increased imports of the originating good have
caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a
domestic industry.
12. All official communications and documentations
exchanged among the Parties relating to an AJCEP safeguard
measure shall be in writing and shall be in the English
language. 
Article 21
Measures to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
 Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent
a Party from taking any measure for balance-of-payments
purposes. A Party taking such measure shall do so in
accordance with the conditions established under Article
XII of GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Balance-ofPayments Provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.
Article 22
Customs Procedures
1. Each Party shall endeavour to apply its customs
procedures in a predictable, consistent and transparent
manner.
2. Recognising the importance of improving transparency
in the area of customs procedures, each Party, subject to
its laws and regulations, and available resources, shall
endeavour to provide information relating to specific
matters raised by interested persons of the Parties
pertaining to its customs laws. Each Party shall endeavour
to supply not only such information but also other
pertinent information which it considers the interested
persons should be made aware of.
3. For prompt customs clearance of goods traded among the
Parties, each Party, recognising the significant role of
customs authorities and the importance of customs
procedures in promoting trade facilitation, shall endeavour
to:
 (a) simplify its customs procedures; and
 (b) harmonise its customs procedures, to the extent
possible, with relevant international standards
and recommended practices such as those made
under the auspices of the Customs Co-operation
Council.
Chapter 3
Rules of Origin
Article 23
Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter, the term:
 (a) “exporter” means a natural or juridical person
located in an exporting Party who exports a good
from the exporting Party; 
 (b) “factory ships of the Party” or “vessels of the
Party” respectively means factory ships or
vessels:
 (i) which are registered in the Party;
 (ii) which sail under the flag of the Party;
 (iii) which are owned to an extent of at least
fifty (50) per cent by nationals of one or
more of the Parties, or by a juridical
person with its head office in a Party, of
which the representatives, chairman of the
board of directors, and the majority of the
members of such board are nationals of one
or more of the Parties, and of which at
least fifty (50) per cent of the equity
interest is owned by nationals or juridical
persons of one or more of the Parties; and
 (iv) of which at least seventy-five (75) per cent
of the total of the master, officers and
crew are nationals of one or more of the
Parties;
 (c) “generally accepted accounting principles” means
the recognised consensus or substantial
authoritative support in a Party, with respect to
the recording of revenues, expenses, costs,
assets and liabilities; the disclosure of
information; and the preparation of financial
statements. These standards may encompass broad
guidelines of general application as well as
detailed standards, practices and procedures;
 (d) “good” means any merchandise, product, article or
material;
 (e) “identical and interchangeable materials” means
materials being of the same kind and commercial
quality, possessing the same technical and
physical characteristics, and which once they are
incorporated into the good cannot be
distinguished from one another for origin
purposes by virtue of any markings;
 (f) “importer” means a natural or juridical person
who imports a good into the importing Party; 
 (g) “materials” means any matter or substance used or
consumed in the production of a good, physically
incorporated into a good, or used in the
production of another good;
 (h) “originating good” or “originating material”
means a good or material that qualifies as
originating in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter;
 (i) “packing materials and containers for
transportation and shipment” means the goods used
to protect a good during its transportation and
shipment, different from those containers or
materials used for its retail sale;
 (j) “preferential tariff treatment” means the rate of
customs duties applicable to an originating good
of the exporting Party in accordance with
paragraph 1 of Article 16; and
 (k) “production” means methods of obtaining a good
including growing, mining, harvesting, raising,
breeding, extracting, gathering, collecting,
capturing, fishing, trapping, hunting,
manufacturing, processing or assembling.
Article 24
Originating Goods
 For the purposes of this Agreement, a good shall
qualify as an originating good of a Party if it:
 (a) is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the
Party as provided for in Article 25;
 (b) satisfies the requirements of Article 26 when
using non-originating materials; or
 (c) is produced entirely in the Party exclusively
from originating materials of one or more of the
Parties,
and meets all other applicable requirements of this
Chapter.
Article 25
Goods Wholly Obtained or Produced
 For the purposes of paragraph (a) of Article 24, the
following shall be considered as wholly obtained or
produced entirely in a Party: 
 (a) plant and plant products grown and harvested,
picked or gathered in the Party;
 Note: For the purposes of this paragraph, the
term “plant” refers to all plant life,
including fruit, flowers, vegetables,
trees, seaweed, fungi and live plants.
 (b) live animals born and raised in the Party;
 Note: For the purposes of paragraphs (b) and
(c), the term “animals” covers all animal
life, including mammals, birds, fish,
crustaceans, molluscs, reptiles, bacteria
and viruses.
 (c) goods obtained from live animals in the Party;
 (d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing,
gathering or capturing conducted in the Party;
 (e) minerals and other naturally occurring
substances, not included in paragraphs (a)
through (d), extracted or taken from soil,
waters, seabed or beneath the seabed of the
Party;
 (f) goods taken from the waters, seabed or beneath
the seabed outside the territorial waters of the
Party, provided that the Party has the rights to
exploit such waters, seabed and beneath the
seabed in accordance with its laws and
regulations and international law;
 Note: Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the
rights and obligations of the Parties
under international law, including those
under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
 (g) goods of sea-fishing and other marine products
taken by vessels of the Party from outside the
territorial sea of any Party;
 (h) goods processed and/or made on board factory
ships of the Party exclusively from products
referred to in paragraph (g);
 (i) articles collected in the Party which can no
longer perform their original purpose or be
restored or repaired, and are fit only for
disposal, for the recovery of parts or raw
materials, or for recycling purposes; 
 (j) scrap and waste derived from manufacturing or
processing operations, including mining,
agriculture, construction, refining, incineration
and sewage treatment operations, or from
consumption, in the Party, and fit only for
disposal or for the recovery of raw materials;
and
 (k) goods obtained or produced in the Party
exclusively from goods referred to in paragraphs
(a) through (j).
Article 26
Goods Not Wholly Obtained or Produced
1. For the purposes of paragraph (b) of Article 24, a
good shall qualify as an originating good of a Party if:
 (a) the good has a regional value content
(hereinafter referred to as “RVC”), calculated
using the formula set out in Article 27, of not
less than forty (40) per cent, and the final
process of production has been performed in the
Party; or
 (b) all non-originating materials used in the
production of the good have undergone in the
Party a change in tariff classification
(hereinafter referred to as “CTC”) at the 4-digit
level (i.e. a change in tariff heading) of
Harmonized System.
 Note: For the purposes of this subparagraph,
“Harmonized System” is that on which the
product specific rules set out in Annex 2
are based.
 Each Party shall permit the exporter of the good to
decide whether to use subparagraph (a) or (b) when
determining whether the good qualifies as an originating
good of the Party.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a good subject to product
specific rules shall qualify as an originating good if it
satisfies the applicable product specific rules set out in
Annex 2. Where a product specific rule provides a choice
of rules from a RVC-based rule of origin, a CTC-based rule
of origin, a specific manufacturing or processing
operation, or a combination of any of these, each Party
shall permit the exporter of the good to decide which rule
to use in determining whether the good qualifies as an
originating good of the Party. 
3. For the purposes of subparagraph 1(a) and the relevant
product specific rules set out in Annex 2 which specify a
certain RVC, it is required that the RVC of a good,
calculated using the formula set out in Article 27, is not
less than the percentage specified by the rule for the
good.
4. For the purposes of subparagraph 1(b) and the relevant
product specific rules set out in Annex 2, the rules
requiring that the materials used have undergone CTC, or a
specific manufacturing or processing operation, shall apply
only to non-originating materials.
5. For the purposes of this Chapter, Annex 3 shall apply.
Article 27
Calculation of Regional Value Content
1. For the purposes of calculating the RVC of a good, the
following formula shall be used:
 FOB - VNM
 RVC = --------------- X 100 %
 FOB
2. For the purposes of this Article:
 (a) “FOB” is, except as provided for in paragraph 3,
the free-on-board value of a good, inclusive of
the cost of transport from the producer to the
port or site of final shipment abroad;
 (b) “RVC” is the RVC of a good, expressed as a
percentage; and
 (c) “VNM” is the value of non-originating materials
used in the production of a good.
3. FOB referred to in subparagraph 2(a) shall be the
value:
 (a) adjusted to the first ascertainable price paid
for a good from the buyer to the producer of the
good, if there is free-on-board value of the
good, but it is unknown and cannot be
ascertained; or
 (b) determined in accordance with Articles 1 through
8 of the Agreement on Customs Valuation, if there
is no free-on-board value of a good. 
4. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the value of nonoriginating materials used in the production of a good in a
Party:
 (a) shall be determined in accordance with the
Agreement on Customs Valuation and shall include
freight, insurance, and where appropriate,
packing and all other costs incurred in
transporting the material to the importation port
in the Party where the producer of the good is
located; or
 (b) if such value is unknown and cannot be
ascertained, shall be the first ascertainable
price paid for the material in the Party, but may
exclude all the costs incurred in the Party in
transporting the material from the warehouse of
the supplier of the material to the place where
the producer is located such as freight,
insurance and packing as well as any other known
and ascertainable cost incurred in the Party.
5. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the VNM of a good
shall not include the value of non-originating materials
used in the production of originating materials of the
Party which are used in the production of the good.
6. For the purposes of subparagraph 3(b) or 4(a), in
applying the Agreement on Customs Valuation to determine
the value of a good or non-originating material, the
Agreement on Customs Valuation shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to domestic transactions or to the cases where
there is no domestic transaction of the good or nonoriginating material.
Article 28
De Minimis
1. A good that does not satisfy the requirements of
subparagraph 1(b) of Article 26 or an applicable CTC-based
rule of origin set out in Annex 2 shall be considered as an
originating good of a Party if:
 (a) in the case of a good classified under Chapters
16, 19, 20, 22, 23, 28 through 49, and 64 through
97 of the Harmonized System, the total value of
non-originating materials used in the production
of the good that have not undergone the required
CTC does not exceed ten (10) per cent of the FOB; 
 (b) in the case of a particular good classified under
Chapters 18 and 21 of the Harmonized System, the
total value of non-originating materials used in
the production of the good that have not
undergone the required CTC does not exceed ten
(10) per cent or seven (7) per cent of the FOB,
as specified in Annex 2; or
 (c) in the case of a good classified under Chapters
50 through 63 of the Harmonized System, the
weight of all non-originating materials used in
the production of the good that have not
undergone the required CTC does not exceed ten
(10) per cent of the total weight of the good,
provided that it meets all other applicable criteria set
out in this Chapter for qualifying as an originating good.
Note: For the purposes of this paragraph, subparagraph
2(a) of Article 27 shall apply.
2. The value of non-originating materials referred to in
paragraph 1 shall, however, be included in the value of
non-originating materials for any applicable RVC-based rule
of origin for the good.
Article 29
Accumulation
 Originating materials of a Party used in the
production of a good in another Party shall be considered
as originating materials of that Party where the working or
processing of the good has taken place.
Article 30
Non-qualifying Operations
 A good shall not be considered to satisfy the
requirements of CTC or specific manufacturing or processing
operation merely by reason of:
 (a) operations to ensure the preservation of products
in good condition during transport and storage
(such as drying, freezing, keeping in brine) and
other similar operations;
 (b) changes of packaging and breaking up and assembly
of packages;
 (c) disassembly;
 (d) placing in bottles, cases, boxes and other simple
packaging operations; 
 (e) collection of parts and components classified as
a good pursuant to Rule 2(a) of the General Rules
for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System;
 (f) mere making-up of sets of articles; or
 (g) any combination of operations referred to in
subparagraphs (a) through (f).
Article 31
Direct Consignment
1. Preferential tariff treatment shall be accorded to an
originating good satisfying the requirements of this
Chapter and which is consigned directly from the exporting
Party to the importing Party.
2. The following shall be considered as consigned
directly from the exporting Party to the importing Party:
 (a) a good transported directly from the exporting
Party to the importing Party; or
 (b) a good transported through one or more Parties,
other than the exporting Party and the importing
Party, or through a non-Party, provided that the
good does not undergo operations other than
transit or temporary storage in warehouses,
unloading, reloading, and any other operation to
preserve it in good condition.
Article 32
Packing Materials and Containers
1. Packing materials and containers for transportation
and shipment of a good shall not be taken into account in
determining the origin of any good.
2. Packing materials and containers in which a good is
packaged for retail sale, when classified together with the
good, shall not be taken into account in determining
whether all of the non-originating materials used in the
production of the good have met the applicable CTC-based
rule of origin for the good.
3. If a good is subject to a RVC-based rule of origin,
the value of the packing materials and containers in which
the good is packaged for retail sale shall be taken into
account as originating or non-originating materials, as the
case may be, in calculating the RVC of the good. 
Article 33
Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools and
Instructional or Other Information Materials
1. If a good is subject to the requirements of CTC or
specific manufacturing or processing operation, the origin
of accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or
other information materials presented with the good shall
not be taken into account in determining whether the good
qualifies as an originating good, provided that:
 (a) the accessories, spare parts, tools and
instructional or other information materials are
not invoiced separately from the good; and
 (b) the quantities and value of the accessories,
spare parts, tools and instructional or other
information materials are customary for the good.
2. If a good is subject to a RVC-based rule of origin,
the value of the accessories, spare parts, tools and
instructional or other information materials shall be taken
into account as the value of the originating or nonoriginating materials, as the case may be, in calculating
the RVC of the originating goods.
Article 34
Indirect Materials
1. Indirect materials shall be treated as originating
materials regardless of where they are produced.
2. For the purposes of this Article, the term “indirect
materials” means goods used in the production, testing, or
inspection of a good but not physically incorporated into
the good, or goods used in the maintenance of buildings or
the operation of equipment associated with the production
of a good, including:
 (a) fuel and energy;
 (b) tools, dies and moulds;
 (c) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance
of equipment and buildings;
 (d) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and
other materials used in production or used to
operate equipment and buildings;
 (e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety
equipment and supplies; 
 (f) equipment, devices and supplies used for testing
or inspecting the good;
 (g) catalysts and solvents; and
 (h) any other goods that are not incorporated into
the good but whose use in the production of the
good can reasonably be demonstrated to be a part
of that production.
Article 35
Identical and Interchangeable Materials
 The determination of whether identical and
interchangeable materials are originating materials shall
be made by the use of generally accepted accounting
principles of stock control applicable, or those of
inventory management practised, in the exporting Party.
Article 36
Operational Certification Procedures
 The operational certification procedures, as set out
in Annex 4, shall apply with respect to procedures
regarding certificate of origin and related matters.
Article 37
Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, a Sub-Committee on Rules of
Origin (hereinafter referred to in this Article as “the
Sub-Committee”) shall be established pursuant to Article
11.
2. The functions of the Sub-Committee shall be to:
 (a) review and make appropriate recommendations, as
needed, to the Joint Committee on:
 (i) the implementation and operation of this
Chapter;
 (ii) any amendments to Annexes 2 and 3, and
Attachment to Annex 4, proposed by any
Party; and
 (iii) the Implementing Regulations referred to in
Rule 11 of Annex 4;
 (b) consider any other matter as the Parties may
agree related to this Chapter; 
 (c) report the findings of the Sub-Committee to the
Joint Committee; and
 (d) carry out other functions as may be delegated by
the Joint Committee pursuant to Article 11.
3. The Sub-Committee shall be composed of representatives
of the Governments of the Parties, and may invite
representatives of relevant entities other than the
Governments of the Parties with necessary expertise
relevant to the issues to be discussed, upon agreement of
all the Parties.
4. The Sub-Committee shall meet at such venues and times
as may be agreed by the Parties.
Chapter 4
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Article 38
Scope
 This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and
phytosanitary (hereinafter referred to as “SPS”) measures
of the Parties as defined in Annex A of the Agreement on
the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as
“SPS Agreement”) that may, directly or indirectly, affect
trade between the Parties.
Article 39
Reaffirmation of Rights and Obligations
 The Parties reaffirm the rights and obligations
relating to SPS measures under the SPS Agreement among
those Parties that are parties to the said Agreement.
Article 40
Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, a Sub-Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures (hereinafter referred to in this
Article as “the Sub-Committee”) shall be established
pursuant to Article 11.
2. The functions of the Sub-Committee shall be to: 
 (a) exchange information on such matters as
occurrences of SPS incidents in the Parties and
non-Parties, and change or introduction of SPSrelated regulations and standards of the Parties,
which may, directly or indirectly, affect trade
between Japan and more than one (1) ASEAN Member
State which are the Parties;
 (b) facilitate cooperation in the area of SPS
measures, including capacity building, technical
assistance and exchange of experts, subject to
the availability of appropriated funds and the
applicable laws and regulations of each Party;
 (c) undertake science-based consultations to identify
and address specific issues that may arise from
the application of SPS measures and are shared by
Japan and more than one (1) ASEAN Member State
which are the Parties;
 (d) review the implementation and operation of this
Chapter; and
 (e) report, where appropriate, its findings to the
Joint Committee.
3. The Parties shall coordinate their undertakings with
the activities conducted in the bilateral, regional and
multilateral context, with the objective of avoiding
unnecessary duplication and maximising efficiency of
efforts of the Parties in this field.
4. The Sub-Committee shall meet at such venues and times
as may be agreed by the Parties.
5. The Sub-Committee shall be:
 (a) composed of government officials of the Parties
with responsibility for SPS measures; and
 (b) co-chaired by an official of the Government of
Japan and an official of one of the Governments
of the ASEAN Member States which are the Parties.
Article 41
Enquiry Points
 Each Party shall designate an enquiry point to answer
all reasonable enquiries from another Party regarding SPS
measures and, if appropriate, provide the latter with
relevant information. 
Article 42
Non-application of Chapter 9
 The dispute settlement procedures provided for in
Chapter 9 shall not apply to this Chapter.
CHAPTER 5
Standards, Technical Regulations and
Conformity Assessment Procedures
Article 43
Objectives
 The objectives of this Chapter are to promote trade
among the Parties by:
 (a) ensuring that standards, technical regulations
and conformity assessment procedures do not
create unnecessary obstacles to trade;
 (b) promoting mutual understanding of the standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures in each Party;
 (c) strengthening information exchange and
cooperation among the Parties in relation to the
preparation, adoption and application of
standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures;
 (d) strengthening cooperation among the Parties in
the work of international bodies related to
standardisation and conformity assessments; and
 (e) providing a framework to realise these
objectives.
Article 44
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures as defined
in the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “TBT
Agreement”).
2. This Chapter shall not apply to purchasing
specifications prepared by governmental bodies for
production or consumption requirements of governmental
bodies and sanitary and phytosanitary measures as defined
in Annex A of the SPS Agreement. 
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the right of a
Party to prepare, adopt and apply standards and technical
regulations, to the extent necessary, to fulfil a
legitimate objective. Such legitimate objectives are,
inter alia, national security requirements; the prevention
of deceptive practices; protection of human health or
safety, animal or plant life or health, or the environment.
In pursuance of this, each Party retains all authority to
interpret its laws, regulations and administrative
provisions.
Article 45
Reaffirmation of Rights and Obligations
 The Parties reaffirm the rights and obligations
relating to standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures under the TBT Agreement among those
Parties that are parties to the said Agreement.
Article 46
Cooperation
1. For the purposes of ensuring that standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures do not
create unnecessary obstacles to trade in goods among the
Parties, the Parties shall, where possible, cooperate in
the field of standards, technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures.
2. The forms of cooperation pursuant to paragraph 1 may
include the following:
 (a) conducting joint studies and holding seminars, in
order to enhance mutual understanding of
standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures in each Party;
 (b) exchanging information on standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures;
 (c) developing and implementing joint programmes for
building and/or upgrading capacity in the Parties
for advancement of activities within the scope of
the TBT Agreement;
 (d) encouraging the bodies responsible for standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures in each Party to cooperate on matters
of mutual interest; 
 (e) contributing, where appropriate, jointly to the
activities related to standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures
in international and regional fora; and
 (f) jointly identifying work in the field of
standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures, where appropriate, to
avoid unnecessary obstacle to trade among the
Parties.
3. The implementation of this Article shall be subject to
the availability of appropriated funds and the applicable
laws and regulations of each Party.
Article 47
Enquiry Points
1. Each Party shall designate an enquiry point which
shall have the responsibility to coordinate the
implementation of this Chapter.
2. Each Party shall provide the other Parties with the
name of its designated enquiry point and the contact
details of relevant officials in that organisation
including information on telephone, facsimile and e-mail
and other relevant details.
3. Each Party shall notify the other Parties promptly of
any change of its enquiry point or any amendments to the
information of the relevant officials.
Article 48
Sub-Committee on Standards, Technical Regulations
and Conformity Assessment Procedures
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, a Sub-Committee on Standards,
Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures
(hereinafter referred to in this Article as “the SubCommittee”) shall be established pursuant to Article 11.
2. The functions of the Sub-Committee shall be to:
 (a) coordinate cooperation pursuant to Article 46;
 (b) identify mutually agreed priority sectors for
enhanced cooperation, including giving favourable
consideration to any proposal made by a Party; 
 (c) establish work programmes in mutually agreed
priority areas to facilitate the acceptance of
conformity assessment results and equivalence of
technical regulations;
 (d) monitor the progress of work programmes;
 (e) review the implementation and operation of this
Chapter;
 (f) facilitate technical consultations;
 (g) report, where appropriate, its findings to the
Joint Committee; and
 (h) carry out other functions as may be delegated by
the Joint Committee pursuant to Article 11.
3. The Sub-Committee shall meet at such venues and times
as may be agreed by the Parties.
4. The Parties shall coordinate their undertakings with
the activities conducted in the bilateral, regional and
multilateral context, with the objective of avoiding
unnecessary duplication and maximising efficiency of
efforts of the Parties in this field.
5. The Sub-Committee shall be:
 (a) composed of representatives of the Governments of
the Parties; and
 (b) co-chaired by an official of the Government of
Japan and an official of one of the Governments
of the ASEAN Member States, which are the
Parties.
Article 49
Non-application of Chapter 9
 The dispute settlement procedures provided for in
Chapter 9 shall not apply to this Chapter.
Chapter 6
Trade in Services
Article 50
Trade in Services
1. Each Party shall endeavour to, in accordance with its
laws, regulations and policies, take further steps towards
the expansion of trade in services among or between the
Parties consistent with GATS. 
2. The Parties shall, with the participation of Japan and
all ASEAN Member States, continue to discuss and negotiate
provisions for trade in services with a view to exploring
measures towards further liberalisation and facilitation of
trade in services among Japan and ASEAN Member States and
to enhance cooperation in order to improve the efficiency
and competitiveness of services and service suppliers of
Japan and the ASEAN Member States. For this purpose, a
Sub-Committee on Trade in Services, which shall be composed
of representatives of the Governments of Japan and all
ASEAN Member States, shall be established in accordance
with Article 11 within one (1) year from the date of entry
into force of this Agreement pursuant to paragraph 1 of
Article 79.
3. The results of the negotiations referred to in
paragraph 2, if any, shall be incorporated into this
Chapter in accordance with Article 77.
Chapter 7
Investment
Article 51
Investment
1. Each Party shall endeavour to, in accordance with its
laws, regulations and policies, create and maintain
favourable and transparent conditions in the Party for
investments of investors of the other Parties.
2. The Parties shall, with the participation of Japan and
all ASEAN Member States, continue to discuss and negotiate
provisions for investment, with a view to improving the
efficiency and competitiveness of the investment
environment of Japan and ASEAN Member States through
progressive liberalisation, promotion, facilitation and
protection of investment. For this purpose, a SubCommittee on Investment, which shall be composed of the
representatives of the Governments of Japan and all ASEAN
Member States, shall be established in accordance with
Article 11 within one (1) year from the date of entry into
force of this Agreement pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article
79.
3. The results of the negotiations referred to in
paragraph 2, if any, shall be incorporated into this
Chapter in accordance with Article 77. 
Chapter 8
Economic Cooperation
Article 52
Basic Principles
1. The Parties shall, subject to the availability of
resources as well as their respective applicable laws and
regulations, promote cooperation under this Agreement for
their mutual benefits in order to liberalise and facilitate
trade and investment among the Parties and to promote the
well-being of the peoples of the Parties, taking into
account the different levels of economic development among
ASEAN Member States.
2. The Parties shall promote regional and sub-regional
development through economic cooperation activities
including capacity building, technical assistance, and
other such activities as may be mutually agreed upon among
the Parties.
Article 53
Fields of Economic Cooperation
 The Parties, on the basis of mutual benefit, shall
explore and undertake economic cooperation activities in
the following fields:
 (a) Trade-Related Procedures;
 (b) Business Environment;
 (c) Intellectual Property;
 (d) Energy;
 (e) Information and Communications Technology;
 (f) Human Resource Development;
 (g) Small and Medium Enterprises;
 (h) Tourism and Hospitality;
 (i) Transportation and Logistics;
 (j) Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry;
 (k) Environment;
 (l) Competition Policy; and 
 (m) Other fields as may be mutually agreed upon among
the Parties.
Article 54
Sub-Committee on Economic Cooperation
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, a Sub-Committee on Economic
Cooperation (hereinafter referred to in this Article as
“the Sub-Committee”) shall be established in accordance
with Article 11 on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 79.
2. The functions of the Sub-Committee shall be to:
 (a) modify and formulate relevant Work Programmes
setting out areas and forms of each field of
economic cooperation;
 (b) make recommendations on existing and new economic
cooperation activities under this Chapter in
accordance with the priorities of the Parties;
 (c) review and monitor the implementation and
operation of this Chapter and the application and
fulfilment of its basic principles; and
 (d) report the findings and the outcome of its
discussions to the Joint Committee.
3. The Sub-Committee shall be:
 (a) composed of representatives of the Governments of
Japan and all ASEAN Member States; and
 (b) co-chaired by an official of the Government of
Japan and an official of one of the Governments
of ASEAN Member States.
Article 55
Work Programmes for Economic Cooperation
1. Work Programmes setting out areas and forms of each
field of cooperation activities shall be set forth in Annex
5.
2. Any modification of existing Work Programmes or
formulation of new Work Programmes shall be made in
accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 54 and through
amending Annex 5 pursuant to the procedures set out in
Article 77. 
Article 56
Resources for Economic Cooperation
 Taking into account the different levels of economic
development and capacity among the Parties, resources for
economic cooperation under this Chapter shall be provided
in such a manner as may be mutually agreed upon among the
Parties.
Article 57
Implementation of Economic Cooperation Activities
1. Economic cooperation activities shall involve Japan
and at least two (2) ASEAN Member States.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, economic cooperation
activities may also involve Japan and one (1) ASEAN Member
State, provided that those activities are regional in
nature and of benefit to other ASEAN Member States. Such
activities shall aim at narrowing the gaps of economic
development among ASEAN Member States or at promoting the
well-being of the people of ASEAN Member States towards
further integration of ASEAN.
3. The Parties shall undertake economic cooperation
activities at mutually agreed time.
Article 58
Non-application of Chapter 9
 The dispute settlement procedures provided for in
Chapter 9 shall not apply to this Chapter.
Chapter 9
Settlement of Disputes
Article 59
Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter, the term:
 (a) “complaining party” means any Party or Parties
that request consultations under paragraph 1 of
Article 62;
 (b) “party to a dispute” means any Party which is a
complaining party or a party complained against;
 (c) “party complained against” means any Party or
Parties to which the request for consultations is
made under paragraph 1 of Article 62; and 
 (d) “third party” means a Party, other than the
parties to a dispute, that notifies its interest
in writing in accordance with Article 66.
Article 60
Scope of Application
1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this
Chapter shall apply with respect to the settlement of all
disputes between the Parties concerning the interpretation
or application of this Agreement.
2. This Chapter may apply to measures affecting a Party’s
observance of this Agreement taken by regional or local
governments or authorities within the Party. When the
arbitral tribunal has awarded that a provision of this
Agreement has not been observed in accordance with Article
67, the responsible Party shall take such reasonable
measures as may be available to it to ensure its
observance. Paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 71 shall apply
in cases where it has not been possible for the Party to
secure such observance.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights of
the Parties to have recourse to dispute settlement
procedures available under any other international
agreement to which all of the parties to a dispute are
parties.
4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, once dispute settlement
proceedings have been initiated under this Chapter or under
any other international agreement to which all of the
parties to a dispute are parties with respect to a
particular dispute, the forum selected by the complaining
party shall be used to the exclusion of any other fora for
that particular dispute. However, this shall not apply if
substantially separate and distinct rights or obligations
under different international agreements are in dispute.
5. For the purposes of paragraphs 3 and 4, the
complaining party shall be deemed to have selected a forum
when it has requested the establishment of, or referred a
dispute to, an arbitral tribunal or a dispute settlement
panel, in accordance with this Chapter or any other
international agreement to which the parties to a dispute
are parties. 
Article 61
Contact Points
1. For the purposes of this Chapter, a Party may
designate a contact point responsible for communications on
all matters referred to in this Chapter. The submission of
any request, notice or other document under this Chapter to
the contact point so designated shall be deemed to have
been made to that Party.
2. Where a Party chooses not to designate a contact point
pursuant to paragraph 1, the submission of any request,
notice or other document under this Chapter shall be made
to the contact point which the Party designates in
accordance with Article 12.
3. Any Party receiving any request, notice or other
document under this Chapter shall acknowledge receipt in
writing.
Article 62
Consultations
1. A Party or Parties may make a request in writing for
consultations to other Party or Parties concerning any
matter on the interpretation or application of this
Agreement where the complaining party considers that any
benefit accruing to it under this Agreement is being
nullified or impaired as a result of the failure of the
party complained against to carry out its obligations under
this Agreement, or as a result of the application by the
party complained against of measures which are in conflict
with its obligations under this Agreement.
2. Any request for consultations shall be submitted in
writing, containing the identification of the specific
measures at issue and indication of the factual and legal
basis (including the provisions of this Agreement alleged
to have been breached and any other relevant provisions) of
the complaint. The complaining party shall at the same
time notify the rest of the Parties thereof.
3. Upon receipt of the request referred to in paragraph
1, the party complained against shall promptly acknowledge
receipt of such request to the complaining party and the
rest of the Parties at the same time. 
4. If a request for consultations is made, the party
complained against shall reply to the request within ten
(10) days after the date of receipt of the request and
shall enter into consultations in good faith within a
period of not more than thirty (30) days after the date of
receipt of the request, with a view to reaching a mutually
satisfactory solution.
5. The parties to a dispute shall make every effort to
reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter
through consultations under this Article. To this end, the
parties to the dispute shall provide each other with
sufficient information to enable a full examination of the
dispute.
6. Consultations shall be confidential between the
parties to the dispute and are without prejudice to the
rights of any Party in any further proceedings under this
Chapter or in other proceedings. The parties to the
dispute shall inform the rest of the Parties of the outcome
of the consultations.
7. In cases of urgency, including those which concern
perishable goods, the parties to the dispute shall enter
into consultations within a period of no more than ten (10)
days after the date of receipt of the request by the party
complained against.
8. In cases of urgency, including those which concern
perishable goods, the parties to the dispute shall make
every effort to accelerate the consultations to the
greatest extent possible.
Article 63
Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation
1. Good offices, conciliation and mediation are
procedures that are undertaken voluntarily if the parties
to the dispute so agree.
2. Good offices, conciliation or mediation may be
requested at any time by any party to a dispute. They may
begin at any time by agreement of the parties to the
dispute and be terminated at any time upon the request of
any party to the dispute.
3. If the parties to the dispute agree, good offices,
conciliation or mediation may continue while the
proceedings of the arbitral tribunal provided for in this
Chapter are in progress. 
4. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation or
mediation, and, in particular, positions taken by the
parties to the dispute during these proceedings, shall be
kept confidential and without prejudice to the rights of
any Party in any proceedings under this Chapter or in other
proceedings.
Article 64
Establishment of Arbitral Tribunals
1. The complaining party may request in writing, to the
party complained against, the establishment of an arbitral
tribunal:
 (a) if the party complained against does not respond
within ten (10) days, or does not enter into such
consultations within thirty (30) days after the
date of receipt of the request for such
consultations; or
 (b) if the parties to the dispute fail to resolve the
dispute through such consultations within sixty
(60) days after the date of receipt of the
request for such consultations, or within twenty
(20) days after such date in cases of urgency
including those which concern perishable goods.
2. A copy of the request referred to in paragraph 1 shall
also be communicated to the rest of the Parties.
3. Where more than one (1) complaining party request the
establishment of an arbitral tribunal related to the same
matter, a single arbitral tribunal may, whenever feasible,
be established by the parties to the dispute to examine the
matter, taking into account the rights of each party to the
dispute.
4. Where a single arbitral tribunal is established
pursuant to paragraph 3, the arbitral tribunal shall
organise its examination and present its findings to all
the parties to the dispute in such a manner that the rights
which the parties to the dispute would have enjoyed had
separate arbitral tribunals examined the same matter are in
no way impaired. If any of the parties to the dispute so
requests, the arbitral tribunal may make separate awards on
the dispute concerned as long as the timeframe for making
the awards so permits. The written submissions by a party
to the dispute shall be made available to the other parties
to the dispute, and each party to the dispute shall have
the right to be present when any other party to the dispute
presents its views to the arbitral tribunal. 
5. Where more than one (1) arbitral tribunal are
established to examine the dispute related to the same
matter, to the greatest extent possible, the same persons
shall be appointed by the parties to the disputes to serve
on each of the separate arbitral tribunals.
6. Any request for the establishment of an arbitral
tribunal shall indicate whether consultations under Article
62 have been held, identify the factual basis for the
complaint including the specific measures at issue and
provide the legal basis of the complaint including the
provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been breached
and any other relevant provisions.
Article 65
Composition of Arbitral Tribunals
1. An arbitral tribunal shall consist of three (3)
arbitrators.
2. The complaining party and the party complained against
shall, within thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of
the request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal,
each appoint one (1) arbitrator who may be a national of
any party to the dispute and propose up to three (3)
candidates to serve as the third arbitrator who shall be
the chair of the arbitral tribunal. The third arbitrator
shall not be a national of any party to the dispute, nor
have his or her usual place of residence in any party to
the dispute, nor be employed by any party to the dispute,
nor have dealt with the dispute in any capacity.
3. The complaining party and the party complained against
shall agree on and appoint the third arbitrator within
forty-five (45) days after the date of receipt of the
request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal,
taking into account the candidates proposed pursuant to
paragraph 2. If either the complaining party or the party
complained against has not appointed an arbitrator pursuant
to paragraph 2, or if the parties to the dispute fail to
agree on and appoint the third arbitrator pursuant to this
paragraph, the Director-General of the World Trade
Organization shall immediately be requested to make the
necessary appointments. In the event that the DirectorGeneral is a national of any party to the dispute, the
Deputy Director-General or the officer next in seniority
who is not a national of any party to the dispute shall be
requested to make the necessary appointments. Appointments
made pursuant to this paragraph other than that of the
third arbitrator shall be deemed to have been made by the
complaining party or the party complained against which has
failed to make such an appointment. 
4. The date of establishment of an arbitral tribunal
shall be the date on which the third arbitrator is
appointed pursuant to paragraph 3.
5. If an arbitrator appointed under this Article resigns
or becomes unable to act, a succeeding arbitrator shall be
appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the
appointment of the original arbitrator and the succeeding
arbitrator shall have all the powers and duties of the
original arbitrator. The work of the arbitral tribunal
shall be suspended until the succeeding arbitrator is
appointed.
6. Any person appointed as an arbitrator shall have
expertise or experience in law, international trade, other
matters covered by this Agreement or the resolution of
disputes arising under international trade agreements. An
arbitrator shall be chosen strictly on the basis of
objectivity, reliability, sound judgment and independence
and shall conduct himself or herself on the same basis
throughout the course of the arbitral tribunal proceedings.
If a party to the dispute believes that an arbitrator is
not adhering to the basis stated above, the parties to the
dispute shall consult and if they agree, the arbitrator
shall be removed and a new arbitrator shall be appointed in
accordance with this Article.
Article 66
Third Parties
1. Any Party having a substantial interest in a dispute
before an arbitral tribunal and having notified its
interest in writing to the parties to the dispute and the
rest of the Parties shall have an opportunity to make
written submissions to the arbitral tribunal. These
submissions shall also be given to the parties to the
dispute and may be reflected in the award of the arbitral
tribunal.
2. A third party shall receive the submissions of the
parties to the dispute to the first meeting of the arbitral
tribunal.
3. If a third party considers that a measure that is
already the subject of any arbitral tribunal proceedings
nullifies or impairs benefits accruing to it under this
Agreement, such third party may have recourse to normal
dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter. 
Article 67
Functions of Arbitral Tribunals
1. The arbitral tribunal established pursuant to Article
64:
 (a) should make an objective assessment of the matter
before it, including an examination of the facts
of the case and the applicability of and
conformity with the Agreement;
 (b) should consult with the parties to the dispute as
appropriate and provide them with adequate
opportunities for the development of a mutually
satisfactory resolution;
 (c) shall make its award in accordance with this
Agreement and applicable rules of international
law;
 (d) shall set out, in its award, its findings of law
and fact, together with the reasons therefor;
 (e) may, apart from giving its findings, include in
its award suggested implementation options for
the parties to the dispute to consider in
conjunction with Article 71; and
 (f) cannot, in its award, add to or diminish the
rights and obligations of any Party provided in
this Agreement.
2. The arbitral tribunal may seek, from the Parties, such
relevant information as it considers necessary and
appropriate. The Parties shall respond promptly and fully
to any request by the arbitral tribunal for such
information.
3. The arbitral tribunal may seek information from any
relevant source and may consult experts to obtain their
opinion on certain aspects of the matter. With respect to
factual issues concerning a scientific or other technical
matter raised by any party to the dispute, the arbitral
tribunal may request advisory reports in writing from
experts. The arbitral tribunal may, at the request of any
party to the dispute or on its own initiative, select, in
consultation with the parties to the dispute, no fewer than
two (2) scientific or technical experts who shall assist
the arbitral tribunal throughout its proceedings, but who
shall not have the right to vote in respect of any decision
to be made by the arbitral tribunal, including its award.
Any information and technical advice so obtained shall be
made available to the parties to the dispute. 
Article 68
Proceedings of Arbitral Tribunals
1. The rules and procedures as set out in this Article
shall apply to the proceedings of an arbitral tribunal.
2. The parties to the dispute, in consultation with the
arbitral tribunal, may agree to adopt additional rules and
procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Article.
Terms of Reference for Arbitral Tribunals
3. An arbitral tribunal shall have the following terms of
reference:
 "To examine, in the light of (the relevant provisions
in this Agreement to be cited by the parties to the
dispute), the matter referred to in the request for
the establishment of an arbitral tribunal pursuant to
Article 64, and to issue awards including findings,
determinations and suggested implementation options,
if any, as provided for in Article 67.”
Written Submissions and Other Documents
4. Each party to the dispute shall deliver to the other
parties to the dispute a copy of its written submissions to
the arbitral tribunal.
5. In respect of any request, notice or other documents
related to the arbitral tribunal proceedings that is not
covered by paragraph 4, each party to the dispute may
deliver a copy of the documents to the other parties to the
dispute by facsimile, e-mail or other means of electronic
transmission.
6. Any party to the dispute may at any time correct minor
errors of a clerical nature in any request, notice, written
submission or other documents related to the arbitral
tribunal proceedings by delivering a new document clearly
indicating the changes. 
Timetable
7. After consulting the parties to the dispute, the
arbitral tribunal shall as soon as practicable and whenever
possible within seven (7) days after the establishment of
the arbitral tribunal, fix the timetable for the arbitral
tribunal process. The timetable fixed for the arbitral
tribunal shall include precise deadlines for written
submissions by the parties to the dispute. Modifications
to such timetable may be made by the agreement of the
parties to the dispute in consultation with the arbitral
tribunal.
Operation of Arbitral Tribunals
8. An arbitral tribunal shall meet in closed session.
The parties to the dispute shall be present at the meetings
only when invited by the arbitral tribunal to appear before
it.
9. All third parties which have notified their interest
in the dispute shall be invited in writing to present their
views during a session of the first meeting of the
arbitral tribunal proceedings set aside for that purpose.
All such third parties may be present during the entirety
of this session.
10. The deliberations of the arbitral tribunal and the
documents submitted to it shall be kept confidential.
11. Notwithstanding paragraph 10, any party to the dispute
may make public statements of its positions and its views
regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential,
information and written submissions made by the other
parties to the dispute to the arbitral tribunal which the
other parties to the dispute have designated as
confidential. Where a party to the dispute submits a
confidential version of its written submissions to the
arbitral tribunal, it shall also, upon request of another
party to the dispute, provide a non-confidential summary of
the information or written submissions which may be
disclosed publicly.
12. The venue for the arbitral tribunal proceedings shall
be decided by mutual agreement between the complaining
party and the party complained against. If there is no
agreement, the venue shall alternate among the capitals of
the parties to the dispute with the first meeting of the
arbitral tribunal proceedings to be held in one (1) of the
capitals of the party complained against. 
13. The parties to the dispute shall be given the
opportunity to attend any of the presentations, statements
or rebuttals in the proceedings. Any information provided
and written submissions made to the arbitral tribunal by a
party to the dispute, including any comments on the
descriptive part of the draft award and responses to
questions put by the arbitral tribunal, shall be made
available to the other parties to the dispute.
Article 69
Draft Award and Award
1. The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be drafted
without the presence of the parties to the dispute and in
the light of the information provided and the statements
made in the proceedings. Opinions expressed in the award
of the arbitral tribunal by its individual arbitrator shall
be anonymous.
2. The arbitral tribunal shall, within ninety (90) days
after the date of its establishment, issue to the parties
to the dispute its draft award including both the
descriptive part and its findings and conclusions for the
purposes of enabling the parties to the dispute to review
precise aspects of the draft award.
3. When the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot
issue its draft award within the ninety (90) day period
referred to in paragraph 2, it shall inform the parties to
the dispute in writing of the reasons for the delay
together with the estimate of the period within which it
will issue its draft award.
4. The parties to the dispute may submit comments in
writing to the arbitral tribunal on the draft award within
fifteen (15) days after the date of issuance of the draft
award.
5. Where written comments by the parties to the dispute
as provided for in paragraph 4 are received, the arbitral
tribunal, on its own initiative or at the request of a
party to the dispute, may reconsider its award and make any
further examination that it considers appropriate.
6. The arbitral tribunal shall issue its award to the
parties to the dispute within thirty (30) days after the
issuance of the draft award.
7. The arbitral tribunal shall make its decisions,
including its award, by consensus, failing which it may
make its decisions by majority vote. 
8. The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and
binding on the parties to the dispute.
9. The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be circulated
to the Parties within ten (10) days after its issuance to
the parties to the dispute.
Article 70
Suspension and Termination of Proceedings
1. Where the parties to the dispute agree, the arbitral
tribunal may suspend its work at any time for a period not
exceeding twelve (12) months from the date of the joint
notification of such agreement to the chair of the arbitral
tribunal by the parties to the dispute. Upon the request
of any party to the dispute, the arbitral tribunal
proceedings shall be resumed after such suspension. If the
work of the arbitral tribunal has been suspended for more
than twelve (12) months, the authority of the arbitral
tribunal shall lapse unless the parties to the dispute
agree otherwise.
2. The parties to the dispute may agree to terminate the
proceedings of an arbitral tribunal at any time before the
issuance of the award by jointly so notifying the chair of
the arbitral tribunal.
3. Before the arbitral tribunal issues its draft award,
it may, at any stage of the proceedings, propose to the
parties to the dispute that the dispute be settled
amicably.
Article 71
Implementation of Award
1. The party complained against shall promptly comply
with the award of the arbitral tribunal issued pursuant to
Article 69.
2. The party complained against shall, within twenty (20)
days after the date of issuance of the award, notify the
complaining party of the period of time in which to
implement the award. If the complaining party considers
the period of time notified to be unacceptable, it may
refer the matter to an arbitral tribunal which then
determines the reasonable implementation period. The
arbitral tribunal shall inform the parties to the dispute
of its determination within thirty (30) days after the date
of the referral of the matter to it. 
3. If the party complained against considers it
impracticable to comply with the award within the
implementation period as determined pursuant to paragraph
2, the party complained against shall, no later than the
expiry of that implementation period, enter into
consultations with the complaining party, with a view to
developing mutually satisfactory compensation. If no
satisfactory compensation has been agreed within twenty
(20) days after the date of expiry of that implementation
period, the complaining party may request an arbitral
tribunal to determine the appropriate level of any
suspension of the application to the party complained
against of concessions or other obligations under this
Agreement.
4. If the complaining party considers that the party
complained against has failed to comply with the award
within the implementation period as determined pursuant to
paragraph 2, the complaining party may refer the matter to
an arbitral tribunal to confirm the failure and to
determine the appropriate level of any suspension of the
application to the party complained against of concessions
or other obligations under this Agreement.
5. The arbitral tribunal established under this Article
shall, wherever possible, have as its arbitrators, the
arbitrators of the original arbitral tribunal. If this is
not possible, then the arbitrators of such arbitral
tribunal shall be appointed pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3
of Article 65.
6. Unless the parties to the dispute agree to a different
period, the arbitral tribunal established under paragraphs
3 and 4 shall issue its award within sixty (60) days after
the date when the matter is referred to it.
7. The award of the arbitral tribunal established under
this Article shall be binding on all the parties to the
dispute.
Article 72
Compensation and the Suspension of Concessions
1. Compensation and the suspension of concessions or
other obligations under this Agreement are temporary
measures available in the event that the award is not
implemented within a reasonable period of time. However,
neither compensation nor the suspension of concessions or
other obligations under this Agreement is preferred to full
implementation of the award to bring a measure into
conformity with this Agreement. Compensation, if granted,
shall be consistent with this Agreement. 
2. The application of concessions or other obligations
under this Agreement shall not be suspended before the
commencement and during the course of the proceedings under
paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 71.
3. The suspension of the application of concessions or
other obligations under paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 71
may only be implemented after the complaining party
notifies the party complained against and the rest of the
Parties that the complaining party intends to suspend the
application to the party complained against of concessions
or other obligations under this Agreement. The party
complained against and the rest of the Parties shall be
informed of the commencement of the suspension and which
concessions or other obligations under this Agreement would
be suspended.
4. In considering what concessions or other obligations
under this Agreement to be suspended under paragraphs 3 and
4 of Article 71, such suspension shall:
 (a) be temporary, and be discontinued when the
parties to the dispute reach a mutually
satisfactory resolution or where compliance with
the award is effected;
 (b) be restricted to the same level of nullification
or impairment that is attributable to the failure
to comply with the award; and
 (c) be restricted to the same sector or sectors as
those in which the arbitral tribunal has found
the nullification or impairment, unless it is not
practicable or effective to suspend the
application of concessions or obligations in such
sector or sectors, in which case, the complaining
party may suspend concessions or benefits in
other sectors under this Agreement.
5. If the party complained against considers that the
suspension of concessions or other obligations under this
Agreement by the complaining party is inconsistent with the
provisions of paragraph 4, the matter shall be referred to
an arbitral tribunal. For the purposes of the arbitral
tribunal established under this Article, paragraph 5 of
Article 71 shall apply, mutatis mutandis.
6. Unless the parties to the dispute agree to a different
period, the arbitral tribunal established under this
Article shall issue its award within sixty (60) days after
the date when the matter is referred to it. Such award
shall be binding on all the parties to the dispute. 
Article 73
Expenses
1. The complaining party and the party complained against
shall respectively bear the costs of the arbitrators which
they appointed, and their own expenses and legal costs.
2. Unless the parties to the dispute otherwise agree, the
costs of the chair of the arbitral tribunal and other
expenses associated with the conduct of the proceedings of
the arbitral tribunal shall be borne in equal parts by the
parties to a dispute.
3. The arbitral tribunal shall keep a record and render a
final account of all general expenses incurred in
connection with the proceedings, including those paid to
their assistants, designated note takers or other
individuals that it retains.
Chapter 10
Final Provisions
Article 74
Table of Contents, Headings and Subheadings
 The table of contents, headings and subheadings are
inserted for convenience of reference only and shall not
affect the interpretation of this Agreement.
Article 75
Review
 The Parties shall undertake a general review of the
implementation and operation of this Agreement in the fifth
calendar year following the calendar year in which this
Agreement enters into force pursuant to paragraph 1 of
Article 79, and every five (5) years thereafter, unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties.
Article 76
Annexes and Notes
 The Annexes including attachment and Notes to this
Agreement shall form an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 77
Amendments
1. This Agreement may be amended by agreement among the
Parties. 
2. The Government of each Party shall notify the
Governments of the other Parties in writing that its legal
procedures necessary for entry into force of the amendment
have been completed. Such amendment shall enter into force
on the first day of the second month following the date by
which such notifications have been made by the Governments
of Japan and at least one (1) ASEAN Member State, which is
a Party, in relation to those Parties whose Governments
have made such notifications by that date.

3. Where an ASEAN Member State, which is a Party, makes
the notification referred to in paragraph 2 after the date
by which the notifications have been made by the
Governments of Japan and at least one (1) ASEAN Member
State, which is a Party, as referred to in paragraph 2, the
amendment referred to in paragraph 1 shall enter into force
in relation to that ASEAN Member State on the first day of
the second month following the date on which it makes the
notification.
4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3, the number of
ASEAN Member States referred to in paragraph 2 which is
necessary for entry into force of the amendment may be
increased by agreement among the Parties.
5. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, amendments relating only
to:
 (a) Annex 1 (provided that the amendments are made in
accordance with the amendment of the Harmonized
System, and include no change on tariff rates
applied to the originating goods of the other
Parties in accordance with Annex 1);
 (b) Annex 2;
 (c) Attachment to Annex 4; or
 (d) Annex 5,
may be made by diplomatic notes exchanged among the
Governments of the Parties. Such amendments shall enter
into force in relation to all the Parties on the date
specified in such diplomatic notes.
Article 78
Depositary
 For the ASEAN Member States, this Agreement including
its amendments shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of ASEAN, who shall promptly furnish a certified
copy thereof, to each ASEAN Member State. 
Article 79
Entry into Force
1. The Government of each signatory State shall notify
the Governments of other signatory States in writing that
its legal procedures necessary for entry into force of this
Agreement have been completed. This Agreement shall enter
into force on the first day of the second month following
the date by which such notifications have been made by the
Governments of Japan and at least one (1) ASEAN Member
State, in relation to those signatory States that have made
such notifications by that date.
2. In relation to an ASEAN Member State making the
notification referred to in paragraph 1 after the date by
which the notifications have been made by the Governments
of Japan and at least one (1) ASEAN Member State as
referred to in paragraph 1, this Agreement shall enter into
force on the first day of the second month following the
date on which that ASEAN Member State makes the
notification. That ASEAN Member State shall be bound by
the existing terms and conditions of this Agreement,
including any amendments that may have entered into force
pursuant to Article 77 by the time of such notification.
For the purposes of Annex 1, the staging of tariff
elimination or reduction of that ASEAN Member State shall
also commence from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement pursuant to paragraph 1.
Article 80
Withdrawal and Termination
1. Any Party may withdraw from this Agreement by giving
one (1) year’s advance notice in writing to the other
Parties.
2. This Agreement shall terminate either when all ASEAN
Member States which are Parties withdraw in accordance with
paragraph 1 or when Japan does so.
 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly
authorised by their respective Governments, have signed
this Agreement. 
DONE in duplicate in the English language and SIGNED
at Tokyo on the day of in the year 2008, at
Bandar Seri Begawan on the day of in the
year 2008, at Phnom Penh on the day of in
the year 2008, at Jakarta on the day of in
the year 2008, at Vientiane on the day of
in the year 2008, at Kuala Lumpur on the day of
in the year 2008, at Nay Pyi Taw on the day of
in the year 2008, at Manila on the day of
in the year 2008, at Singapore on the day of
in the year 2008, at Bangkok on the day of
in the year 2008, and at Hanoi on the day of
in the year 2008.
For the Government of For the Government of
Japan: Brunei Darussalam:
For the Government of
the Kingdom of Cambodia:
For the Government of
the Republic of Indonesia:
For the Government of
the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic: 
For the Government of
Malaysia:
For the Government of
the Union of Myanmar:
For the Government of
the Republic of
the Philippines:
For the Government of
the Republic of Singapore:
For the Government of
the Kingdom of Thailand:
For the Government of
the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam: 