AMENDMENT TO THE FIRST AGREEMENT ON TRADE
NEGOTIATIONS AMONG DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES OF
THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE
PACIFIC (BANGKOK AGREEMENT)
 ASIA-PACIFIC TRADE AGREEMENT
PREAMBLE
RECOGNIZING the urgent need to take action to implement a trade expansion
programme among the developing member countries of the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) pursuant to the decisions contained
in the Kabul Declaration of the Council of Ministers on Asian Economic Cooperation and within the framework of the Asian Trade Expansion Programme
which was adopted by the Intergovernmental Committee on a Trade Expansion
Programme created under the Kabul Declaration;
GUIDED by the principles contained in the New Delhi Declaration adopted at the
thirty-first session of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific;
REALIZING that the expansion of trade could act as a powerful stimulus to the
development of their national economies, by expanding investment and production
opportunities through benefits to be gained from specialization and economies of
scale, thus providing greater opportunities of employment and securing higher
living standards for their populations;
MINDFUL of the importance of expanding access on favourable terms for their
goods to each other’s markets and of developing trade arrangements which
promote the rational and outward-oriented expansion of production and trade;
NOTING that the international community has fully recognized the importance of
encouraging the establishment of preferences among developing countries at the
international, regional and subregional levels, particularly through the resolutions
of the General Assembly of the United Nations establishing the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade and
the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order and 
- 2 -
the Programme of Action for the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order; the Concerted Declaration on Trade Expansion, Economic Co-operation
and Regional Integration among Developing Countries adopted at UNCTAD II; as
well as Part IV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and Article V of
the General Agreement on Trade in Services and decisions made in pursuance
thereof;
NOTING FURTHER that developing countries have already taken some major
decisions intended to promote such type of preferential arrangements among
themselves such as the Global System of Trade Preferences;
CONVINCED that the establishment of preferences among the developing
member countries of ESCAP, complementary to other efforts undertaken in other
international forums, could make an important contribution to the development of
trade among developing countries;
The Governments of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, the People’s Republic
of China, the Republic of India, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the
Republic of Korea and the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka HAVE
AGREED as follows:
Chapter I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement, the following definitions shall apply:
1) “Participating State” means a State which has consented to be bound by the
Agreement by deposition of its instrument of accession or ratification with the
Executive Secretary of ESCAP.
2) “Original Participating States” means the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, the
Republic of India, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. 
- 3 -
3) “Developing member countries of ESCAP” means those countries included in
paragraphs 3 and 4 of the terms of reference of the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, including any future amendments thereto.
4) “Least developed country” means a country designated as such by the United
Nations.
5) “Products” means all products including manufactures and commodities in their
raw, semi-processed and processed forms.
6) “Like product” is a product which is identical to the product under
consideration or, in the absence of such a product, another product which,
although not identical, has characteristics closely resembling those of the
product under consideration.
7) “Tariffs” means customs duties included in the national tariff schedules of the
Participating States.
8) “Border charges and fees” means border charges and fees, other than tariffs, on
foreign trade transactions with a tariff-like effect which are levied solely on
imports, but are not indirect taxes and charges which are levied in the same
manner on like domestic products. Import charges corresponding to specific
services rendered are not considered border charges and fees.
9) “Non-tariff measures” means any measures, regulations or practices, other than
tariffs and border charges and fees, the effect of which is to restrict imports or
to significantly distort trade.
10) “Margin of preference” means the percentage difference between the MostFavoured-Nation (MFN) rate of duty and the preferential rate of duty for the
like product, and not the absolute difference between those rates. Thus,
 Margin of preference = (MFN duty– tariff rate conceded under the Agreement) × 100(per cent)
 MFN duty
11) “Value of the concessions” means the extent of benefits received by other
Participating States from the tariff/non-tariff preferences given by each
Participating State through its National List of Concessions agreed upon under
this Agreement. In the case of tariff preferences, the value of the concessions
shall be deemed to be preserved if margins of preference are maintained. 
- 4 -

12) “Serious injury” means significant damage to domestic producers of like or
similar products resulting from a substantial increase of preferential imports in
situations which cause substantial losses in terms of earnings, production or
employment unsustainable in the short term. The examination of the impact on
the domestic industry concerned shall also include an evaluation of other
relevant economic factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the
domestic industry of that product.
13) “Threat of serious injury” means a situation in which a substantial increase
of preferential imports is of a nature to cause serious injury to domestic
producers, and that such injury, although not yet existing, is clearly imminent.
A determination of threat of serious injury shall be based on facts and not on
mere allegations, conjecture, or remote or hypothetical possibility.
Article 2
Objectives
The objectives of this Agreement are to promote economic development through a
continuous process of trade expansion among the developing member countries of
ESCAP and to further international economic co-operation through the adoption of
mutually beneficial trade liberalization measures consistent with their respective
present and future development and trade needs.
Article 3
Principles
The Agreement shall be governed in accordance with the following general
principles:
(i) The Agreement shall be based on overall reciprocity and mutuality of
advantages in such a way as to benefit equitably all Participating States;
(ii) The principles of Transparency, National Treatment and Most-FavouredNation Treatment shall apply to the trade relations among the Participating
States;
(iii) The special needs of least developed country Participating States shall be
clearly recognized and concrete preferential measures in their favour shall be
agreed upon. 
- 5 -
Chapter II – PROGRAMME OF TRADE LIBERALIZATION
Article 4
Negotiation of Concessions
This Agreement may, inter-alia, consist of arrangements relating to: (a) tariffs; (b)
border charges and fees; (c) non-tariff measures. Participating States may conduct
their negotiations for tariff concessions in accordance with any one or a
combination of the following approaches and procedures: (a) product-by-product
basis; (b) across-the-board tariff reductions; (c) sectoral basis. The tariff
negotiations should be based on the current MFN rates applied by each
Participating State. Participating States shall enter into periodic negotiations with a
view to further expanding this Agreement and the fuller attainment of its aims.
Article 5
Application of Concessions
Each Participating State shall apply such tariff, border charge and fee, and nontariff concessions in favour of the goods originating in all other Participating States
as are set out in its National List of Concessions. These National Lists of
Concessions are attached as annex I, which is an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 6
Non-Tariff Measures
Each Participating State shall take appropriate measures, consistent with its
development needs and objectives, for the gradual relaxation of non-tariff
measures which may affect the importation of products covered by its National
List of Concessions. Issues relating to technical barriers to trade and sanitary and
phytosanitary measures among Participating States shall be dealt with, as far as
practicable, in accordance with the WTO provisions on these subjects.
Participating States shall also make available to one another on a transparent basis
a list of non-tariff measures existing on conceded products.
Article 7
Special Concessions to Least Developed Country Participating States
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 5 of this Agreement, any Participating
State may grant to least developed country Participating States special concessions
which shall apply to all least developed country Participating States and shall not
be extended to other Participating States. These special concessions shall be
included in the National List of Concessions of the preference-giving Participating
State. 
- 6 -
Article 8
Rules of Origin
Products contained in the National Lists of Concessions annexed to this Agreement
shall be eligible for preferential treatment if they satisfy the Rules of Origin set out
in annex II, which is an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 9
Preservation of the Value of the Concessions
Except as provided for elsewhere, in order to secure preservation of the value of
the concessions set out in the attached National Lists of Concessions, the
Participating States shall not abrogate or reduce the value of these concessions
after the entry into force of this Agreement through the application of any charge
or measure restricting commerce other than those existing prior thereto, except
where a charge corresponds to: (a) an internal tax imposed on a similar domestic
product; (b) an anti-dumping or countervailing duty; or (c) fees commensurate with
the cost of services rendered.
Article 10
Re-establishment of Margins of Preference
If, as a result of a tariff revision, a Participating State reduces or abrogates the
value of the concessions granted to the other Participating States, it shall within a
reasonable period of time take mutually acceptable compensatory action to reestablish margins of preference of equivalent value or enter into prompt
consultations with the other Participating States as provided for in chapter IV in
order to negotiate a mutually satisfactory modification of its National List of
Concessions. For the purposes of this article, a reasonable period of time means not
exceeding six months from the date of issue of the notification of tariff revision. A
Participating State exceeding this period shall provide justification as to the
reasons thereof.
Article 11
Coverage of the Agreement
The Agreement shall cover all products including manufactures and commodities
in their raw, semi-processed and processed forms. Participating States shall explore
further areas of cooperation with regard to border and non-border measures to
supplement and complement the liberalization of trade. These may include, among
others, the harmonization of standards, mutual recognition of tests and certification
of products, macroeconomic consultations, trade facilitation measures and trade in
services. 
- 7 -
Chapter III – TRADE EXPANSION
Article 12
Trade Expansion and Diversification
To ensure the consolidation, continued expansion and further diversification of
trade, the Participating States agree to keep in view the objectives and provisions
set out in the following subparagraphs and shall strive to implement them
expeditiously in a manner consistent with their national policies and procedures:

a. To the fullest extent possible, Participating States shall grant to one another,
in relation to imports originating in the territory of any one of them, a
treatment no less favourable than that which prevailed prior to the entry into
force of this Agreement;
b. With respect to taxes, rates and other internal duties and charges, products
originating in the territory of a Participating State shall enjoy in the territory
of every other Participating State a treatment no less favourable than that
accorded by that other Participating State to similar products of domestic
origin;
c. Participating States shall endeavour, in relation to each other, not to
introduce or increase the incidence of tariffs, border charges and fees, and
non-tariff measures on products of current or potential export interest to the
other Participating States. For purposes of determination of the products that
fall within the purview of this paragraph, the Participating States shall
submit, and the Standing Committee shall decide on, lists of products in this
category from time to time;
d. Whenever considered necessary, Participating States shall take appropriate
measures for co-operation, particularly in customs administration, to
facilitate implementation of this Agreement and to simplify and standardize
procedures and formalities relating to reciprocal trade. For this purpose the
Standing Committee shall take the required administrative action;
e. The Participating States shall, as far as practicable, follow the provisions of
relevant WTO Agreements including the Agreement on the Implementation
of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Duties, and ensure that the provisions of this Agreement are
harmoniously applied;
f. Participating States shall adopt the latest version of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System of the World Customs
Organization as a common tariff nomenclature and, as far as practicable, 
- 8 -
conduct further negotiations on the basis of the six-digit level of the HS
classification of goods;
g. Through further negotiations, Participating States shall take steps to expand
the coverage and value of the concessions on products of export interest to
one another. To this end, the Standing Committee shall adopt from time to
time a programme of action to accelerate the process of negotiations,
including additional negotiating techniques and the possible establishment of
specific targets for the negotiations.
Article 13
Extension of Advantage, Benefit, Franchise, Immunity or Privilege
In matters of trade, any advantage, benefit, franchise, immunity or privilege
applied by a Participating State in respect of a product originating in or intended
for consignment to any other Participating State or any other country shall be
immediately and unconditionally extended to the like product originating in or
intended for consignment to the territories of the other Participating States.
Article 14
Non-Application of Preferences
The provisions of article 13 shall not apply in relation to preferences granted by
Participating States:
a. Through bilateral trade agreements, to other Participating States and to third
countries;
b. Exclusively to other developing countries prior to the entry into force of this
Agreement;
c. To least developed country Participating States under article 7 of this
Agreement;
d. To other Participating States which may be classified by the Participating
States as at a relatively less advanced stage of economic development,
provided that such preferences are accorded without full reciprocity from the
relatively less advanced country. The Standing Committee shall decide from
time to time which Participating States shall be considered to be in the
category of countries at a relatively less advanced stage of economic
development;
e. To any other Participating State(s) and/or other developing member
countries of ESCAP with which the Participating State engages in the
formation of an economic integration grouping;
f. To any other Participating State(s) and/or other developing countries with
which the Participating State enters into an industrial co-operation 
- 9 -
agreement or joint venture in other productive sectors, within the purview of
article 16.
Notwithstanding the above exceptions, each Participating State shall take the
necessary steps to reconcile, to the extent possible, the provisions of agreements
entered into with third countries with the provisions of this Agreement.
Article 15
Special Consideration for Least Developed Country Participating States
Special consideration shall be given by Participating States to requests from least
developed country Participating States for technical assistance and cooperation
arrangements designed to assist them in expanding their trade with other
Participating States and in taking advantage of the potential benefits of this
Agreement.
Article 16
Extension of Special Tariff and Non-Tariff Preferences
The Participating States agree to consider extending special tariff and non-tariff
preferences in favour of products included in industrial co-operation agreements
and joint ventures in other productive sectors reached among some or all of them,
and/or with the participation of other developing member countries of ESCAP,
which will apply exclusively in favour of the countries participating in the said
agreements or ventures. Provisions for such agreements or ventures shall be
embodied in protocols, which shall enter into force for the Participating States
concerned after the Standing Committee has declared their compatibility with this
Agreement.
Chapter IV – SAFEGUARD MEASURES AND CONSULTATIONS
Article 17
Suspension of Concessions
(i) If, as a result of the implementation of this Agreement, imports of a
particular product included in the National List of Concessions of a
Participating State originating in the territory of another Participating State
or other Participating States, are increasing in such a manner as to cause, or
threaten to cause, serious injury to domestic industry that produces like or
directly competitive products in the importing Participating State, the
importing Participating State may suspend, provisionally and without 
- 10 -
discrimination, concessions included in its National List of Concessions in
respect of that particular product and shall simultaneously notify the
Standing Committee and enter into consultations with the other Participating
State(s) concerned, with a view to reaching agreement to remedy the
situation, keeping the Standing Committee duly informed of progress in
these consultations.
(ii) If agreement among the Participating States concerned cannot be reached
within 90 days, the Standing Committee shall then seek to obtain a mutually
acceptable solution through: (a) confirmation of the suspension; or (b)
modification of the concession; or (c) its replacement by a concession of
equivalent value. If the Standing Committee cannot reach a satisfactory
solution within 90 days from that date, the Participating State(s) affected by
the suspension shall then be free to temporarily suspend the application to
the trade of the Participating State which has taken such action of
substantially equivalent concessions, subject to notification to and further
negotiation for a mutually acceptable solution by the Standing Committee,
which shall adopt its final decision by at least a two-thirds majority vote
within 90 days following the date of receipt of the latter notification.
(iii) The preconditions and circumstances for the legitimate application of
safeguard measures shall, as far as possible, be the same as provided under
the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.
Article 18
Balance of Payments Restrictions
(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of article 9 of this Agreement and without
prejudice to existing international obligations, a Participating State which
finds it necessary to introduce restrictions on imports for the purpose of
safeguarding its balance of payments may do so while endeavouring to
safeguard the value of the concessions embodied in its National List of
Concessions. If, however, such restrictions are applied by a Participating
State in respect of products included in its National List of Concessions,
such restrictions shall apply provisionally and without discrimination, and
notice thereof must immediately be given to the Standing Committee with a
view to negotiating a mutually satisfactory solution, in accordance with the
procedures set out in articles 19 and 20 of this Agreement. Notwithstanding
these consultation procedures, Participating States applying balance of
payments restrictions with respect to products included in their National 
- 11 -
Lists of Concessions shall progressively relax such restrictions as their
balance of payments situation improves and shall eliminate such restrictions
when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
(ii) The preconditions and circumstances for the legitimate application of
balance of payments safeguards shall, as far as practicable, be the same as
provided under WTO’s Understanding on Balance of Payments Provisions
of the GATT 1994.

Article 19
Remedy of Trade Disadvantages
If, as a result of the implementation of this Agreement, significant and persistent
disadvantages are created in respect of the trade between one Participating State
and the others as a whole, those Participating States shall, at the request of the
affected Participating State, accord sympathetic consideration to the representation
or request of the latter, and the Standing Committee shall afford adequate
opportunity for consultations with a view to taking the necessary steps to remedy
such disadvantages through the adoption of suitable measures, including additional
concessions, designed to further expand multilateral trade.
Article 20
Non-Compliance
If a Participating State should consider that another Participating State is not duly
complying with any given provision under this Agreement, and that such noncompliance adversely affects its own trade relations with that Participating State,
the former may make formal representation to the latter, which shall give due
consideration to the representation made to it. If no satisfactory adjustment is
effected between the Participating States concerned within 120 days following the
date on which such representation was made, the matter may be referred to the
Standing Committee, which may decide to make to any Participating State such
recommendation as it considers appropriate. If the Participating State concerned
does not comply with the recommendation of the Standing Committee, the latter
may authorize any Participating State to suspend, in relation to the non-complying
State, the application of such obligations under this Agreement as the Standing
Committee considers appropriate. 
- 12 -
Article 21
Dispute Settlement
Any dispute that may arise among Participating States regarding the interpretation
and application of the provisions of this Agreement or any instrument adopted
within its framework shall be amicably settled by an agreement between the parties
concerned. In the event of Participating States’ failure to settle a dispute among
themselves, the dispute will be brought to the Standing Committee to resolve. The
Standing Committee shall review the matter and make a recommendation thereon
within 120 days from the date on which the dispute was submitted to it. The
Standing Committee shall adopt appropriate rules for this purpose.
Chapter V – THE STANDING COMMITTEE AND ADMINISTRATION
OF THE AGREEMENT
Article 22
Standing Committee
A Standing Committee, consisting of the representatives of the Participating States
(hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”), shall meet at least once a year and be
responsible for reviewing the application of this Agreement, carrying out
consultations, making recommendations and taking decisions as required, and, in
general, undertaking whatever measures may be required to ensure the adequate
implementation of the objectives and provisions of this Agreement.
Article 23
Ministerial Council
The Participating States, for the purpose of supervising, coordinating and
reviewing the implementation of this Agreement, establish a Council at minister
level comprising of one minister from the relevant economic ministry of each
Participating State. The Council shall meet at least once every two years, or
whenever it becomes necessary. The Committee shall provide support to the
Ministerial Council for the discharge of its responsibilities.
Article 24
Decision-Making
The practice of decision-making by consensus will be the preferred practice of the
Committee, and will be implemented whenever possible. If the need arises,
however, the Committee shall, by a two-thirds majority vote, adopt such rules of 
- 13 -
procedure as may be required for the performance of its functions, provided that at
least two thirds of the Participating States are present to cast votes. The Committee
shall communicate with third countries and international organizations in matters
relating to the interpretation and operation of this Agreement, and may request the
technical advice and the co-operation of national and international organizations.
Chapter VI – REVIEW AND MODIFICATIONS
Article 25
Review of the Agreement
(i) At each session, the Committee shall review progress made in the
implementation of this Agreement, taking into account the objectives and
principles set out in articles 2 and 3.
(ii) At least once a year, the Committee shall make a critical review of reciprocal
trade with a view to making the necessary corrections and improvements in
the National Lists of Concessions to ensure that the benefits deriving from the
application of this Agreement accrue to all Participating States in a mutually
satisfactory manner, consistent with each country’s contribution to the
Programme of Trade Liberalization set out in chapter II.
(iii) Every three years the Committee shall undertake a major review in order to
determine means of advancing the aims of promoting trade expansion among
the developing member countries of ESCAP.
Article 26
Amendments to the Agreement
Except where provision for modification is made elsewhere in this Agreement all
articles of this Agreement may be modified through amendments to the
Agreement. Amendments to the provisions of chapters II and III and of article 26
shall become effective upon acceptance by all Participating States. For all other
amendments, the Committee will make every effort to adopt a decision by
consensus as to whether the amendments in question shall become effective; if a
consensus decision is not reached, however, these amendments shall become
effective upon acceptance by two thirds of the Participating States. 
- 14 -
Article 27
Duration of Application of Concessions
Except for the special circumstances listed under chapter IV, the concessions
contained in the National Lists of Concessions shall have a minimum duration of
application of three years from the date of their entry into force. If at the end of
that period they are modified or withdrawn, the Participating States concerned
shall enter into consultations with a view to re-establishing a general level of the
value of the concessions which shall be at least as favourable to their mutual trade
as that existing prior to the modification or withdrawal.
Article 28
Replacement of Concessions
In the case of concessions withdrawn or modified in accordance with provisions
set out under chapter IV, the Participating State concerned shall attempt to replace
such concessions by other concessions of at least equivalent value.
Article 29
Promotion of Concessions and Participation
The Committee shall continuously promote negotiations for additions to the
National Lists of Concessions and for increasing the number of Participating States
and shall sponsor such negotiations at the time of the annual trade reviews
provided for under article 25 or at any other time it may deem desirable.
Chapter VII – ACCESSION AND WITHDRAWAL
Article 30
Accession to the Agreement
(i) After its entry into force, this Agreement shall be open for accession by any
developing member country of ESCAP.
(ii) Upon notification being received by the Committee through the Executive
Secretary of ESCAP from any such country regarding its intention to accede
to this Agreement, the Committee shall take the necessary steps to facilitate
accession of the applicant country to this Agreement on terms consistent with
the latter's present and future development and trade needs as well as with the
principle of mutual benefit. 
- 15 -
(iii) The applicant country shall offer concessions in exchange for the existing
concessions of Participating States and, unless otherwise decided, shall not
ask for additional concessions from Participating States through a request list
or otherwise.
(iv) After due negotiations, the applicant country may accede to the Agreement by
consensus. If consensus is not reached, however, the applicant country may
accede to the Agreement if at least two thirds of the Participating States
recommend its accession. If any of the Participating States objects to such
accession, however, the provisions of the Agreement shall not apply as
between that country and the acceding country.
(v) This Agreement shall come into force for an eligible acceding State on the
date of deposit of its corresponding instrument of accession, accompanied by
the National List of Concessions and the related administrative notification,
with the Executive Secretary of ESCAP.
(vi) For the purposes of this article, a related administrative notification means a
government notification, such as a customs notification, that gives practical
effect to the acceding State’s obligations under the Agreement.
Article 31
Notification of Accession, Ratification and Entry into Force
The Executive Secretary of ESCAP shall notify the Participating States and other
developing member countries of ESCAP of: (a) accessions to and ratifications of
this Agreement; and (b) the date on which this Agreement enters into force for a
new Participating State.
Article 32
Withdrawal from the Agreement
Any Participating State may withdraw from this Agreement, such withdrawal to
take effect six months following the day on which written notice of the same is
served to the Participating States through the Executive Secretary of ESCAP. The
rights and obligations of a Participating State which has withdrawn from this
Agreement shall cease to apply as of that date. After that date, the Participating
States and the withdrawing country shall jointly decide whether to withdraw in
whole or in part the concessions received by the latter from the former and vice
versa. 
- 16 -
Chapter VIII – MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 33
Amendments to National Lists of Concessions
Amendments to annex I in pursuance of the provisions of article 29 shall consist
of:
( a ) The reduction of tariffs, border charges and fees, and non-tariff measures
on products already included in the National Lists of Concessions of the
Participating States;
( b ) The reduction of tariffs, border charges and fees, and non-tariff measures
on products not yet included in the National Lists of Concessions of the
Participating States;
( c ) The reduction of tariffs, border charges and fees, and non-tariff measures
on products included in the National Lists of Concessions of acceding States.
Article 34
Entry Into Force of National Lists of Concessions
Upon receipt by the Committee of the respective notification of intention by the
Participating State concerned, any amendment to annex I shall enter into force 30
days after the date on which the Committee, by a two-thirds majority vote, has
declared the compatibility of such proposed amendment with the objectives of this
Agreement. The Governments of the Participating States bind themselves to
undertake whatever internal administrative measure as may be required to comply
with this provision. The National Lists of Concessions of acceding States shall
enter into force 30 days after the dates on which the respective instruments of
accession have been deposited with the Executive Secretary of ESCAP.
Article 35
Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent any Participating State from taking action
and adopting measures which it considers necessary for the protection of its
national security, the protection of public morality, the protection of human,
animal and plant life and health, and the protection of articles of artistic, historical
and archaeological value. 
- 17 -
Article 36
Non-Application of the Agreement
This Agreement shall not apply as between any Participating States if they have
not entered into direct negotiations with each other and if either of them, at the
time of its signature, deposit of instrument of ratification or of accession, does not
consent to such application.
Article 37
Reservations
Except for the provisions made under article 36, this Agreement may not be signed
with reservations nor shall reservations be admitted at the time of ratification or
accession.
Article 38
Depositary
The original of this Agreement, as well as any amendments to the Agreement, shall
be deposited with the Executive Secretary of ESCAP, who shall transmit a certified
copy thereof to each Participating State.
Article 39
Registration of the Agreement
This Agreement shall be registered in accordance with the provisions of Article
102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 40
Name of the Agreement
This Agreement, which was hitherto called the First Agreement on Trade
Negotiations Among Developing Member Countries of the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, as also the Bangkok Agreement, shall
henceforth be called the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorized representatives of the
original signatory States, have signed the present Agreement on behalf of their
respective Governments. Done at Beijing, this second day of No