FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN TURKEY AND BULGARIA PREAMBLE The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of Bulgaria (hereinafter called the "Parties"); Reaffirming their commitment to the principles of market economy, which constitutes the basis for their economic relations, and their compliance with the rights and obligations arising out of the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994); Considering their common desire to participate actively in the process of international economic integration; Resolved to this end to eliminate progressively the obstacles to substantially all their mutual trade, in accordance with the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994); Considering the rights and the obligations arising out of the Agreement Establishing an Association between the Republic of Turkey and the European Economic Community, and the Europe Agreement Establishing an Association between the European Communities and their Member States, of one part, and the Republic of Bulgaria, of the other part; Convinced that this Agreement will create a new climate for their economic relations and, in particular, for the development of trade, investments and economic and technological co-operation; Have agreed as follows: Article 1 Objectives 1. The Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area, during a transitional period ending at the latest on 1 January 2002, in accordance with the provisions of the present Agreement and in conformity with those of the GATT 1994, in particular Article XXIV of the GATT 1994, and the Agreement Establishing the WTO. 2. The objectives of present Agreement are: (a) to promote, through the expansion of mutual trade, the harmonious development of the economic relations between the Parties; (b) to provide fair conditions of competition for trade between the Parties; (c) to contribute in this way, by removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade; (d) to enhance co-operation between the Parties. CHAPTER I Industrial products Article 2 Scope 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products originating in the Parties. 2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "industrial products" means products falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the exception of the products listed in Annex I. Article 3 Basic duties 1. For commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Customs Tariff of the Republic of Bulgaria shall be applied to the classification of goods for imports into the Republic of Bulgaria. The Customs Tariffs of the Republic of Turkey shall be applied t o the classification of goods for imports into the Republic of Turkey. 2. For each product, the basic duty to which successive reductions set out in this Agreement are to be applied shall be the Most Favoured Nation duty that was in force in the Parties, erga omnes, on date of the entry into force of this Agreement. 3. If after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff agreement concluded as a result of the GATT Uruguay Round, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 2 as from that date when such reductions are applied. 4. The reduced duties calculated in accordance with paragraph 3 shall be applied rounded to the first decimal place. 5. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective basic duties. Article 4 Customs duties on imports 1. No new customs duties on imports shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased, in trade between the Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 2. Customs duties on imports applied in the Republic of Bulgaria on products originating in the Republic of Turkey, other than those specified in Annex II, shall be abolished from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 3. Customs duties on imports applied in the Republic of Bulgaria on products originating in the Republic of Turkey, specified in Annex II, shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the timetable provided in that Annex. 4. Customs duties on imports applied in the Republic of Turkey on products originating in the Republic of Bulgaria, other than those specified in Annex III, shall be abolished from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 5. Customs duties on imports applied in the Republic of Turkey on products originating in the Republic of Bulgaria, specified in Annex III, shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the timetable provided in that Annex. Article 5 Charges equivalent to duties 1. No new charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on imports shall be introduced in trade between the Parties. 2. All charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on imports shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Article 6 Customs duties of a fiscal nature The provisions of Article 4 shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature. Article 7 Customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect 1. No new customs duties on exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties. 2. The Parties shall abolish between them on the date of entry into force of this Agreement all customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect. Article 8 Quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect 1. No new quantitative restrictions on exports or measures having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties. 2. All quantitative restrictions on exports from the Parties and measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Article 9 Quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect 1. No new quantitative restrictions on imports or measures having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties. 2. All quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect on imports of products originating in the Parties shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Article 1 0 Technical barriers to trade 1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to standards or technical regulations and related measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade. 2. The Parties shall co-operate and exchange information in the field of standardization, metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation with the aim of reducing technical barriers to trade. 3. Each Party, upon request of the other Party, shall provide information on particular individual cases of standards, technical regulations or related measures. 4. To eliminate technical barriers and effectively implement this Agreement, the Parties can, on the basis hereof, conclude an agreement for mutual recognition of test reports, certificates of conformity and other documents, directly or indirectly, related t o conformity assessment of products which are the subject of the goods exchanged between Parties, on the basis of regulations in force in the importing State. CHAPTER II Agricultural Products Processed Agricultural Products and Fishery Products Article 1 1 Scope 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural, processed agricultural and fishery products originating in the Parties. 2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "agricultural products" means products falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, including the products listed in Annex I. Article 1 2 Exchange of concessions 1. The Parties declare their readiness to foster, in so far as their agricultural policies allow, the harmonious development of trade in agricultural products, and to discuss this issue periodically within the Joint Committee. 2. In pursuance of this objective, the Parties grant each other the concessions specified in Protocol A, providing for measures to facilitate trade in agricultural products, in accordance with provisions of this Chapter and those laid down in this Protocol. 3. Taking account of : - the role of agriculture in their economies, - the development of trade in agricultural products between the Parties, - the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, - the rules of their agricultural policies, - the consequences of the multilateral trade negotiations under the GATT and of the WTO, the Parties shall examine the possibilities of granting each other further concessions. Article 1 3 Concessions and agricultural policies 1. Without prejudice to the concessions granted under Article 12, the provisions of this Chapter shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective agricultural policies of the Parties or application of any measures under such policies, including the implementation of the provisions of the Agreement on Agriculture negotiated under the auspices of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement Establishing WTO. 2. The Parties shall notify to the Joint Committee changes in their respective agricultural policies pursued or measures applied which may affect the conditions of agricultural trade among them as provided for in this Agreement. On the request of a Party prompt consultations within the Joint Committee shall be held to examine the situation. Article 1 4 Specific safeguards Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement and, in particular, Article 21, if, given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, imports of products originating in a Party, which are subject to concessions granted under this Agreement, cause serious disturbances to the markets of the other Party, the Party concerned shall immediately enter into consultations to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Party concerned may take measures it deems necessary. Article 1 5 Sanitary and phytosanitary measures 1. The Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, plant health and health matters in a non-discriminatory fashion and shall not introduce any new measures that have the effect of unduly obstructing trade. 2. The veterinary-sanitary measures and the work of the veterinary services will be in accordance with the Office International des Epizoodies Codex and other international conventions in this field. 3. The phytosanitary measures and the work of the plant protection services will be in accordance with the International Plant Protection Convention. CHAPTER III General Provisions Article 1 6 Right of establishment and supply of services 1. The Parties shall seek to widen the scope of this Agreement to cover the right of establishment of firms of one of the Parties in the territory of the other Party and the liberalization of the provision of services by one Party's firms to consumers of services in the other. 2. The Parties will discuss this cooperation in the Joint Committee with the aim of developing and deepening their relations under this Article. Article 1 7 Internal taxation 1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the like products originating in the Parties. 2. Products exported to one of the Parties may not benefit from repayment of internal taxes in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxes imposed on them. Article 1 8 Customs unions, free-trade areas and frontier trade 1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free-trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that these do not negatively affect the trade regime of the Parties and in particular the provisions concerning rules of origin provided for in this Agreement. 2. Upon request, consultations between the Parties shall take place within the Joint Committee, in order the Parties to inform each other about any agreement establishing such customs union or free-trade area. Article 1 9 Structural adjustment 1. Exceptional measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article 4 may be taken by any of the Parties in the form of increased customs duties. 2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important social problems. 3. Customs duties on imports applicable in the Party concerned to products originating in the other Party introduced by these measures may not exceed 25 per cent ad valorem and shall maintain an element of preference for products originating in the other Party. The total value of imports of the product which are subject to these measures may not exceed 15 per cent of total imports of industrial products from the other Party as defined in Chapter I, during the last year for which statistics are available. 4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding four years unless a longer duration is authorized by the Joint Committee. They shall cease to apply at the latest at the expiration of the transition period. 5. No such measures can be introduced in respect of a product if more than three years have elapsed since the elimination of all duties and quantitative restrictions or charges or measures having an equivalent effect concerning the product. 6. The Party concerned shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures it intends to take and, at the request of the other Party, consultations shall be held within the Joint Committee on such measures and the sectors to which they apply before they are applied. When taking such measures the Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the customs duties introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a phasing out of these duties starting at the latest two years after their introduction, at equal annual rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a different schedule. Article 2 0 Dumping If a Party finds that dumping, within the meaning of Article VI of the GATT 1994 is taking place in trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures against that practice in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994, and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 24. Article 2 1 Emergency action on import of particular products Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause, or threaten to cause: (a) serious injury to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the territory of the importing Party, or (b) serious disturbances in any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 24. Article 2 2 Re-export and serious shortage 1. Where compliance with the provisions of Article 7 and 8 leads to: (a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party maintains for the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or charges having equivalent effect; or (b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party; and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to major difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 24. 2. Measures taken as a result of the situation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner and be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. Article 2 3 State monopolies The Parties shall adjust progressively any State monopoly of a commercial character so as to ensure that by the end of the year following the entry into force of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals of the Parties. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to implement this objective. Article 2 4 Procedure for the application of safeguard measures 1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in the following paragraphs of the present Article, the Parties shall endeavour to solve any differences between them through direct consultations. 2. If a Party subjects imports of products liable to give rise to the situation referred to in Article 21 to an administrative procedure, the purpose of which is the rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other Party. 3. Without prejudice to paragraph 7 of the present Article, a Party which considers resorting to safeguard measures shall promptly notify the other Party thereof and supply all relevant information. Consultations between the Parties shall take place without delay in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a mutually acceptable solution. 4. (a) As regards Articles 20, 21 and 22 the Joint Committee shall examine the case or the situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to the difficulties notified by the Party concerned. In the case of the absence of such decision within thirty days of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the Party concerned may adopt the measures necessary in order to remedy the situation and shall notify to the other Party the measures taken. (b) As regards Article 36, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures after the consultations have been concluded or after a period of three months has elapsed from the date of first notification to the other Party. (c) As regards Articles 28 and 29, the Party concerned shall give the Joint Committee all the assistance required in order to examine the case and, where appropriate, eliminate the practice objected to. If the other Party fails to put an end t o the practice objected to within the period fixed by the Joint Committee or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an agreement within thirty working days, of the matter being referred to it, the Party concerned may adopt the appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the practice in question. 5. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee. They shall be limited, with regard to their extent and to their duration, t o what is strictly necessary in order to rectify the situation giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures as will least disturb the functioning of this Agreement. 6. The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of periodic consultations with a view to their relaxation or abolition as soon as possible, when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. 7. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination impossible, the Party concerned may, in the case of Articles 20, 21 and 2 2 apply forthwith the provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified without delay and consultations between the Parties shall take place as soon as possible in the Joint Committee. Article 2 5 Rules of origin and co-operation in customs administration 1. Protocol B lays down the rules of origin and related methods of administrative co-operation. 2. The Parties to this Agreement shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews by the Joint Committee and arrangements for administrative co-operation, t o ensure that the provisions of Protocol B and Articles 3 to 9, 13, 17 and 19 of the Agreement are effectively and harmoniously applied, and to reduce as far as possible the formalities imposed on trade, and to achieve mutually satisfactory for both Parties solutions to any difficulties arising from the operation of those provisions. Article 2 6 General exceptions This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants and environment; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; the protection of intellectual property; or rules relating to gold or silver or the conservation of exhaustible natural resources, if such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties. Article 2 7 Payments 1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to commercial transactions, other than those existing in the current legislation of the Parties, within framework of this Agreement between the Parties and the transfer of such payments to the territory of the Party where the creditor resides shall be free from any restrictions. 2. The Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions other than those existing in the current legislation of the Parties, on the grant, repayment or acceptance of short and medium term credits covering commercial transactions within the framework of this Agreement in which their resident participates. 3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, any measures concerning current payments connected with the movement of goods shall be in conformity with the conditions laid down under the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), with respect to Turkey, and the IMF Agreement, with respect to Bulgaria. Article 2 8 Rules of competition concerning undertakings 1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement, in so far as they may affect trade between the Parties: (a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition; (b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to the activities of all undertakings including public undertakings and undertakings to which the Parties grant special or exclusive rights. Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest or having the character of a revenue-producing monopoly, shall be subject to provisions of paragraph 1 in so far as the application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular public tasks assigned t o them. 3. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II the provisions stipulated in paragraph 1(a) shall not apply to such agreements, decisions and practices which form an integral part of a national market organization. 4. If a Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice t o the interest of that Party or material injury to its domestic industry, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 24. Article 2 9 State aid 1. Any aid granted by a State being a Party to this Agreement or through State resources in any form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favoring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods shall, in so far as it may affect trade between the Parties, be incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement. 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to products referred to in Chapter II. 3. The Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid measures, inter alia by reporting annually to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given and by providing to the other Party, upon request, information on aid schemes and on particular individual cases of state aid. 4. If a Party considers that a particular practice: (a) is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1, or (b) causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Party or material injury to its domestic industry, it may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the provisions laid down in Article 24. Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with the procedures and under the conditions laid down by the GATT 1994 and by the Agreement Establishing the WTO and any other relevant instruments negotiated under their auspices which are applicable between the Parties. Article 3 0 Balance of payments difficulties Where one of the Parties is in serious balance of payment difficulties, or under imminent threat thereof, the Party concerned may in accordance with the conditions established under the GATT 1994, under the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, with respect to Turkey, and the IMF Agreement, with respect t o Bulgaria, adopt restrictive measures, including measures related to imports, which shall be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The measures shall be progressively relaxed as balance of payments conditions improve and they shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The Party shall inform the other Party forthwith of their introduction and, whenever practicable a time schedule of their removal. Article 3 1 Protection of intellectual property 1. The Parties shall grant and ensure protection of intellectual property rights on a non-discriminatory basis, including measures for the grant and enforcement of such rights. Parties confirm their will to respect obligations arising from the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, constituting Annex 1C to the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the WTO, as well as other conventions on intellectual property protection, which are signed by both Parties, and listed in Annex IV. 2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "intellectual property" refer to all categories of intellectual property such as: copyright, neighbouring rights, inventor's rights, trademarks and decorative patterns, geographical indications, topographies of integrated circuits, industrial designs, utility models, patents, undisclosed information including know-how, new varieties of plants, as well as prevention of unfair competition. 3. The Parties to this Agreement shall take all necessary measures to enforce these rights against infringement, and particularly against counterfeiting and piracy. 4. In fulfilment of their commitments under international agreements and legislation in the field of intellectual property rights, the Parties to this Agreement shall not grant to nationals of the state of the other Party treatment less favorable than that accorded to nationals of any third State. 5. The Parties shall co-operate in matters of intellectual property. Upon request of a Party, they shall hold consultations of experts on these matters, in particular with respect to activities, relating to the existing or to future international conventions on the harmonization, administration and vindication of intellectual property rights, and on activities in international organizations, such as the WTO, World Intellectual Property Organization, as well as concerning the relations of the Parties with third countries with respect to the intellectual property matters. Article 3 2 Public procurement 1. The Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement markets an objective of this Agreement. 2. The Joint Committee shall review progress in this area annually. Article 3 3 The Joint Committee 1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Party shall be represented. 2. The Joint Committee shall be responsible for the administration of this Agreement and shall ensure its proper implementation . 3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall exchange information and, at the request of any Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee. The Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Parties. 4. The Joint Committee may, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 34, take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement. On other matters the Committee may make recommendations. Article 3 4 Procedures of the Joint Committee 1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet whenever necessary but at least once a year. Each Party may request that a meeting be held. 2. The Joint Committee shall act by common agreement. 3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Party to this Agreement has accepted a decision subject to the fulfilment of internal legal requirements, the decision shall enter into force, if no later date is contained therein, on the day the lifting of the reservation is notified. 4. For the purpose of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure which shall, inter alia, contain provisions for convening meetings and for the designation of the Chairman and his/her term of office. 5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working parties as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. Article 3 5 Security exceptions Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures which i t considers necessary: (a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests; (b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of international obligations or national policies, (i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or (ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or (iii) taken in time of war or other serious international tension . Article 3 6 Fulfilment of obligations 1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures required to fulfill their obligations under this Agreement. They shall ensure that the objectives set out in the Agreement are achieved. 2. If a Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation under this Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 24. Article 3 7 Evolutionary clause 1. Where a Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the economies of the Parties to develop and deepen the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Party. The Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine such a request and, where appropriate, to make recommendations, particularly with a view to opening negotiations. 2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be subject to ratification or approval by the Parties in accordance with their own procedures. Article 3 8 Amendments Amendments to this Agreement other than those decided upon in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 34, and which are approved by the Joint Committee, shall be submitted to the Parties for acceptance in accordance with the requirements of their respective legislation and shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the latter diplomatic note confirming that all procedures required by the national legislation of each Party for entry into force of the amendments have been completed . Article 3 9 Protocols and annexes Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement are an integral part of it. The Joint Committee may decide to amend Annexes and the Protocols. Article 4 0 Validity and withdrawal This Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period. Each Party to this Agreement may withdraw therefrom, by means of a written notification to the other Party. The termination shall take effect on the first day of the sixth month following the date on which the notification was received by the other Party. Article 4 1 Entry into force 1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the date when the Parties have notified each other that respective internal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled. 2. This Agreement shall be applied provisionally from the first day of the first month following the date of notification by the Republic of Turkey that its internal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized thereto, have signed the present Agreement. Done at Sofia, this 11th day of July 1 998 in two originals in English language, both text being equally authentic. For the Republic of Turkey For the Republic of Bulgaria