Economic Complementation Agreement No. 36 Signed between
the Governments of the States Parties to MERCOSUR and the Government of the Republic of Bolivia
The Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, MERCOSUR States Parties and the Government of the Republic of Bolivia will be called “Signatory Parties”. The Contracting Parties to this Agreement are MERCOSUR and the Republic of Bolivia.
 


CONSIDERING:


The need to strengthen the integration process of Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, through the conclusion of agreements open to the participation of the other ALADI member countries;


That the formation of free trade areas in Latin America constitutes an important means of approximating the existing integration schemes, in addition to being a fundamental stage for the integration process and the establishment of a hemispheric free trade area;


That regional economic integration is one of the essential instruments for the countries of Latin America to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples;


That the validity of democratic institutions constitutes an essential element for the development of the regional integration process;


The advisability of offering economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade and investment, in order to promote, in this way, a more active participation of the same in the economic and commercial relations between the Member States of MERCOSUR and Bolivia;


That the States Parties to MERCOSUR, through the signing of the 1991 Treaty of Asunción, have taken a significant step towards achieving the objectives of Latin American integration;


That the Andean Countries have formed the Andean Community as a body to achieve the objectives of regional integration;


That the Marrakesh Agreement, which creates the World Trade Organization, constitutes a framework of rights and obligations to which trade policies and the commitments of this Agreement will be adjusted;




That the integration process should cover aspects related to the development and full use of the physical infrastructure;


AGREE:


To enter into this Economic Complementation Agreement, under the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, Resolution No. 2 of the ALADI Council of Ministers and the rules established below.
TITLE I


OBJECTIVES
Article 1.- This Agreement has the following objectives:


- Establish the legal and institutional framework for cooperation and economic and physical integration that contributes to the creation of an expanded economic space that tends to facilitate the free circulation of goods and services, and the full use of productive factors;


- Form a free trade area between the Contracting Parties within a maximum period of 10 years, through the expansion and diversification of commercial exchange and the elimination of tariff and non-tariff restrictions that affect reciprocal trade;


- Promote the development and use of the physical infrastructure with special emphasis on the progressive liberalization of communications and fluvial and land transportation and the facilitation of navigation through the Paraná-Paraguay Waterway, Puerto Cáceres-Puerto Nueva Palmira.


- Establish a regulatory framework for the promotion and protection of investments.


- Promote complementarity and economic, energy, scientific and technological cooperation.


- Promote consultations, when appropriate, in trade negotiations carried out with third countries and blocks of extra-regional countries.
TITLE II


TRADE RELEASE PROGRAM
Article 2 . - The Contracting Parties will form a Free Trade Zone within a period of 10 years through a Trade Liberalization Program, which will be applied to products originating in and coming from the territories of the Contracting Parties. Said Program will consist of progressive and automatic reductions applicable to the taxes in force for third countries at the time of dispatch of the goods.


This Agreement incorporates the tariff preferences previously negotiated between the Signatory Parties in the Partial or Regional Agreements within the framework of ALADI, as reflected in the Trade Liberalization Program.


As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the preferences negotiated in the aforementioned Partial or Regional Agreements remain without effect.


For such purposes, they agree:
Article 3.- The Administrative Commission may speed up the Trade Liberalization Program set forth in this Title, for any product or group of products that the Contracting Parties mutually agree upon.


Article 4.- Those products exported by the Republic of Bolivia, whose relief resulting from the Trade Liberation Program implies the application of a lower tariff than that indicated in the corresponding list of Annex 8 (Adaptation Regime), for access to the market of which in question, the latter will be applied to them.


MERCOSUR could consider, for some particular cases, maintaining in favor of Bolivia the Historical Heritage preference for products included in the Adjustment Regime.


Article 5.- "Customs duties" shall be understood as customs duties and any other tax of equivalent effect, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affects imports. Similar rates and surcharges are not included in this concept when they are equivalent to the cost of the services rendered.


The Signatory Parties may not establish other levies and charges of equivalent effects other than customs duties, other than those in force on the date of signing this Agreement and which are included in Complementary Notes to this.


Article 6.- Without prejudice to the provisions of the Agreements of the World Trade Organization, the Signatory Parties will not apply new export taxes to reciprocal trade, nor will they increase the incidence of the existing ones, in a discriminatory way between them, from the entry into force of this Agreement.


The current liens are included in Complementary Notes to this Agreement.


Article 7 .-Neither Contracting Party shall impose or maintain non-tariff restrictions on the import or export of products from its territory to that of the other Contracting Party, whether applied through quotas, licenses or through other measures, except as provided in the Agreements of the Organization World Trade.


Notwithstanding the previous paragraph, the existing measures that appear in the Complementary Notes to this Agreement may be maintained.


Article 8.- The Administrative Commission will adopt the necessary measures to ensure the elimination of the Complementary Notes to this Agreement.


Article 9.-The Contracting Parties will exchange, at the time of entry into force of this Agreement, the tariffs in force and will keep each other informed, through the competent national bodies, of any subsequent modifications and will send a copy of them to the General Secretariat of the ALADI for your information.


Article 10.- No provision of this Agreement shall be interpreted to prevent a Contracting Party from adopting or applying a measure in accordance with Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and/or with Articles XX and XXI of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs. and Trade (GATT).


Article 11.-The Contracting Parties will apply the tariff in force for third countries to all goods produced or coming from free zones or special customs areas of any nature, located in the territory of the other Contracting Party.


These goods must be duly identified.


Notwithstanding the foregoing, the legal provisions in force in each of the Signatory Parties shall apply for the entry, into the market of the MERCOSUR States Parties or of Bolivia, of goods coming from free zones or special customs areas located in their own territories.
TITLE III


ORIGIN REGIME
Article 12.- : The Contracting Parties will apply the Origin Regime contained in Annex 9 of this Agreement to imports made under the Trade Liberation Program .
TITLE IV


TREATMENT IN THE MATTER OF INTERNAL TAXES
Article 13.- : In terms of taxes, rates or other internal taxes, products originating in the territory of a Signatory Party will enjoy, in the territory of the other Signatory Party, a treatment no less favorable than that applicable to national products in circumstances Similar. 
TITLE V


UNFAIR PRACTICES IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE
- Dumping and Subsidies -
AND RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES OF COMPETITION
Article 14.- In the application of measures destined to counteract the distortions in competition generated by dumping practices and subsidies, the Contracting Parties will be based on the Agreements of the World Trade Organization in these matters.


Article 15.-: In the event that one of the Signatory Parties of a Contracting Party applies antidumping or countervailing measures on imports from third countries, it will inform the other Contracting Party of them, for the evaluation and follow-up of imports. in its market of the products subject to the measure, through the competent national bodies.


Article 16.-If one of the Contracting Parties considers that the other Contracting Party is making imports from third markets under conditions of dumping or subsidies, it may request that consultations be carried out in order to find out the real conditions of entry of those products.


The Contracting Party or the Signatory Party consulted will give adequate consideration and response within a period not exceeding 15 business days. The consultations will be carried out in the place that the Contracting Parties agree and both their development and conclusions will be brought to the attention of the Administrative Commission of the Agreement.


Article 17.-The Contracting Parties will promote the actions that are necessary to have, as soon as possible, a regulatory scheme based on internationally accepted provisions and practices, which constitutes the appropriate framework to discipline eventual practices that restrict competition.
TITLE VI


INCENTIVES FOR EXPORTS
Article 18.- In relation to export incentives, the Contracting Parties will base themselves on the Agreements of the World Trade Organization.


Article 19.- The products, which incorporate inputs imported temporarily or under the draw-back regime in their manufacture, will not benefit from the Trade Liberalization Program established in this Agreement as of January 1, 2002.


The Administrative Commission will analyze the products that, exceptionally, may benefit from this Regime for an additional period of two years.
TITLE VII


SAFEGUARDS
Article 20 .- The Contracting Parties shall adopt the Safeguards Regime contained in Annex 10 .
TITLE VIII


SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Article 21 .- Controversies that may arise from the application of this Agreement will be resolved in accordance with the Dispute Resolution Regime contained in Annex 11 .
TITLE IX


CUSTOMS VALUATION
Article 22.- The Agreement relating to the application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994, of the World Trade Organization, will regulate the Customs Valuation Regime applied by the Contracting Parties in their reciprocal trade.


The Contracting Parties agree not to make use, for reciprocal trade, of the extension of the period provided for in numeral 1 and what is stipulated in numeral 2 of Annex III of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 of the World Trade Organization , regarding the application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994.
TITLE X


TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS, SANITARY AND
PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES AND OTHER RELATED MEASURES
Article 23.- The Contracting Parties shall not adopt, maintain or apply standardization measures, conformity assessment, metrological provisions, sanitary, phytosanitary or environmental standards or measures and technical regulations, which imply creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.


Article 24.- For these purposes, the Contracting Parties shall be governed by the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the World Trade Organization.


Article 25.-The Contracting Parties, when they deem necessary, shall establish coordinated guidelines and criteria for the compatibility of standards and technical regulations, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, and other related measures. Efforts should also be made to identify production areas in which it is possible to harmonize inspection, control and conformity assessment procedures, which allow mutual recognition of the results of these procedures.
TITLE XI


COMPLEMENTATION AND EXCHANGE BY PRODUCTIVE SECTORS
Article 26.- The Contracting Parties will promote complementation and industrial, commercial and technological integration, in order to achieve the maximum use of available resources, increase trade between the Contracting Parties and enable the export of goods produced to third markets. in their territories.


Article 27.- The Contracting Parties will stimulate joint investments that allow the development of productive activities of goods and services, be it through the constitution of multinational companies, joint venture contracts or other modalities.


Article 28.-The actions to promote a progressive economic complementation between the Contracting Parties will be carried out through Business Agreements between companies, both public and private, for the production of goods and the provision of services.


The Business Agreements will be oriented to the development of new specific activities in the territories of the Contracting Parties, as well as to the complementation, integration and/or rationalization of existing activities and will cover the exchange of goods, services, technology and the association of capitals.


Business Agreements should preferably refer to those activities for the production of goods and services that meet all or some of the following characteristics:
a) Activities related to the foreign trade of the Contracting Parties that require specific modalities of cooperation between economic agents of the same, to ensure their viability;

b) Activities that, due to their nature or development characteristics, require a more specific or casuistic approach; and

c) Activities related to the defense and preservation of the environment.
Article 29.- Complementation projects, after being negotiated and agreed upon in the Advisory Committee referred to in Title XVIII of this Agreement, will be submitted for consideration by the Administrative Commission referred to in Article 39.
TITLE XII


PROMOTION AND EXCHANGE OF COMMERCIAL INFORMATION
Article 30.- The Contracting Parties will support themselves in the programs and tasks of diffusion and commercial promotion, facilitating the activity of official and private missions, the organization of fairs and exhibitions, the holding of informative seminars, market studies and other actions aimed at to the best use of the Commercial Liberalization Program and of the opportunities offered by the procedures agreed upon in commercial matters.


Article 31.-For the purposes provided in the previous article, the Contracting Parties will schedule activities that facilitate reciprocal promotion by public and private entities in both Contracting Parties, for the products of their interest, included in the Trade Liberalization Program of this Agreement.


Article 32.- The Signatory Parties will exchange information about the regional and global offers and demands of their export products.
TITLE XIII


SERVICES


Article 33.- The Contracting Parties will promote the adoption of measures tending to facilitate the provision of services. For this purpose, the Contracting Parties may commission studies on the subject, taking into account the provisions in force at the World Trade Organization.
TITLE XIV


PHYSICAL INTEGRATION
Article 34.- The Contracting Parties, recognizing the importance of the physical integration process as an essential instrument for the creation of an expanded economic space, undertake to facilitate the transit of people and the circulation of goods, promote trade between the Contracting Parties and towards third markets, through the establishment and full operation of land, river, sea and air links.


To this end, the Signatory Parties will negotiate an Additional Physical Integration Protocol, which will contemplate the issue of road interconnections, in the broader context of the establishment, with third parties, of bi-oceanic corridors.
TITLE XV


INVESTMENTS AND DOUBLE TAXATION
Article 35.- The Signatory Parties will seek to encourage reciprocal investment, with the aim of intensifying bilateral trade and technology flows, in accordance with their respective national legislation.


Article 36.- The Signatory Parties will examine the possibility of signing Agreements on Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments. The Bilateral Agreements signed hereby between the Signatory Parties will remain in full force.


Article 37. - The Signatory Parties will examine the possibility of signing Agreements to avoid double taxation. The Bilateral Agreements signed herein will remain in full force.
TITLE XVI


SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL COOPERATION
Article 38.- The Contracting Parties will seek to facilitate and support forms of collaboration and joint initiatives in science and technology, as well as joint research projects. 


For such purposes, they may agree on reciprocal technical assistance programs, aimed at raising the levels of productivity of the aforementioned sectors, obtaining the maximum use of available resources and stimulating the improvement of their competitive capacity, both in the regional and international markets. .


The aforementioned technical assistance will be developed among the competent national institutions, through survey programs of the same.


The Contracting Parties will promote the exchange of technology in the areas of agriculture, industry, technical standards, and matters of animal and plant health and others considered to be of mutual interest.
TITLE XVII


ADMINISTRATION AND EVALUATION OF THE AGREEMENT
Article 39.- The administration and evaluation of this Agreement will be in charge of an Administrative Commission made up of the MERCOSUR Common Market Group, by a Contracting Party, and a National Commission chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship of Bolivia, through of the National Secretariat for International Economic Relations, by the other Contracting Party.


The Administrative Commission will be constituted within sixty (60) calendar days from the effective date of this Agreement and at its first meeting it will establish its internal regulations.


1. The Delegations of both Contracting Parties will be chaired by the representative designated by each of them.


2.The Administrative Commission will meet in ordinary sessions once a year, in a place and on a date determined by mutual agreement, and in extraordinary sessions, when the Contracting Parties, after consultation, so agree.


The Administrative Commission will adopt its decisions by agreement of the Contracting Parties.


Article 40.- The Administrative Commission will have the following powers:
a. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement and its Additional Protocols and Annexes.

b. Determine in each case the modalities and deadlines in which the negotiations aimed at achieving the objectives of this Agreement will be carried out, being able to set up working groups for that purpose.

c. Periodically evaluate the progress of the Trade Liberalization Program and the general operation of this Agreement, and must present an annual report to the Contracting Parties in this regard, as well as on the fulfillment of the general objectives set forth in Article 1 of this Agreement.

d.Negotiate and agree on the intergovernmental understandings that are required to put into practice the Business Agreements provided for in Title XVIII.

and. Promote and organize, in coordination and with the support of regional and international organizations, business meetings, business conferences and other similar activities, aimed at facilitating the identification of sectors that could be the subject of business agreements.

F. Evaluate the development of business agreements.

g. Contribute to the solution of disputes in accordance with the provisions of Annex 11 .

h.Monitor the application of the commercial disciplines agreed between the Contracting Parties, such as origin regime, safeguard clauses, defense of competition and unfair trade practices.

Yo. Establish, when appropriate, procedures for the application of the commercial disciplines contemplated in this Agreement and propose to the Contracting Parties possible modifications to said disciplines.

j. Be aware of the consultations provided for in Article 16 of this Agreement regarding unfair trade practices.

k.To convene the Contracting Parties to comply with the objectives established in Title X of this Agreement, regarding Standards and Technical Regulations, Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and other related measures.

he. Establish the modalities of coordination and participation of the Business Advisory Committee referred to in Article 41. m. Review the Trade Liberalization Program in cases where one of the Contracting Parties substantially modifies it. selectively and/or generally, its general tariffs significantly affecting the other Contracting Party. no.



Exchange information on the negotiations that the Contracting Parties carry out with third countries to formalize Agreements not provided for in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty.

o. Comply with the other tasks that are entrusted to the Administrative Commission by virtue of the provisions of this Agreement, its Additional Protocols and other Instruments signed in its scope, or by the Contracting Parties.

p. Modify the Rules of Origin and establish or modify specific requirements.

Q. Establish the operating procedures to which the re-exports of goods originating from the Contracting Parties must comply.
TITLE XVIII


OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Article 41.- In order to promote and stimulate the active participation of the business sectors in the tasks related to the application of this Agreement, the Business Advisory Committee is established, which will be made up of representatives of the top business organizations of the Signatory Parties. .


This Committee will have the character of a consultative body of the Administrative Commission.
TITLE XIX


GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 42. Due to their strictly bilateral nature, the provisions of the Partial Scope Agreement for Trade Promotion No. 6 and the Partial Scope Agreements for Economic Complementation Nos. 15, 19, 26 and 29 signed in within the scope of ALADI, not referred to the Trade Liberalization Program and that have not been dealt with in this Agreement.


Article 43. - The Contracting Party, which enters into an Agreement not provided for in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, must:
a) Inform the other Contracting Party, within a period of fifteen (15) days of signing the Agreement, accompanying the text thereof and its complementary instruments.

b) Announce, on the same occasion, the willingness to negotiate, within a period of ninety (90) days, concessions equivalent to those granted and received globally.

c) In the event that a mutually satisfactory solution is not reached in the negotiations provided for in subparagraph b), the Contracting Parties will negotiate equivalent compensation within a period of ninety (90) days.

d)If an agreement is not reached in the negotiations established in letter c), the affected Contracting Party may resort to the dispute settlement procedure in force in this Agreement.
Article 44. - In the event that Bolivia considers totally or partially applying the price band system provided for in the Andean legislation, relative to the importation of merchandise, it will previously present this situation within the scope of the Administrative Commission.
TITLE XX


CONVERGENCE
Article 45.- On the occasion of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference, referred to in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the Contracting Parties will examine the possibility of proceeding with the progressive multilateralization of the treatments provided for in this Agreement.
TITLE XXI


ACCESSION
Article 46.- In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement is open to adhesion, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries.


The adhesion will be formalized, once its terms have been negotiated between the Contracting Parties and the adhering country, through the execution of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement, which will enter into force 30 days after being deposited with the ALADI General Secretariat.
TITLE XXII


VALIDITY
Article 47.- This Agreement will enter into force on February 28, 1997 and will have an indefinite duration.
TITLE XXIII


COMPLAINT
Article 48.- The Contracting Party that wishes to denounce this Agreement must notify its decision to the other Contracting Parties 60 days in advance of depositing the respective denunciation instrument with the ALADI General Secretariat.


From the formalization of the denunciation, the rights acquired and the obligations contracted under this Agreement will cease for the denouncing Contracting Party, maintaining those referring to the Trade Liberation Program, the non-application of non-tariff measures and other aspects that the Contracting Parties, together with the denouncing Party, agree within 60 days after the formalization of the denunciation. These rights and obligations will continue in force for a period of two years from the date of deposit of the respective denunciation instrument, unless the Contracting Parties agree on a different term.


The cessation of obligations with respect to the commitments adopted in terms of investments, infrastructure works, energy integration and others that are agreed, will be governed by the provisions of the Protocols agreed on these matters.
TITLE XXIV


AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS


Article 49.- Amendments or additions to this Agreement may only be made by agreement of all the Contracting Parties. They will be submitted to the approval of the Administrative Commission and formalized by Protocol.
TITLE XXV


FINAL PROVISIONS


Article 50.- The General Secretariat of ALADI will be the depositary of this Agreement, of which it will send duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Parties .




Done in Fortaleza, on December 17, 1996. (Signed:) For the Argentine Republic: Guido Di Tella; For the Federative Republic of Brazil: Luiz Felipe Palmeira Lampreia; For the Republic of Paraguay: Ruben Melgarejo Lanzoni; For the Eastern Republic of Uruguay: Carlos Pérez del Castillo; For the Republic of Bolivia: Antonio Araníbar Quiroga.
ANNEX TEXT:

ANNEX 9

ORIGIN REGIME
Article 1

This Annex establishes the rules of origin applicable to the exchange of goods resulting from the Economic Complementation Agreement, entered into by the Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, States Parties to MERCOSUR. , on the one hand, and the Government of the Republic of Bolivia, on the other, for the purposes of:

1.- Classification and determination of the originating merchandise;

2.- Issuance of certificates of origin; and

3.- Verification, Control and Sanctions Processes.

Scope of application
Article 2

The Contracting Parties shall apply to the goods subject to the Trade Liberalization Program of the Agreement, the present Regime of Origin, without prejudice to the fact that it may be modified by Resolution of the Administrative Commission of the Agreement.

To access the Liberalization Program, the goods must prove compliance with the origin, in accordance with the provisions of this Annex.

During the period in which the goods registered in Annexes 5 and 6 of the Agreement do not receive preferential treatment, the provisions of this Annex shall apply only to the Signatory Parties involved in the bilateral preferential treatment provided for in Annex 2 of the Agreement.

Origin Qualification
Article 3

1) The following will be considered original:

a) Goods that are manufactured entirely in the territory of one or more of the Signatory Parties, when materials originating from the Signatory Parties were used solely and exclusively in their preparation;

b) merchandise of the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms, including hunting and fishing, extracted, harvested or collected, born and raised in the territories of the Signatory Parties or within their territorial, patrimonial waters and exclusive economic zones;

c)Sea products extracted outside their territorial, patrimonial waters or exclusive economic zones by ships under their flags or leased by companies established in their territories, and processed in their economic zones, even when they have been subjected to primary packaging and preservation processes, necessary for its commercialization;

d) Goods processed on board factory ships registered or registered by one of the Signatory Parties from fish, crustaceans and other marine species, obtained from the sea by ships registered or registered by one of the Signatory Parties and carrying its flag;

and)goods obtained by one of the Signatory Parties or by a person of the Signatory Parties, from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that such Party or person has the right to exploit said seabed or subsoil;

f) Goods obtained from outer space, provided that they are obtained by one of the Signatory Parties or by a person from a Signatory Party and that they are processed in one of said Parties;

g)Goods made with non-originating materials, provided that they result from a transformation process, carried out in the territories of the Signatory Parties that gives them a new individuality. This individuality is present in the fact that the merchandise is classified in a heading other than the materials, according to the NALADISA nomenclature;

h) In the event that the provisions of literal g) above cannot be met, because the transformation process does not imply a departure jump in the NALADISA nomenclature, it will suffice that the CIF port of destination value or CIF maritime port of the non-originating materials does not exceed 40% of the FOB export value of the final merchandise;

Yo)the goods resulting from assembly or assembly operations carried out within the territory of one of the Signatory Parties, despite complying with the starting point, using non-originating materials, when the CIF value of the destination port or CIF maritime port of those materials does not exceed 40 % of the FOB value of the final merchandise;

j) Goods that meet the specific requirements, in accordance with Article 4.

2) Goods that, despite being classified in a different heading, are the result of operations or processes carried out in the territory of the Signatory Parties by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed, will not be considered originating, when in those operations or processes non-originating materials or inputs were exclusively used and consist of:

a) simple assemblies or assemblies, packaging, division into batches or volumes, selection, classification, marking, composition of assortments of merchandise or other operations that do not imply a process of substantial transformation of the characteristics of the merchandise;

b) operations designed to ensure the conservation of the products during transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, freezing, addition of substances, extraction of damaged parts and similar operations;

c) operations such as simple dusting, shaking, husking, shelling, maceration, drying, thinning, classification, selection, fractioning, washing, painting and trimming;

d)the simple formation of sets of products;

e) the packaging, packaging or repackaging;

f) the division or assembly of packages;

g) the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;

h) mixtures of products, provided that the characteristics of the product obtained are not essentially different from the characteristics of the products that have been mixed;

i) dilution or filtration in water or another substance that does not alter the physical-chemical composition of the product;

j) the simple meeting, assembly, or assembly of parts or pieces to constitute a complete product;

k) the sacrifice of animals; and

he)the accumulation of two or more of these operations.

3) For purposes of determining the CIF value in the weighting of non-originating materials that integrate or are incorporated into exported merchandise referred to in subparagraphs h) and i) of subsection 1) of this Article, it will be considered for Bolivia and Paraguay as port of destination, any maritime or fluvial port located in the territory of the Signatory Parties or in that of neighboring countries, including warehouses and free zones or CIF Frontera when transport is carried out by land.

Specific origin requirements
Article 4

The Contracting Parties may agree to the establishment of specific requirements, in those cases in which it is considered that the general norms previously established are not adequate to qualify the origin of a merchandise or group of merchandise. These specific requirements will prevail over the general criteria.

Goods with specific requirements are included in Appendix No. 1 of this Annex.

Article 5

In establishing the specific requirements of origin referred to in Article 4, as well as in the modification of such requirements, the Administrative Commission of the Agreement, when appropriate, will take as a basis, individually or jointly, the following elements:

I. Materials and other inputs used in production:

a) Raw materials:

i) Preponderant raw material or that gives the merchandise its essential characteristic, and
ii) Main raw materials

b) Parts or pieces

i) Part or piece that gives the merchandise its final characteristic;
ii) Main parts or pieces; and
iii) Percentage that the parts or pieces represent with respect to the total value

c) Other inputs

II. Process of transformation or elaboration used

III. Proportion of the value of non-originating imported materials in relation to the total value of the merchandise.

Article 6

For the purposes of exercising the powers referred to in Article 40 paragraph p) of the Agreement, any of the Signatory Parties must submit a well-founded request to the Administrative Commission, providing the respective background information.

Accumulation
Article 7


For compliance with origin, materials originating in the territory of any of the Signatory Parties, incorporated into a specific merchandise in the territory of another of the Signatory Parties, will be considered as originating in the territory of the latter.

When both Contracting Parties have individually entered into Free Trade Agreements with the same third country, a member of ALADI, not a member of the Agreement of which this Annex is a part, the necessary actions will be promoted so that the cumulation of origin provided for in this Article can be applied. to materials originating in the territory of that third country, incorporated into the exported product, as long as the aforementioned materials are fully tax-free in the two Agreements.

Of the Expedition, Transport and Transit of the goods
Article 8

In order for the goods to benefit from preferential treatment, they must have been shipped directly from the exporting Signatory Party to the importing Signatory Party. For this purpose, direct dispatch is considered:

a) goods transported without passing through the territory of any State not participating in the Agreement;

b) Goods in transit through one or more States not participating in the Agreement, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the surveillance of the competent customs authority, provided that:

i) transit is justified for geographical reasons or considerations related to transportation requirements;

ii) were not intended for trade, use or employment in the non-participating State of transit;

iii) do not undergo, during transport or storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or handling to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

Article 9

The intervention of commercial operators from another Signatory Party or from a State not participating in the Agreement will be accepted, provided that, in compliance with the provisions a) and b), of article 8, there is a commercial invoice issued by the intervener and the Certificate of Origin issued. by the authority of the exporting Signatory Party, in which case it must be recorded in the Certificate of Origin.

Issuance of Certificates of Origin
Article 10

In all cases subject to the application of the rules of origin established in this Annex, the Certificate of Origin is the essential document for verifying the origin of the goods. Said certificate must unequivocally indicate that the merchandise to which it refers originates from the Signatory Party in question under the terms and provisions of this Annex.

Article 11

This certificate must contain an Affidavit from the final producer or exporter of the merchandise in which it states full compliance with the provisions on origin of the Agreement.

Article 12

The issuance of certificates of origin will be the responsibility of official departments, to be nominated by each Signatory Party, which may delegate their issuance to other public bodies or private entities, acting in national or state, provincial or departmental jurisdiction. as appropriate. An official department in each Signatory Party will be responsible for controlling the issuance of certificates of origin.

In the delegation of competence for the issuance of certificates of origin, the official departments will take into consideration the representativeness, technical capacity and suitability of the class entities for the provision of such service.

Each Signatory Party will notify the Administrative Commission of the name of the corresponding official control division, within a period of no more than thirty (30) days, counted from the effective date of the Agreement.

Within a period of no more than sixty (60) days, the Signatory Parties will notify the Administrative Commission and the ALADI General Secretariat of the name of the official departments and private entities authorized to issue certificates of origin, with the registration of the names and facsimile of the signatures of the officials accredited for this purpose.

The records of the names and facsimile of signatures referred to in the preceding paragraph will enter into force within a period of sixty (60) calendar days, counted from the date they were communicated. Until then, the records and facsimile currently in force before ALADI will remain in force.-

Within thirty (30) calendar days from the communication, the modifications made to the register of signatures and facsimile and in the distributions will enter into force. officials or delegated bodies. Until then, the records and facsimile prior to the modification will remain valid.

Article 13

The certificate of origin must meet at least the following requirements:

a) Be issued by authorized entities, with the autograph signature of the authorized official(s);

b) Identification of the exporting and importing Signatory Party;

c) Identification of the exporter and importer;

d) Identify the merchandise to which it refers (NALADISA code, tariff gloss, denomination, quantity and measurement, FOB value);

e) Affidavit referred to in article 11.

Article 14

The request for a Certificate of Origin must be accompanied by a statement with the necessary background that demonstrates in documentary form that the merchandise meets the required requirements, such as:

a) Name or company name of the applicant

b) Legal domicile

c) Name of the merchandise to be exported and its NALADISA position

d) FOB value of the merchandise to be exported

e) Demonstrative elements of the merchandise components indicating:

i) National materials, components and/or parts and pieces;
ii) Materials, components and/or parts and pieces originating from another Signatory Party, indicating:

- Origin
- NALADISA codes,
- CIF value in US dollars,
- Percentage they represent in the value of the final merchandise.

iii) Component materials and/or non-originating parts and pieces:

- NALADISA codes,
- CIF value in US dollars,
- Percentage they represent in the value of the final merchandise.

The description of the merchandise must coincide with the one that corresponds to the NALADISA code and with the one registered in the commercial invoice, as well as in the Certificate of Origin, which accompanies the documents presented for customs clearance. The referred invoice may be issued in a State not participating in the Agreement.

The aforementioned statements must be submitted sufficiently in advance for each certification application. 

In the case of goods that were regularly exported, and as long as the process and the component materials were not altered, the declaration may be valid for 180 days from the date of its issuance.

Article 15

The certificate of origin must be issued, at the most, within five (5) business days following the presentation of the respective application and will be valid for 180 days from its issuance. Said certificate will not be valid if it is not duly completed in all its fields. Before December 31, 1997, the Administrative Commission will define a new format to which the certification of origin will conform.

Certificates of origin may not be issued before the date of issuance of the commercial invoice corresponding to the operation in question, but rather on the same date or within the following sixty days.

The certificates of origin may be issued no later than 10 business days after the final shipment of the goods they certify.

Until December 31, 1997, the origin form approved by the ALADI Representatives Committee, Agreement No. 25, of September 15, 1983, will remain in force.

Article 16

The certifying entities must correlatively number the certificates issued and file a copy for a minimum period of two years, from the date of issue. Said file must also include all the background information that served as the basis for the issuance of the Certificate.

Authorized entities will keep a permanent record of all certificates of origin issued, which must contain at least the number of the certificate, the applicant for it, and the date of issue.

Verification and Control Processes
Article 17

Notwithstanding the presentation of the certificate of origin under the conditions established by this Annex and those that may be established by the Administrative Commission of the Agreement, the customs authorities may, in the case of well-founded doubts in relation to the authenticity or veracity of the certificate, require the official department of the exporting Signatory Party responsible for the verification and control of certificates of origin, additional information in order to clarify the matter.

If within a period of twenty (20) days, counted from the date of the request, the required information has not been received or it does not allow elucidating the matter, the investigations of the case may be initiated, with the knowledge of the official control department. of the exporting Signatory Party.

Article 18

In the verification process, the importing Signatory Party, through the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Party, may:

a) address written questionnaires to exporters or producers in the territory of another Signatory Party;

b) request, in justified cases, that this authority carry out the pertinent steps in order to be able to carry out verification visits to the facilities of an exporter, in order to examine the production processes, the facilities used in the production of the merchandise , as well as other actions that contribute to the verification of its origin; 

c) carry out other procedures that may be established through the Administrative Commission.

For these purposes, the Signatory Parties may facilitate reciprocal External Audits, in accordance with national legislation.

The results of the verification must be communicated to the official control division of the importing Signatory Party.

Article 19

Once an investigation has been opened by the customs authority, it may order the suspension of the preferential tariff treatment or adopt the measures it deems necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest, but in no case will it stop the import process of the merchandise.

Investigations aimed at elucidating issues related to the certification of origin, will not require a period of more than one hundred and fifty (150) days.

Once the case has been resolved, the resolution will be finalized, the rights received in excess will be refunded or the guarantees will be released or made effective, as appropriate.

Article 20

The customs authority must notify the initiation of the investigation to the importer and to the authority in charge of verification and control in the exporting Signatory Party, from which it will request the necessary information for said investigation.

Article 21

The official department responsible for the verification and control of the Certificates of Origin in the exporting Signatory Party, must provide the information requested by application of the provisions of Article 17, within a period not exceeding 30 business days, counted from the date of receipt of the respective order. The information will be confidential and will be used exclusively to clarify such cases.

In cases where the requested information was not provided or was unsatisfactory, the customs authority of the Signatory Party importing such merchandise may order, preventively, the suspension of preferential treatment of new operations referring to the same merchandise from the same operator.

Article 22

Once the investigation instance has been exhausted, if the conclusions are not satisfactory to those involved, the Signatory Parties will hold bilateral consultations. If the results of these consultations are not satisfactory to the affected Signatory Party, it may resort to the Dispute Settlement system of the Agreement.

Penalties
Article 23

When it is verified that the Certificate of Origin does not comply with the provisions contained in this Annex or when falsification, adulteration or any other circumstance that gives rise to fiscal or economic damage is detected in said Certificate, or in its background, Signatories may adopt the corresponding sanctions in accordance with their respective legislation.

In the case of non-compliance with the provisions established in this Annex, as well as in the case of adulteration or falsification of the documents related to the origin of the merchandise, the Signatory Parties will adopt the measures in accordance with their respective legislation, against the producers. , exporters, entities issuing certificates of origin and any other person who is responsible for such transgressions, in order to avoid violations of the principles of the Agreement.

Definitions
Article 24

For the purposes of this Annex, the following shall be understood as:

a) Materials: includes raw materials, inputs, intermediate products and parts and pieces used in the manufacture of goods,

b) NALADISA: identifies the Tariff Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association -Harmonized System-.

c) Heading: refers to the first four digits of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or the NALADISA Nomenclature,

d) Jump Heading: change of the tariff classification at the four-digit level of the Harmonized System for Designation. and Merchandise Coding or NALADISA Nomenclature,

e)Regional Content: added value resulting from operations or processes carried out in one or more of the Signatory Countries.

TRANSITORY DISPOSITIONS

Article 25

As an exception, until January 1, 2002, products originating in the Republic of Bolivia may qualify as origin, for the merchandise included in Appendix 2 literal a) of this Annex, provided that the non-originating materials of the Signatory Parties do not exceed 50% of the FOB export value of the final merchandise.

Likewise, a special treatment is established until January 1, 2000, for the goods included in Appendix 2 literal b) of this Annex.

In the cases expressly indicated in Appendix 2 literal b), the special treatment established will apply until January 1, 2002.

The Administrative Commission may consider, exceptionally, the extension of said regime for some products until January 1, 2001.

In the case of products included in the transitory regime of origin in favor of Bolivia, for which a specific requirement agreed as a final rule of origin, said specific requirement will be enforceable, simultaneously, to preferential imports from both Contracting Parties as of the date already agreed for the transitional regime.

Merchandise included in headings 6401 to 6405, while the transience is in force (50% of imported inputs), will not accredit origin when they have inputs of subheading 6406.10 not originating from the Signatory Parties.

The conditions established in the list called "List of products for special treatment" (60% of non-originating materials from the Signatory Parties) will also be applied by Bolivia to imports from Paraguay.
ANNEX 10

SAFEGUARDS REGIME

APPLICATION OF SAFEGUARD MEASURES

Article 1

The Contracting Parties may apply, exceptionally, and under the conditions established in this Annex, safeguard measures on the importation of products that benefit from the Trade Liberation Program established within the scope of the MERCOSUR-Bolivia Economic Complementation Agreement, meaning for these, the total or partial suspension of compliance with the commitments in terms of tariff preferences resulting from the Agreement.

Unless agreed between the Contracting Parties, such safeguard measures may not be used once the Free Trade Area provided for in the Agreement is definitively formed, that is, once all products in the tariff universe reach the preferential reduction of 100%. 

The provisions of this Annex shall not prevent the Contracting Parties from applying, when appropriate, the measures provided for in Article XIX of the GATT 1994 (Emergency measures on the import of specific products), according to the interpretation given by the Agreement on Safeguards. of the World Trade Organization, if imports from the Signatory Parties warrant such application, according to the provisions of Article 9 of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.

Article 2

The safeguard measures applied in accordance with this Annex shall consist of:

a) the suspension of the increase in preferences programmed in the Agreement, or

b) the reduction or elimination of the margin of preference. In this case, the preference for an import quota in favor of the other Contracting Party will be preserved, in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.

At the end of the period of application of the measure, the margin of preference applied to the product subject to it, will be the one that would be in force if the measure had not been applied.

Article 3

The Contracting Parties will only apply a safeguard measure to a product if it has been determined by an investigation that the preferential imports of that product in one of the Contracting Parties or in one of the Signatory Parties have increased in such quantity, in absolute terms or in relation to what is produced domestically and are carried out under conditions that cause or threaten to cause serious damage to the domestic production of similar or directly competitive products.

Article 4

When MERCOSUR applies a safeguard measure, it may do so:

a) as a single entity, in which case, the requirements for determining the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage will be based on the existing conditions in MERCOSUR considered as a whole;

b) On behalf of one of its State Parties, in which case, the requirements for determining the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage will be based on the existing conditions in the MERCOSUR State Party and the measure will be limited to the aforementioned State Party.

Article 5

For the purposes of this Annex, the following shall be understood as:

a) “Serious damage”: a significant general impairment of the conditions of a certain domestic production.

b) “Threat of serious damage”: the clear imminence of serious damage. The determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury will be based on facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility.

c)"Domestic production": the group of producers of similar or directly competitive products that operate within the territory of a Contracting Party or of one of the Signatory Parties or those whose joint production of similar or directly competitive products constitutes a significant proportion of the total domestic production of those products in a Contracting Party or in one of the Signatory Parties.

Article 6

In the investigation to be carried out to determine whether the increase in preferential imports has caused or threatens to cause serious injury to domestic production, the Contracting Parties shall assess all relevant factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that have a bearing on the situation of that domestic production, in particular the following:

a) the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the product in question, in absolute and relative terms;

b) the relationship between preferential and non-preferential imports, as well as between their increases;

c) the increasing share of the domestic market absorbed by imports;

d) changes in the level of sales, production, productivity, capacity utilization, profit and loss, and employment.

The determination of the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury referred to in this Article shall be based on objective evidence that demonstrates the existence of a causal relationship between the increase in preferential imports of the product in question and serious harm or threat of serious harm. When there are factors other than the increase in preferential imports that at the same time cause injury to the domestic production in question, this injury shall not be attributed to the increase in preferential imports.

Article 7º

In critical circumstances, in which any delay entails damage that is difficult to repair, the Contracting Parties may adopt a provisional safeguard measure based on a preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence that the increase in preferential imports has caused or threatens to cause Serious damage to the domestic production of the Contracting Party or one of the Signatory Parties. Immediately after the provisional safeguard measure has been adopted, it will be notified and consulted in accordance with the provisions of Articles 10 and 11 of this Annex.

The duration of the provisional safeguard measure will not exceed 180 days and will take the form of an increase in tariffs that are applicable due to the suspension or inapplicability of preferences. If, in the subsequent investigation, it is determined that the increase in preferential imports has not caused or threatened to cause injury to the domestic production in question, the amount collected as provisional measures will be promptly reimbursed.

Article 8

The Contracting Parties will only apply safeguard measures to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment. In the event that the safeguard measure takes the form provided for in subparagraph b) of Article 2, the preference applicable at the time of adoption of the safeguard measure will be maintained for a quota of imports that will be the average of the imports made in the last three representative years for which statistics are available, unless clear justification is given for the need to set a different level to prevent or remedy serious harm.

This quota will be usable by the exporting Contracting Party, which may assign it among the Signatory Parties.

Article 9º

The safeguard measures will have a maximum initial duration of 2 years, including the period in which provisional measures would have been in force. They may be extended when it is determined, in accordance with the provisions of this Annex, that they are still necessary to prevent or repair serious damage and that there is evidence that domestic production is in the process of readjustment.

The total period of application of a safeguard measure shall not exceed 4 years. Safeguard measures will not be applied to products whose preferential imports were subject to such measure, until a period equal to that during which the measure was previously applied has elapsed, provided that the period of non-application is at least 1 year. .

Article 10

The Contracting Parties shall notify each other of:

a) the initiation of the investigation process as stipulated in Articles 3 and 6. It will be reported within a maximum period of five days from the start of the investigation process, including the main characteristics of the facts under investigation, with a precise indication of the products subject to it, including their NALADISA classification. 

b) the application of a provisional safeguard measure in accordance with the provisions of Article 7, will be informed within a maximum period of five days after the measure is adopted, expressly indicating the main characteristics of the facts, including the evidence that generated the need for provisional safeguarding, with a precise indication of the products subject to it, including their NALADISA classification.

c) the decision to apply or extend a safeguard measure. Said circumstance will be reported and information will be provided about the evidence of serious damage or the threat of serious damage caused by the increase in preferential imports, the precise description of the product in question (including its NALADISA classification) and the measure proposal, the date of its introduction and its duration. In case of extension of a measure, evidence will also be provided that the domestic production concerned is in the process of readjustment. The notified Contracting Party may request any additional information it deems necessary from the Contracting Party that intends to apply or extend the measure.

Article 11

Once the notifications referred to in subparagraphs b) or c) of Article 10 have been made, MERCOSUR and Bolivia will meet within a period not exceeding thirty days from the issuance of the notification to carry out consultations. Said consultations will have as their main objective the mutual knowledge of the facts, the exchange of opinions and eventually the clarification of the problem raised and reach an understanding to maintain a level of concessions substantially equivalent to those existing under the Agreement.

The application of the measure indicated in literal c) of Article 10 may only be applied once the consultations have been carried out. However, safeguard measures may be applied when the consultations cannot be carried out due to the impediment of the Contracting Party that has been duly notified.

Article 12

When no agreement is reached between the Contracting Parties on the maintenance of a level of concessions substantially equivalent to those existing under the Agreement, the Contracting Party that considers this balance of concessions affected may convene an extraordinary meeting of the Administrative Commission for the treatment of the subject.

If, within a maximum period of sixty (60) days from the date of the extraordinary meeting of the Administrative Commission, no agreement has been reached on the level of the concessions, the exporting Contracting Party shall be free to modify equivalent commitments assumed in the trade liberalization program of the Agreement.

Such commitments must be resumed at the end of the application of the safeguard measure as if they had not been suspended.

Article 13º

Differences between the Contracting Parties regarding the merits and justification for the application or extension of a safeguard measure will be analyzed and resolved within the scope of the Administrative Commission, based on the information and evidence submitted to it or additional evidence that it deems necessary for such evaluation. The differences that persist may be resolved by the Dispute Settlement Regime provided for in the Agreement.
ANNEX 11

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT REGIME

Chapter I
Scope of Application

Article 1

Controversies that arise between the Contracting Parties in relation to the interpretation, application, or breach of the provisions contained in the Partial Scope Agreement for Economic Complementation MERCOSUR - Bolivia (hereinafter "the Agreement"), and in the instruments and Protocols signed or that are subscribed within the framework of the same, will be submitted to the Dispute Resolution procedure established in this Annex, which forms part of the Agreement.

Chapter II
Reciprocal consultations and direct negotiations

Article 2

The Parties shall endeavor to resolve the disputes referred to in Article 1 through reciprocal consultations and direct negotiations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.

Article 3

Any of the Parties in the conflict may request in writing to the other, consultations and direct negotiations, and will communicate it to the Administrative Commission of the Agreement, hereinafter "the Commission".

Article 4

The Parties will provide the information that allows the analysis of the matter, treating this information confidentially, and they will carry out negotiations between them to reach a solution. These negotiations may not be extended for more than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the formal request to initiate consultations, unless the Parties agree to extend that period to a maximum of thirty (30) days.

Chapter III
Intervention of the Administrative Commission

Article 5

If a mutually satisfactory solution is not reached within the period indicated in Article 4 or if the dispute is only partially resolved, either Party may request in writing that the Commission meet to discuss the matter.

Article 6

The Party requesting to convene the Commission will state in its request the reasons and indicate the provisions of the Agreement or additional instruments that it considers applicable. The Commission will evaluate the situation, giving the Parties the opportunity to present their positions and requesting, if it considers it necessary, technical information on the case.

The Commission must meet within fifteen (15) days following the date of receipt of the call request, and the procedure may not take more than forty-five (45) calendar days, counted from the date on which The Commission met, unless otherwise agreed between the Parties.

Article 7
Group of Experts


When the controversy could not have been resolved with the mechanism established in Article 6, the Commission will immediately create an ad-hoc Group of Experts, made up of three experts from the list referred to in Article 8.

The Group of Experts will be made up of the following way:

a) Within ten (10) days after the communication of the Commission's decision to convene a Group of Experts, each of the Parties shall designate an expert. The third party, who may not be a national of any of the Parties, shall be appointed by mutual agreement of the Parties, within ten (10) days from the date on which the last of the two aforementioned experts was appointed. The third expert will chair the Group.

b) If one of the Parties has not appointed its expert within the ten (10) day period established in subparagraph a), or if there is no agreement between the Parties to appoint the third expert, these appointments will be made by the Commission. , by draw, from the list mentioned in the second paragraph of Article 8.

c)Each Party shall also appoint a substitute expert to replace the holder in case of incapacity or resignation.

d) By mutual agreement, the Parties may designate an expert who is not on the list referred to in Article 8.

The expenses of the experts shall be borne by the Party that appointed them. The remuneration of the President and the other expenses of the Group of Experts will be covered in equal amounts by the Parties.

Article 8

To integrate the list of experts, each Contracting Party will designate eight (8) experts, within a period of three (3) months from the signing of the Agreement. The list will be made up of persons of recognized competence in commercial matters and of another nature, which may become a matter of controversy within the framework of the Agreement.

Likewise, the Parties will designate up to eight (8) experts each, from third countries, for the purposes of the lottery provided for in subparagraph b) of Article 7.

Article 9

The Commission will draw up the list based on the designations of the Parties, and will keep it updated, informing the Parties of any changes that may occur.

Article 10

The Group of Experts will consider the dispute raised taking into account the provisions of this Agreement, the additional instruments and protocols signed within its framework, and the information provided by the Parties to the conflict. The Group of Experts will give the Parties an opportunity to present their respective positions.

Article 11

The Group of Experts will adopt its own rules of procedure for each case, within five days of its constitution, which will guarantee the Parties the opportunity to be heard and will ensure that the procedure is carried out expeditiously.

Article 12

The Group of Experts will have a term of thirty (30) calendar days from its creation to formulate its conclusions, which will be submitted to the appreciation of the Commission.

Article 13

The Commission will formulate recommendations to the Parties in the conflict, based on the conclusions of the Group of Experts, within a maximum period of fifteen (15) calendar days, counted from the date on which it received the conclusions of the Group of Experts. The Commission will ensure compliance with its recommendations.

Article 14

The Dispute Resolution Regime established in this Annex will be applied for a maximum period of three (3) years of validity of the Agreement , and a new regime must be established that will include an arbitration procedure, and that will be in force, at the latest, from the fourth (4th) year of validity of the Agreement.

If the period indicated in the previous paragraph has expired, the pertinent negotiations have not been concluded or there is no agreement on said procedure, the Parties will adopt the arbitration procedure provided for in Chapter IV of the Brasilia Protocol, the text of which is attached.

