Economic Complementation Agreement No. 53
 between the Federative Republic of Brazil and the United States of Mexico


            The Plenipotentiaries of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the United Mexican States, accredited by their respective Governments, according to powers that were granted in good and due form,

 

CONSIDERING:

            The need to strengthen the integration process in Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, through the conclusion of agreements open to the participation of the other member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI);

            That regional economic integration constitutes one of the essential instruments for the countries of Latin America to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples;

            That the Parties are willing to establish a legal framework that fosters the necessary conditions for the growth and diversification of trade and investment flows, in a manner that is compatible with the potential of both countries;

            That it is convenient to offer economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade and investment in order to encourage their active participation in economic and trade relations between the two countries; and

            That the agreements of the World Trade Organization represent a framework of rights and obligations for the international commitments assumed by the Parties.

AGREE: 

In signing this Economic Complementation Agreement, under the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the ALADI Council of Ministers, as well as the provisions established below.

 

CHAPTER I

OBJECTIVES AND INITIAL PROVISIONS

Article I-1.- The objectives of this Agreement are:

to. establish norms and disciplines for economic and commercial relations between the Parties, within the framework of the Montevideo Treaty of 1980;

b. promote the development and diversification of trade flows, with the aim of intensifying economic complementarity;

c. stimulate investment flows, to try to promote an intensive use of the markets and of the competitive capacity of the Parties; and

d. encourage the participation of the private sectors of the Parties.

Article I-2.- For purposes of this Agreement, it shall be understood as:

WTO Agreement: the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, dated April 15, 1994;
tariff: any import tax or levy and any other charge or charge, of any kind, of equivalent effect, applied in relation to the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge, charge or additional tax on imports, with the exception of :
to. any charge or tax equivalent to an internal tax, established in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994;

b. any antidumping, countervailing duty or safeguard measure that is applied in accordance with the legislation of each Party and in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement;

c. any duty or other charge, provided that the amount is limited to the approximate cost of the services rendered and that it does not represent an indirect protection for national merchandise, or a tax on imports for fiscal purposes;

d. other rights or charges established in Article VIII of the GATT 1994 and in particular the Understanding Regarding the Interpretation of paragraph 1 b) of Article II of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; and

and. any duty or other charge to protect the equilibrium of the balance of payments, adopted in accordance with Articles XII, XIV and XVIII of the GATT 1994 and with the Understanding Related to the provisions of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 regarding of Balance of Payments;

most-favoured-nation tariff: the tariff applied by a Party to imports, in accordance with Article I of the GATT 1994;
Commission: the Administrative Commission established in accordance with Chapter XIII;
days: calendar or calendar days;
GATT 1994: the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;
merchandise: any good, product, item or matter;
NALADISA 96: identifies the 1996 version of the Tariff Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association, based on the Harmonized System of Designation and Classification of Goods.;
Party: any State for which this Agreement has entered into force;
preference: the percentage reduction with respect to the most favored nation tariff in force in a Party, at the time of dispatch of the goods; and
Harmonized System: The Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System in force, including its general rules and its section, chapter and subheading legal notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective laws imposed on the foreign trade; and
Treaty of Montevideo 1980: instrument that creates the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI).
Article I-3.- The references made in this Agreement to other international treaties or agreements shall be understood as made to the treaties or agreements that follow them, in which both Parties participate.

Article I-4.- This Agreement does not apply to used or rebuilt merchandise.

 

CHAPTER II

TARIFF PREFERENCES

Article II-1.- The United Mexican States will apply to imports of goods originating in the Federative Republic of Brazil, the preferences agreed with respect to the most favored nation tariff, included in column (5) of Annex I of this Agreement. .

Article II-2.- The Federative Republic of Brazil will apply to imports of merchandise originating in the United Mexican States, the preferences agreed with respect to the most favored nation tariff, included in column (4) of Annex I of this Agreement. .

Article II-3.- The Commission, at any time, may include new merchandise with preferences, or increase the preference levels of the merchandise included in Annex I. Once a resolution of the Commission is issued, in the sense of what is stipulated in this paragraph, said resolution, duly notarized within the framework of this Agreement, will prevail over the provisions of the Annex and the new preferences agreed will become an integral part. of said Annex.

Article II-4.- The Parties may not unilaterally reduce or eliminate preferences on a good included in Annex I , except as provided in chapters V (Safeguard) and VI (Unfair Trade Practices).

Article II-5.- In the event that a Party increases, selectively or generally, the most favored nation tariff applicable to goods originating from the other Party included in the Agreement, the Parties may negotiate a review of preferences or other measures, in order to preserve their balance.

Article II-6.- The goods included in the Annexes of this Agreement are identified in NALADISA 96.

 

CHAPTER III

COMMERCIAL DISCIPLINES

Article III-1.- Regarding national treatment, the Parties shall be governed in accordance with the provisions of Article III of the GATT 1994, for goods from the territories of the Parties.

Article III-2.- Neither Party shall impose or maintain non-tariff restrictions on the import or export of goods from its territory to that of the other Party, whether applied through quotas, licenses or through other measures, except when they are compatible with the WTO Agreement.

Article III-3.- At the request of one Party, the other Party shall identify, in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them in accordance with the Harmonized System, the measures, restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of merchandise that it applies to imports of merchandise of export interest.

 

CHAPTER IV

ORIGIN REGIME AND CUSTOMS PROCEDURES FOR THE CONTROL AND VERIFICATION OF THE ORIGIN OF GOODS

Article IV-1.- For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

customs authority: the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party, is responsible for the application and administration of its customs laws and regulations;
competent authority: in the case of Mexico, the authority designated by the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, or its successor; in the case of Brazil, the authority designated by the Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade and the Ministry of Finance, as the case may be, or their successors;
CIF: costs, insurance and freight included;
- total cost: the sum of the following elements:

to. the costs or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;

b. the costs of direct labor used in the production of the merchandise; and

c. an amount for direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the merchandise, reasonably assigned to it, except for the following concepts:

Yo. the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to the good,

ii. costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the producer's business, which constitutes a discontinued operation,

iii. costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of accounting principles,

iv. the costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good,

v. costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure,

saw. the profits made by the producer of the good, whether retained by the producer or paid to others as dividends, and the taxes paid on those profits, including capital gains taxes, and

vii. the interest costs that have been agreed between related parties and that exceed those interests that are paid at market interest rates;

Customs Valuation Code: the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;
shipping containers and packaging materials: merchandise that is used to protect merchandise during transportation, other than retail packaging and materials;
business days: every day, except Saturdays and Sundays, as well as all those days that each Party designates as non-business days in accordance with its legislation;
certifying entities: in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy, or its successor; in the case of Brazil, the Secretary of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, or its successor;
containers and packaging materials for retail sale: containers and materials in which a good is packaged for retail sale;
exporter: a person located in the territory of a Party from which the good is exported, who, in accordance with this chapter, is obliged to keep in the territory of that Party, the records referred to in article IV-26;
FOB: free on board (LAB), regardless of the means of transport, at the point of direct shipment from the seller to the buyer;
importer: a person located in the territory of a Party into which the good is imported, who, in accordance with this chapter, is obliged to keep in the territory of that Party, the records referred to in article IV-26;
material: includes raw materials, inputs, intermediate products and parts and pieces used in the manufacture of the goods, without prejudice to other provisions contained in the Agreement;
self-produced material: a material produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;
intermediate material: self-produced materials used in the production of a good and designated in accordance with article IV-8;
indirect material: a good used in the production, inspection or control of another good, which is not physically incorporated into it; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of other good, such as:
to. fuel and power;

b. tools, dies and molds;

c. spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

d. lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;

and. gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;

F. equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;

g. catalysts and solvents; either

h. any other good that is not incorporated into the finished product but whose use in the production of that product can reasonably be shown to be a part of that production;

merchandise: any good, product, item or matter;
identical or similar merchandise: "identical merchandise" and "similar merchandise" respectively, as defined in the Customs Valuation Code;
originating good or originating material: a good or a material that qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
heading: refers to the first four digits of the Harmonized System or NALADISA;
generally accepted accounting principles: the recognized consensus to the substantial support authorized in the territory of a Party, regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, disclosure of information and preparation of financial statements. These standards can be broad guidelines of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;
production: the growing or raising, extracting, harvesting, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, assembling, or processing of a good;
producer: a person who grows or raises, extracts, harvests, fishes, hunts, manufactures, processes, or assembles a good, located in the territory of a Party who, pursuant to this chapter, is required to maintain in the territory of that Party, the records to referred to in article IV-26;
General Rule 2 a) of the Harmonized System: rule 2 a) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, or any rule that replaces it. At the time of signing this Agreement, the text of the rule is as follows:
“Any reference to an article in a specific item includes the article even incomplete or unfinished, provided that it presents the essential characteristics of the complete or finished article. It also reaches the complete or finished article, or considered as such by virtue of the preceding provisions, when it is presented disassembled or not yet assembled.”
General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System: rule 3 of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, or any rule that replaces it. At the time of signing this Agreement, the text of the rule is as follows:
"When a good could be classified, in principle, into two or more items by application of Rule 2 b) or in any other case, the classification will be made as follows:
to. the item with a more specific description will have priority over items with a more generic scope. However, when two or more items each refer to only a part of the materials constituting a mixed product or a composite article or only to a part of the articles, in the case of goods presented in conditioned sets or assortments for retail sale, such headings should be considered equally specific to that product or article, even if one of them more precisely or completely describes it;

b. Mixed products, articles made up of different materials or made up of the union of different articles and merchandise presented in sets or assortments put up for retail sale, whose classification cannot be carried out by applying Rule 3 a), will be classified according to the matter or with the article that gives them their essential character, if it were possible to determine it; and

c. When Rules 3 a) and 3 b) do not allow classification, the merchandise will be classified in the last item in order of numbering among those that can reasonably be taken into account.”

General Rule 5 b) of the Harmonized System: rule 5 b) of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, or any rule that replaces it. At the time of signing this Agreement, the text of the rule is as follows:
"Except for the provisions of Rule 5 a), the containers that contain merchandise will be classified with them when they are of the type normally used for that class of merchandise. . However, this provision is not mandatory when the containers are likely to be reasonably used repeatedly.
Harmonized System: The Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System in force, including its general rules and its section, chapter and subheading legal notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective tax laws. to foreign trade;
subheading: refers to the first six digits of the Harmonized System or NALADISA;
preferential tariff treatment: the application of the agreed preference for an originating good in accordance with Annex I of this Agreement;
used: used or consumed in the production of goods;
transaction value of a good: the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 thereof, regardless of whether the merchandise is sold for export. For the purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the merchandise; and
transaction value of a material: the price actually paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of Article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 thereof, regardless of whether the material is sold for export. For the purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the supplier of the material and the buyer referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the merchandise.
 

SCOPE OF APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION

Article IV-2.- This chapter establishes the rules of origin applicable to the exchange of goods between the Parties, for the purposes of:

to. qualification and determination of the originating merchandise;

b. certification of origin and issuance of certificates of origin; and

c. processes of verification of origin, control and sanctions.

Article IV-3.- The Parties shall apply to the goods for which preferential tariff treatment is requested, in accordance with the preferences negotiated in this Agreement, the origin regime established in this chapter, without prejudice to the fact that it may be modified by Commission resolution.

Article IV-4.-

1. For purposes of this chapter:

to. the tariff classification basis is NALADISA 1996;

b. the determination of the value of a merchandise or a material will be made in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code; and

c. all costs referred to in this chapter shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the merchandise is produced.

2. When applying the Customs Valuation Code to determine the origin of a merchandise, the principles of the Customs Valuation Code will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications required by circumstances, as would be applied to international ones.

 

ORIGIN QUALIFICATION

Article IV-5.- Without prejudice to the other provisions of this chapter, the following shall be considered original:
to. goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties:

Yo. minerals extracted in the territory of one or both Parties;

ii. vegetables harvested in the territory of one or both Parties;

iii. live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or both Parties;

iv. goods obtained from hunting or fishing in the territory of one or both Parties;

v. fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained from the sea by vessels registered or registered by a Party and flying the flag of that Party;

saw. goods produced on board factory ships, from the goods identified in numeral v), provided that these factory ships are registered or enrolled by any Party and carry the flag of that Party;

vii. goods obtained by a Party, or a person of a Party, from the seabed or subsoil, outside territorial waters, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;

viii. waste and scrap derived from:

production in the territory of one or both Parties, or
used goods, collected in the territory of one or both Parties, provided that such goods serve only for the recovery of raw materials; and
ix. goods produced in the territory of one or both Parties, exclusively from the goods mentioned in numbers i) to viii), at any stage of production;

 

b. goods that are produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating, in accordance with this chapter;

c. Goods made using non-originating materials, provided that they result from a production process, carried out entirely in the territory of one or both Parties, in such a way that the good meets the specific requirements in accordance with the provisions of Annex II of the Agreement. .

For purposes of determining the origin of a material to be incorporated into a good subject to the provisions of this Agreement, which is not included in Annex I and for which a specific rule is not defined in Annex II , the following shall apply. first and second articles of Resolution 252 of the Committee of Representatives of the Latin American Integration Association.

 

REGIONAL VALUE CONTENT

Article IV-6.- When, in accordance with this chapter, a good requires compliance with the regional content value in accordance with the provisions of letter c) of Article IV-5, the value of non-originating materials will be:

to. the transaction value of the material, calculated in accordance with Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code; either

b. calculated in accordance with Articles 2 to 7 of the Customs Valuation Code; in the event that there is no transaction value or the transaction value of the material is not admissible under Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code; and

c. shall include, when they are not considered in subsections (a) or (b):

Yo. freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the port of importation in the Party where the producer of the good is located, except that when the producer of the good acquires the material non-originating within the territory of the Party where it is located, the value of said material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred for the transportation of the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located; and

ii. the cost of waste and scrap resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less any recovery of these costs, provided that the recovery does not exceed 30 percent of the value of the material, determined in accordance with subparagraph (a) above.

The value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used by:

to. another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either

b. the producer of the good in the production of an originating material of its own manufacture and that is designated by the producer as an intermediate material in accordance with Article IV-8.

For purposes of this chapter, the value of the merchandise will be the transaction value, calculated in accordance with Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code and adjusted on the FOB basis. However, when the producer of the good does not export it directly, the transaction value of said good will be determined up to the point in which the buyer receives the good within the territory where the producer is located.

Each Party shall provide that the producer or exporter use the total cost of production of the good as the value of the good when:

to. there is no transaction value because the merchandise is not the subject of a sale;

b. the transaction value of the merchandise cannot be determined because there are restrictions on the transfer or use of the merchandise by the buyer, with the exception of those that:

Yo. imposed or required by the law or the authorities of the Party in which the buyer of the good is located,

ii. limit the geographic territory where the merchandise can be resold, or

iii. do not substantially affect the value of the merchandise;

c. the sale or price depends on some condition or consideration whose value cannot be determined in relation to the merchandise;

d. reverts directly or indirectly to the seller any part of the proceeds of the resale or of any subsequent assignment or use of the merchandise by the buyer, unless the due adjustment can be made in accordance with Article 8 of the Customs Valuation Code;

and. the buyer and seller are related persons and the relationship between them influences the price, except as provided in paragraph 2 of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code;

F. the merchandise is sold by the producer to a related person and the volume of sales, in units of quantity of identical or similar merchandise, sold to related persons, during a 6-month period immediately preceding the month in which the producer sold that merchandise , exceeds 85 (eighty-five) percent of the total sales of the producer of those merchandise during that period; either

g. the good is designated as an intermediate material in accordance with Article IV-8.

 

DE MINIMIS

Article IV-7.- A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good, adjusted on the CIF basis, that do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in literal c) of article IV-5, does not exceed 7 (seven) percent of the value of the merchandise, adjusted on the FOB basis.

This article does not apply to:

to. merchandise included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System; neither

b. a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 01 through 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading than the good for which origin is being determined accordance with this article.

 

INTERMEDIATE MATERIALS

Article IV-8.- For purposes of calculating the regional content value in accordance with Article IV-6, the producer of a good may designate as an intermediate material any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good, provided that such material complies with the provisions of article IV-5.

When the intermediate material is subject to a regional value content in accordance with subparagraph c) of Article IV-5, it will be calculated based on the fact that the value of non-originating materials, adjusted on the CIF basis, must not exceed 50 (fifty) percent of the total cost of that material.

If a material designated as an intermediate material is subject to a regional value content requirement, no other self-produced material subject to a regional value content used in the production of that intermediate material may in turn be designated by the producer as an intermediate material. intermediate.

 

ACCUMULATION

Article IV-9.- For compliance with the origin requirements, materials originating in the territory of one of the Parties, incorporated into a specific good in the territory of another Party, shall be considered as originating in the territory of the latter. 1

 

FUNGIBLE GOODS AND MATERIALS

Article IV-10.- For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined in inventory are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined by one of the methods inventory management established in generally accepted accounting principles in the Party where the merchandise is produced.

When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of the other Party, the origin of the goods may be determined based on one of the inventory management methods referred to in the previous paragraph.

Once one of the inventory management methods is selected, it will be used throughout the fiscal year or period.

 

INDIRECT MATERIALS

Article IV-11.- Indirect materials will be considered originating, without taking into account the place of their production and the value of these materials will be their cost that is reported in the accounting records of the producer of the merchandise.

 

CONTAINERS AND PACKAGING MATERIALS FOR RETAIL SALE

Article IV-12.- For purposes of establishing whether a merchandise is originating, the containers and packaging materials in which a merchandise is presented for retail sale will not be taken into account, when they are classified with the merchandise they contain, according to with General Rule 5 b) of the Harmonized System, except when the merchandise is subject to a regional content value requirement in accordance with letter c) of article IV-5, in which case, they will be taken into account in the content calculation regional.

 

CONTAINERS AND PACKAGING MATERIALS FOR SHIPPING

Article IV-13.- Containers and packaging materials in which a merchandise is packed or conditioned exclusively for its transport, will not be taken into account for purposes of compliance with the provisions of Article IV-5.

 

GAMES OR ASSORTMENTS

Article IV-14.- The sets or assortments that are classified according to the provisions of General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, as well as the merchandise whose description, according to the NALADISA nomenclature, is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating. , provided that each of the merchandise contained in the set or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of the merchandise in this chapter.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, a set or assortment of merchandise shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating merchandise used in the formation of the set or assortment, adjusted on the CIF basis, does not exceed 7 (seven) percent of the value of the merchandise as a set or assortment, adjusted on the FOB basis.

The provisions of this article shall prevail over the other provisions established in this chapter.

 

OPERATIONS AND PRACTICES THAT DO NOT CONFER ORIGIN

Article IV-15.- The operations and practices indicated below are considered as processes that do not confer origin, whether or not the provisions of this chapter are complied with, due to those operations or practices:

to. simple leaks and dilutions in water or another substance that do not materially alter the characteristics of the merchandise;

b. simple operations intended to ensure the conservation of the goods during transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, freezing, removal of damaged parts, drying or addition of substances;

c. dusting, screening, classification, selection, washing or cutting;

d. packaging, repackaging, packaging or repackaging or packaging for retail sale;

and. the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;

F. cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings;

g. fractioning into batches or volumes, husking or shelling;

h. the simple assembly of parts and components that are classified as merchandise, in accordance with Rule 2 a) of the Harmonized System;

Yo. any activity or practice of fixing the value of a merchandise with respect to which it can be demonstrated, based on sufficient evidence, that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter; either

j. the accumulation of two or more of the operations indicated in literals a) to i) of this article.

 

SPECIFIC ORIGIN REQUIREMENTS

Article IV-16.- The Commission, at the request of the Parties, may modify or expand the specific origin requirements established in Annex II of the Agreement, due to changes in the development of production processes or other matters.

 

PROCESSES CARRIED OUT OUTSIDE THE TERRITORIES OF THE PARTIES

Article IV-17.- A good that has been produced in accordance with the requirements of this chapter will lose its original status if it undergoes a subsequent process or is the object of any other operation outside the territories of the Parties in which it was carried. carry out production pursuant to Article IV-5, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep it in good condition or to transport it to the territory of the other Party.

 

OF THE SHIPMENT, TRANSPORTATION AND TRANSIT OF THE GOODS

Article IV-18.- In order for originating goods to benefit from preferential tariff treatment, they must have been shipped directly from the exporting Party to the importing Party. For this purpose, direct dispatch is considered:

to. goods transported without passing through the territory of a State that is not a Party to the Agreement;

b. Goods in transit through one or more States that are not Parties to the Agreement, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the control or surveillance of the customs authority, provided that:

Yo. the transit was justified for geographical reasons or considerations related to transportation needs;

ii. are not intended for trade, use or employment in the State of transit; and

iii. do not undergo, during their transport or storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or handling, to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

 

CERTIFICATION OF ORIGIN AND ISSUE OF CERTIFICATES

Article IV-19.- The certificate of origin is the document that guarantees that the goods comply with the provisions on origin of this chapter and, therefore, can benefit from the preferential tariff treatment agreed by the Parties. This certificate may be modified by agreement of the Commission.

The certificate referred to in the preceding paragraph must be issued on the form established in Resolution 252 of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), which must contain an affidavit from the final producer or exporter of the merchandise, stating full compliance with the provisions on origin of the Agreement and the veracity of the information established therein.

The certificate of origin covers a single importation of one or several goods into the territory of one of the Parties and must be presented at the time of processing the customs clearance.

Article IV-20.- The issuance of certificates of origin will be the responsibility of official departments, to be nominated by each Party, which may delegate their issuance to other public bodies or trade union entities that act in national or state jurisdiction. . The official distribution in each Party, duly notified to the ALADI General Secretariat, will be responsible for controlling the issuance of certificates of origin.

The request for the issuance of certificates of origin must be made by the final producer or exporter of the merchandise in question, in accordance with articles IV-19 and IV-23.

In a delegation of competence for the issuance of certificates of origin, the official departments will take into consideration the representativeness, technical capacity and suitability of public bodies or private entities for the provision of such service.

The names of the public bodies or trade union entities authorized to issue certificates of origin, as well as the register of the signatures of the officials accredited for this purpose, will be those that the Parties have notified or notify the General Secretariat of ALADI, either for the registration process or for any change suffered by said registries, in accordance with the provisions governing said matter in the ALADI technical body.

Article IV-21.- The certifying entities of each Party must correlatively number the certificates issued and file a copy for a minimum period of five (5) years, from the date of issue. Said file must also include all the background information that served as the basis for the issuance of the certificate.

The certifying entities will keep a record, in accordance with the previous paragraph, of all certificates of origin issued, which must contain, as a minimum, the number and date of the certificate, the applicant for it and the date of its issuance.

Article IV-22.- The certificate of origin must be issued, at the latest, within five (5) business days following the presentation of the respective application, in accordance with the provisions of Articles IV-20 and IV- 23, and will be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days from its issuance. Said certificate will not be valid if it is not duly completed in all the fields, except for what is established in article IV-24.

The certificates of origin may not be issued before the date of issuance of the commercial invoice corresponding to the operation in question, but rather on the same date or within sixty (60) days following the issuance of the invoice.

Article IV-23.- For the issuance of a certificate of origin, the corresponding application must be submitted, accompanied by a signed declaration of origin with the necessary background documents that demonstrate that the merchandise whose certification of origin is requested, meets the requirements for it, such as:

to. name, denomination or business name of the applicant;

b. legal domicile for tax purposes;

c. name of the merchandise to be exported and its position NALADISA;

d. FOB value in US dollars of the merchandise to be exported;

and. For the application of articles IV-7, IV-8, IV-9, IV-10 and IV-14, you must provide the necessary information according to said articles for each case;

F. demonstrative elements of the components of the merchandise indicating:

Yo. national materials, components and/or parts and pieces;

ii. materials, components and/or parts and pieces originating from the other Party, indicating:

origin;
national tariff codes or NALADISA codes;
CIF value in US dollars; and
percentage that they represent in the value of the final merchandise;
iii. non-originating materials, components and/or parts and pieces:

origin;
national tariff codes or NALADISA codes;
CIF value in US dollars; and
percentage that they represent in the value of the final merchandise;
iv. descriptive summary of the production process; and

v. sworn statement on the veracity of the information provided.

The description of the merchandise must match the one corresponding to the NALADISA code and the one recorded on the exporter's commercial invoice.

The aforementioned statements must be submitted sufficiently in advance for each certification application. The applicant must keep the necessary records that demonstrate in documentary form that the merchandise meets the required requirements, and make it available to the certifying authority of the exporting country or the competent authority of the importing country, when requested.

In the event that the merchandise is exported regularly, the declaration will be valid for up to three hundred and sixty-five (365) days, as long as the circumstances or facts that support said declaration do not change.

 

OPERATIONS CARRIED OUT THROUGH THE INTERVENTION OF THIRD PARTY OPERATORS

Article IV-24.- Merchandise that complies with the provisions of this chapter will maintain its originating character, even when invoiced by commercial operators from third countries.

In these cases, the producer or exporter from the country of export must indicate, in the respective certificate of origin, in the "COMMENTS" field, that the merchandise object of his declaration will be invoiced from a third country.

For this purpose, it will identify the name, denomination or company name and address of the operator that will ultimately be the one that invoices the operation to the destination.

In the situation referred to in the preceding paragraphs and, exceptionally, if at the time of issuing the certificate of origin, the number of the commercial invoice issued by an operator from a third country is not known, the corresponding field of the certificate must not be fill. In this case, the importer will submit to the corresponding customs authority an affidavit that justifies the fact, in which he must indicate, at least, the numbers and dates of the final commercial invoice and the certificate of origin that cover the import operation. .

 

OBLIGATIONS REGARDING EXPORTS

Article IV-25.- Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer who has filled out and signed a certificate or declaration of origin and has reason to believe that said certificate or declaration of origin contains incorrect information, must communicate without delay and in writing, any changes that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate or declaration to the certifying entity. In these cases, the exporter or the producer may not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certification or declaration, respectively.

Each Party shall provide that a false certificate or declaration of origin made by an exporter or a producer shall have the same administrative consequences as false declarations or declarations made in its territory by an importer in contravention of its laws and regulations. In addition, it may apply such measures, as the circumstances warrant, when the exporter or producer does not comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.

 

ACCOUNTING RECORDS

Article IV-26.- For verification and control cases, the exporter or producer who has signed a declaration of origin and a certificate of origin must maintain, for a period of five (5) years, all the information contained therein. , through its accounting records and supporting documents (such as invoices, receipts, among others) or other evidence that allows to prove what has been declared, including those referring to:

to. the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the merchandise that is exported from its territory;

b. the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials, including indirect ones, used in the production of the merchandise that is exported from its territory; and

c. the production of the good in the form that is exported from its territory.

Likewise, the importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good that is imported into its territory, from the territory of the other Party, will keep for a minimum of five (5) years, counted from the date of importation, all the import related documentation required by the importing Party.

 

VERIFICATION AND CONTROL PROCESSES

Article IV-27.- To determine whether a good imported from another Party qualifies as originating, the importing Party may, through its competent authority, verify the origin of the good by:

to. requirement, in the case of Mexico, to the certifying entity and in the case of Brazil, to the competent authority, of the information necessary to verify the authenticity of the certificate(s) of origin, the veracity of the information established in the same (s) or the origin of the goods. In the event that the information provided by the exporting Party is insufficient to determine the origin of the merchandise, the importing Party will request more information from the other Party;

b. sending, in the case of Mexico, to the certifying entity and in the case of Brazil, to the competent authority, of written questionnaires to exporters or producers in the territory of the other Party;

c. request, in the case of Mexico, to the certifying entity and in the case of Brazil, to the competent authority, for verification visits to the facilities of an exporter, in order to examine the production processes, the facilities used in the production of the merchandise, as well as other actions that contribute to the verification of its origin; either

d. Other procedures that the Parties agree.

Article IV-28.- For the purposes of paragraph a) of Article IV-27, the competent authority of the importing Party must indicate the number and date of the certificates of origin that it wishes to verify, as well as the object and scope of the application.

For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, the competent authority or certifying entity of the exporting Party, as the case may be, must provide the information requested by application of the provisions of subparagraph a) of Article IV-27, within a period not exceeding one hundred and twenty (120) days, counted from the date of receipt of each request for information or additional information.
 In cases where the required information is not provided within the period stipulated in the preceding paragraph or if the response does not contain the information requested to determine the authenticity or veracity of the certificate of origin or the origin of the goods, the competent authority of the The importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the goods covered by the certificates subject to the verification procedure by means of a written resolution that includes the factual and legal grounds of the resolution.

Article IV-29.- When the exporter or producer receives a questionnaire in accordance with subparagraph b) of Article IV-27, it will respond and return that questionnaire within a period of 30 days. During this period, the exporter or producer may request in writing to the importing Party that is carrying out the verification, an extension which shall not exceed 30 (thirty) days. This request will not lead to the denial of preferential treatment.

When the competent authority has sent a questionnaire in accordance with paragraph b) of Article IV-27 and has received the questionnaire answered by the exporter or producer within the corresponding term and considers that more information is required to determine the origin of the merchandise or merchandise subject to verification, may request additional information from that exporter or producer, through a subsequent questionnaire, under the terms of this article.

In the event that the exporter or producer does not return the duly answered questionnaire or subsequent questionnaire within the thirty (30) day term, or if the response to said questionnaire does not demonstrate the origin of the goods, the importing Party may deny tariff treatment, to the merchandise object of the verification, by means of a written resolution that includes the factual and legal grounds of the resolution.

Article IV-30.- Before carrying out a verification visit in accordance with the provisions of paragraph c) of Article IV-27, the importing Party shall be obliged, through its competent authority, to notify in writing its intention to carry out the visit at least thirty (30) days in advance. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer to be visited, to the competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit will take place and, if requested by the latter, to the embassy of this Party in the territory of the Party importer. The competent authority of the importing Party shall obtain the written consent of the exporter or the producer whom it intends to visit.

The notification referred to in the preceding paragraph will contain:

to. the identification of the competent authority making the notification;

b. name of the exporter or producer to be visited;

c. date and place of the proposed verification visit;

d. purpose and scope of the proposed verification visit, making specific mention of the merchandise(s) subject to verification(s);

and. names, personal data and positions of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; and

F. the legal basis for the verification visit.

Si dentro de los treinta (30) días siguientes al recibo de la notificación de la visita de verificación propuesta conforme al primer párrafo de este artículo, el exportador o el productor no otorga su consentimiento por escrito para la realización de la misma, la Parte importadora podrá negar el trato arancelario preferencial a la mercancía o mercancías que habría(n) sido objeto de la visita de verificación, mediante resolución escrita que incluya los fundamentos de hecho y de derecho de la resolución.

Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority receives a notification in accordance with the first paragraph, it may, no later than fifteen (15) days after the date of receipt of the notification of the verification visit, postpone the visit. of verification proposed for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days from the date on which the notification was received, or for a longer period agreed by the Parties.

A Party may not deny preferential tariff treatment based exclusively on the postponement of the verification visit, in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph.

Each Party will allow the exporter or producer whose merchandise is the subject of a verification visit, to designate two observers who are present during the visit, provided that the observers intervene only in that capacity. If there is no designation of witnesses by the exporter or the producer, this omission will not result in the postponement of the visit.

The Party that has carried out a verification shall provide the exporter or the producer whose good or goods have been subject to the verification a written resolution in which it determines whether or not the good or goods qualify as originating, and includes the factual and legal grounds. right of determination.

For the purposes of Article IV-27, when the verification carried out by a Party indicates that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, the Party may suspend the treatment. preferential tariff to the identical goods that that person exports or produces, until the same proves that it complies with the provisions of this chapter.

 

REVISION

Article IV-31.- Each Party shall grant, in accordance with its legislation, access to the same rights with respect to the administrative or judicial review procedures and resources provided for its importers, exporters or producers of the other Party who fill out and sign a certificate or declaration of origin that has been the subject of an origin determination resolution, in accordance with the third paragraph of article IV-28, the third paragraph of article IV-29 and the last paragraph of article IV-30.

The rights referred to in the preceding paragraph include access to at least one instance of administrative review, regardless of the official or agency responsible for the resolution subject to review, and access to a instance of judicial review of the resolution or the decision made in the last instance of administrative review, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

 

CONFIDENTIALITY

Article IV-32.- Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with the provisions of its legislation, the confidentiality of the information of such nature obtained pursuant to this chapter and shall protect it from any disclosure that could harm the person providing it.

The confidential information obtained in accordance with this chapter may only be made known to the authorities responsible for the administration and application of the regime of origin, and for customs or tax matters, as the case may be.

 

SANCTIONS

Article IV-33.- Each Party shall apply penal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations related to this chapter, in accordance with its laws and regulations.

 

CONSULTATIONS, COOPERATION AND MODIFICATIONS

Article IV-34.- The Parties shall establish, through the Administrative Commission, a Working Group on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures, made up of representatives of each of the Parties, which shall meet at the request of one of the Parties. .

The Working Group shall:

to. ensure the effective application and administration of this chapter;

b. reach agreements on the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter;

c. seek agreements on modifications to the certificate or declaration of origin;

d. examine the administrative or operational provisions in customs matters that are related to the origin regime of the Agreement; and

and. attend to any other matter that the Parties agree, related to this chapter.

The Parties shall consult regularly and cooperate to ensure that this Chapter is applied effectively, uniformly and in accordance with the spirit and objectives of the Agreement.

 

CHAPTER V

SAFEGUARDS

DEFINITIONS

Article V-1.- For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:

serious injury: a significant general impairment of the situation of a certain domestic industry;

threat of serious harm: the clear imminence of serious harm. The determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury will be based on facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility;

domestic industry: the group of producers of like or directly competitive goods operating within the territory of a Party or those whose collective output of like or directly competitive products constitutes a significant proportion of the total domestic production of those goods in a Party . That significant proportion may not be less than 50%;

similar merchandise: the identical one or that one that even though it is not equal in all its aspects, has sufficiently similar characteristics and composition; and

Directly competitive merchandise: that which, while not being similar to the one being compared, constitutes a close substitute allowing it to fulfill the same functions.

Article V-2.- The Parties retain their rights and obligations to apply safeguard measures under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the GATT 1994 Agreement on Safeguards or under any other WTO Agreement.

 

PREFERENTIAL SAFEGUARDS

Article V-3.- The Parties may apply, after investigation, exceptionally and in accordance with the conditions established in this chapter, safeguard measures to imports of a good that benefits from this Agreement.

Article V-4.- The safeguard measures that are applied in accordance with this chapter will consist of the reduction or temporary elimination of the tariff preference margin.

Article V-5.- The Parties will only apply safeguard measures to the extent necessary to prevent or repair serious damage as a result of the unforeseen evolution of circumstances and as a result of the tariff preferences granted under this Agreement and to facilitate the readjustment of the domestic industry.

Article V-6.- The preference applicable at the time of adoption of the safeguard measure will be maintained for a quota of imports that will be the average of the imports made in the three (3) years immediately prior to the period in which the determination was made. existence or threat of serious harm, unless there is clear justification for the need to set a different level to prevent or remedy serious harm.

Article V-7.- At the end of the period of application of the measure, the tariff preference margin negotiated in this Agreement will be restored for the merchandise subject to it.

Article V-8.- The safeguard measures will have a maximum initial duration of one (1) year. They may be extended for one (1) more year when it is determined, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, that they are still necessary to repair the serious injury or threat of serious injury and that there is evidence that the domestic industry is in readjustment process.

The total period of application of a safeguard measure, including its extension, shall not exceed two (2) years.

 

PROCEDURES RELATED TO THE APPLICATION OF PREFERENTIAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES

Article V-9.- Each Party shall ensure the uniform, impartial, and reasonable application of its laws, regulations, resolutions, and determinations that govern all procedures for the adoption of safeguard measures.

Article V-10.- Each Party shall establish or maintain equitable, transparent, and effective procedures for the application of safeguard measures in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

Article V-11.- The Parties will only apply a safeguard measure to a good, after investigation and under the conditions established in this chapter, if the imports subject to preferential tariffs have increased in such quantity, in absolute terms or in relation to the domestic production and are carried out under conditions that cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry of like or directly competitive goods.

Article V-12.- The procedures for the adoption of safeguard measures may be initiated by means of a request submitted, before the competent investigative authorities, by the companies or entities representing the branch of national production that produces at least fifty (50) percent of the total national production of a merchandise similar to or directly competitive with the imported merchandise.

Article V-13.- The petitioner will provide the following information in her request, indicating her sources, or, to the extent that the information is not available, her best estimates and the bases that support them:

to. description of the merchandise: name and description of the imported merchandise in question, including its NALADISA 96 classification, the national tariff classification and, if applicable, the current tariff treatment, as well as the name and description of the similar or direct competitive merchandise;

b. representativeness: the petitioner will submit the following information on her representativeness:

Yo. the names and addresses of the companies or entities that submit the request, as well as the identification of the main establishments where the merchandise in question is produced; and

ii. the value of the production of the similar or directly competitive merchandise produced by the requesting or represented companies and the percentage that said production means in relation to the total national production, as well as the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of the national production .

c. Import Figures: Import figures for at least each of the most recent three (3) full years that form the basis for the assertion that the subject merchandise is being imported in increasing quantities, either in terms of absolute or relative to national production;

d. Figures on national production: the figures on the total national production of the similar or direct competitive merchandise, corresponding, at least, to each of the last three (3) complete years;

and. information that demonstrates the damage: the quantitative and objective information that denotes the nature and scope of the serious damage caused to the branch of national production in question, such as that indicated in paragraph d) of article 13;

F. causal relationship: the enumeration and description of the presumed causes of the serious damage or threat thereof and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports subject to preferential tariffs of that merchandise, in absolute terms or relative to production national, is the cause of the serious damage or the threat of serious damage, supported by pertinent information; and

g. adjustment plan: indication of the actions that are intended to be adopted, in order to adjust the conditions of competitiveness of the domestic industry to that of imports.

The competent investigating authority will only start the investigation after carefully evaluating whether the application meets all the requirements set forth in this article.

Article V-14.- In the investigation that will be carried out to determine if the increase in imports subject to preference has caused or threatens to cause serious damage to the domestic industry, the Parties shall evaluate all pertinent factors of a objective and quantifiable that are related to the situation of that domestic industry, in particular the following:

to. the pace and amount of the increase in imports of the merchandise in question, in absolute and relative terms;

b. the relationship between the imports subject to preferential tariffs in question and those of any other origin, as well as between the increases in said imports;

c. the part of the domestic market absorbed by imports on the rise; and

d. changes in the level of sales, production, productivity, use of installed capacity, profits or losses, and employment in the domestic industry.

Other factors such as changes in prices, inventories, and the ability of companies within the domestic industry to generate capital should also be analyzed, if deemed pertinent.

The determination of the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage referred to in this article will be based on objective evidence that demonstrates the existence of a causal relationship between the increase in imports subject to preferential tariffs of the merchandise of which in question and serious harm or threat of serious harm.

When there are other factors, other than the increase in imports subject to preferential tariffs, which at the same time cause serious damage to the domestic industry in question, this damage will not be attributed to said increase in imports.

Article V-15.- The interested parties may access the public information contained in the administrative file of the investigation.

All information that, by its nature, is confidential or that has been provided confidentially by the interested parties will be, upon prior justification, treated as such by the competent authorities. Said information will not be disseminated without the authorization of the party that submitted it.

Interested parties providing confidential information should provide non-confidential summaries of the information or, if they indicate that such information cannot be summarized, state the reasons why a summary cannot be provided.

If the competent authorities conclude that a request that information be considered confidential is not justified, and if the interested party does not want to make it public or authorize its disclosure in general or summarized terms, the said authorities may not take that information into account, unless unless it is convincingly demonstrated, from an appropriate source, that the information is accurate.

Article V-16.- The Parties shall publish in their respective official dissemination bodies the duly founded and reasoned resolutions issued in connection with an investigation on safeguards. Said resolutions must contain a summary of the elements that served as the basis for the decision in question.

 

PROVISIONAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES

Article V-17.- In critical circumstances, in which any delay entails damage that is difficult to repair, the Parties may adopt a provisional safeguard measure by virtue of a duly founded and reasoned preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence that the increase of imports subject to preference has caused or threatens to cause serious injury to the domestic industry of the other Party. Immediately after the provisional safeguard measure has been adopted, it will be notified and consulted in accordance with the provisions of letter b) of article V-18, and article V-20.

The duration of the provisional safeguard measure will not exceed 180 days and will take one of the forms provided for in Article V-4. If, in the subsequent investigation, it is determined that the increase in imports from the other Party has not caused or threatened to cause serious injury to the domestic industry in question, the amount collected for provisional measures shall be promptly reimbursed or released, if it were the case, the guarantee guaranteed by said concept.

 

NOTIFICATION

Article V-18.- The Parties shall notify each other in writing about:

to. the initiation of the investigation procedure for the application of safeguard measures. It will be reported within a maximum period of ten (10) days from the publication of the start of the investigation procedure, including the main characteristics of the facts under investigation, such as:

Yo. the names of the applicants and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of that sector;

ii. a clear and complete description of the merchandise involved, including its NALADISA 96 classification and current tariff treatment;

iii. a summary of the essential facts on which the initiation of the investigation was based;

iv. the import data that constitutes the basis that such merchandise is being imported in increasing quantities in absolute terms or relative to the domestic industry;

v. the data that were taken into consideration to prove the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury to the entire domestic industry of the similar or directly competitive merchandise;

saw. the applicable legal regulations;

vii. the period for holding consultations; and

viii. the term for hearing requests by the interested parties as well as the term in which the interested parties may present evidence and present their arguments, in writing, so that they may be taken into consideration during the investigation;

b. Prior to the application of a provisional safeguard measure in accordance with the provisions of Article V-17, the Party that will apply the measure shall inform at least thirty (30) days before adopting the measure, expressly indicating the main characteristics of the facts, including the evidence that generated the need for provisional safeguarding, with a precise indication of the merchandise subject to it, including its NALADISA 96 classification.

c. the intention to apply or extend a safeguard measure. This circumstance will be reported and information will be provided about:

Yo. evidence of serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by increased imports subject to preference or, in the case of extension, evidence that the measure is still necessary;

ii. the precise description of the merchandise in question (including its NALADISA 96 classification);

iii. the description of the proposed measure;

iv. the date of its entry into force and its duration;

v. when appropriate, the criteria and objective information that demonstrates that the assumptions established in this chapter are met for the application of a measure to the other Party;

saw. the period for holding consultations; and

vii. in the case of extension of a measure, evidence will also be provided that the domestic industry concerned has complied with the adjustment schedule.

d. the decision to apply or extend a safeguard measure. This circumstance will be reported and information will be provided about:

Yo. evidence of serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by increased imports subject to tariff preferences, in the case of extension, evidence that the measure is still necessary;

ii. the precise description of the merchandise in question (including its NALADISA 96 classification);

iii. the description of the measure adopted;

iv. the date of its entry into force and its duration; and

v. in the case of extension of a measure, evidence will also be provided that the domestic industry concerned has complied with the adjustment schedule.

The notifications referred to in this article shall be made through the competent authorities of the Parties.

Article V-19.- During any stage of the procedure, the notified Party may request any additional information it deems necessary from the Party that has initiated an investigation or intends to extend a measure.

 

INQUIRIES

Article V-20.- Once the notification referred to in subparagraph a) of Article V-18 has been made, the notified Party may request consultations.

Once the notifications referred to in subparagraphs b) or c) of article V-18 have been made, the Parties will meet within a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, from the issuance of the notification, to carry out consultations. Said consultations will have as their main objective the mutual knowledge of the facts, the exchange of opinions and eventually the clarification of the problem raised.

Likewise, and in the case of the notification of letter c) of Article V-18, the Parties will seek to reach an understanding on the ways to maintain a level of concessions and other obligations, substantially equivalent to the existing one, under the Agreement, at the time prior to the application of the measure.

The measure indicated in literal c) of article V-18, may only be applied or extended once the consequent consultations to that notification have been carried out. However, safeguard measures may be applied or extended when the consultations cannot be carried out for reasons attributable to the Party to which they have been duly notified.
COMPENSATIONS

Article V-21.- The Party that intends to apply a safeguard measure shall grant the other Party mutually agreed compensation, in the form of concessions that have commercial effects equivalent to the impact of the safeguard measure. For this purpose, consultations may be held to determine the compensation prior to the imposition of the measure.

When no agreement is reached on the maintenance of a level of concessions substantially equivalent to that existing under the Agreement, the Party proposing to adopt the measure shall be empowered to do so and the Party affected by the measure shall be free to modify equivalent commitments assumed in the Agreement. Agreement, in the form in which it has been notified by that Party after the application of the safeguard measure thirty (30) days prior to the application of this modification of commitments.

The exporting Party will have a maximum period of sixty (60) days, counted from the adoption of the safeguard measure by the importing Party, to carry out said concession modifications.

 

CHAPTER VI

UNFAIR TRADE PRACTICES

Article VI-1.- In the application of countervailing or antidumping measures intended to counteract the detrimental effects of unfair trade, the Parties shall abide by the provisions of the GATT 1994, the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VI of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade Act 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, which are part of the WTO Agreement.

The Parties will apply their legislation on unfair international trade practices, in accordance with the procedures established in the normative instruments cited in the previous article. The Parties shall carry out the investigations through their respective competent authorities.

Article VI-2.- If a Party considers that the other Party is making imports from a third country under conditions of dumping or subsidies that affect its exports, it may request consultations, through the Commission, in order to find out the conditions of entry of these goods. In the case of dumping, the Party may assess the convenience of requesting the initiation of an antidumping investigation against said third country.

The consulted Party will give adequate consideration and response to the request for consultations within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) business days. The consultations will be held in the place agreed by the Parties and both their development and conclusions will be reported to the Commission.

 

CHAPTER VII

ECONOMIC COOPERATION

Article VII-1.- The economic cooperation activities between the Parties shall be promoted taking into account the respective national and sectoral development plans and policies and the objectives and programs of the regional integration process, as well as the existing possibilities of complementation.

Article VII-2.- The Parties will support each other, by mutual agreement, in the programs and tasks of diffusion and commercial promotion, facilitating the activity of official and private missions, the organization of fairs and exhibitions, the holding of informative seminars, the studies market and other actions aimed at making better use of tariff preferences and the opportunities offered by the procedures agreed upon in commercial matters.

Article VII-3.- The Parties will encourage the adoption of measures aimed at coordinating and complementing the industrial activities of both countries, in order to stimulate co-investments in different sectors of the economies of the Parties.

Article VII-4.- Both Parties will promote the strengthening of mutual communications to the greatest possible degree, especially with regard to the transport of merchandise by air and sea, in order to facilitate trade and consolidate the integration process. Between the parts.

 

CHAPTER VIII

TECHNICAL STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES

Article VIII-1.- This chapter applies to the technical standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures of the Parties, as well as the measures related to them that may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods or services between the Parties. Parties. This chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

Article VIII-2.- The Parties shall be governed by the provisions established in the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement), which forms part of the WTO Agreement.

Article VIII-3.- Each Party may set the level of protection it deems appropriate to achieve its legitimate objectives without the purpose of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties and likewise may prepare, adopt or maintain the necessary measures to ensure compliance. of its technical standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.

Article VIII-4.- Each Party shall notify the other Party in writing and no later than its nationals, together with the notification to the WTO, about the adoption or modification of any technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure, at least sixty (60) days prior to the adoption or modification and the entry into force of the measure, so as to allow interested persons to familiarize themselves with it.

Said notification does not apply to those measures that have the character of law or regulation of law.

Article VIII-5.- Each Party, at the request of the other Party, shall provide information on the preparation and list of technical standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.

Article VIII-6.- At the request of one Party, the other Party:

to. provide that Party with technical advice, information and assistance on mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen the technical standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures of that Party, as well as its related activities, processes and systems;

b. provide that Party with information on its technical cooperation programs related to measures related to technical standards, technical regulations and/or conformity assessment procedures on areas of particular interest; and

c. shall consult with that Party, through its competent authorities, regarding any doubt regarding its current technical standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures.

Each Party shall encourage bodies with recognized standardization activities in its territory to cooperate in standardization activities with those of the other Party in their territories, as appropriate.

Article VIII-7- The Parties will also encourage the implementation of technical cooperation programs at the most different levels with the aim of facilitating mutual recognition agreements.

Article VIII-8.- At the request of a Party, the Parties shall hold meetings as soon as possible, once the request is received, to: consider or consult a particular matter on technical standards, technical regulations and/or evaluation procedures of the conformity that may affect trade between the Parties;

to. promote technical cooperation activities between the Parties;

b. facilitate the process of negotiating mutual recognition agreements; and

c. discuss any other related matter.

 

CHAPTER IX

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article IX-1.- The Parties will be governed, regarding the adoption of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures, by what is established in the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (AMSF), which is part of the WTO Agreement.

Article IX-2.- The Parties undertake to give concrete expression to the provisions of this chapter. 

Article IX-3.- The Complementary Agreement to the Basic Agreement for Scientific and Technical Cooperation in Animal Health Matters between the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government of the United Mexican States, signed on November 13, 1997, is part of member of this chapter.

Article IX-4.- The Parties shall establish their sanitary and phytosanitary measures only to the degree necessary to achieve their adequate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection, taking into account the technical and economic feasibility of their application.

Article IX-5.- The Parties undertake to avoid that the sanitary or phytosanitary measures that they apply constitute unjustified obstacles to trade.

Article IX-6.- The Parties may establish or maintain sanitary or phytosanitary measures that offer a higher level of protection than that which would be achieved by means of a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that there is a scientific justification for it. and observed the procedures established in the AMSF.

Article IX-7.- The Parties will initiate efforts aimed at the process of recognition of the equivalences of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures and their respective control and approval procedures, based on the practices established by the pertinent international organizations. To that end, the importing Party shall be provided, upon request, reasonable access for inspections, tests, and other pertinent procedures.

Article IX-8.- The Parties undertake that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures are based on an assessment appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks to the life and health of people and animals or to the preservation of plants. , taking into account the guidelines and techniques of the competent international organizations.

Article IX-9.- The Parties shall recognize zones free of diseases or pests, or of low prevalence of diseases and pests, based on regionalization criteria and procedures agreed upon by the authorities responsible for sanitary and phytosanitary matters. Such criteria must be compatible with the provisions of the AMSF.

Article IX-10.- Once an application has been received for the recognition of zones free or of low prevalence of diseases or pests, a reasonable term shall be set for the requested Party to communicate its decision to the other Party.

Article IX-11.- The Parties may establish agreements on specific requirements, compliance with which allows agricultural products originating in a zone free or with a low prevalence of pests or diseases in the territory of the exporting Party, to be admitted to the territory of the Party. importer if it achieves the level of protection required by it.

Article IX-12.- The authorities responsible for sanitary and phytosanitary matters will determine the necessary measures to carry out the verification and inspection activities of free or low prevalence zones, and will provide the necessary assistance so that said activities can be carried out efficiently and satisfactorily.

Article IX-13.- The Parties may allow the importation of products and by-products of animal or vegetable origin from processing plants and other facilities, once they are approved and certified in accordance with their respective national legislation on sanitary and phytosanitary matters. .

Article IX-14.- The authorities responsible for sanitary and phytosanitary matters will determine the sanitary and phytosanitary criteria for the introduction of agricultural products into their territories, as well as the inspection and verification controls at their border posts, which must be compatible. with the provisions of the AMSF.

Article IX-15.- The Parties shall establish contact points for the exchange of information and technical cooperation.

Article IX-16.- Each Party may adopt, based on Article 5.7 of the AMSF, the necessary provisional measures for the protection of human health, animal health or plant health.

Article IX-17.- The authorities with sanitary and phytosanitary responsibilities will meet, as they deem necessary, to evaluate the application of this chapter and will report their results to the Commission.

Article IX-18.- The sanitary and phytosanitary authorities, in coordination with the Commission, may create ad hoc technical working groups , whose function will be to examine and propose solutions to sanitary and phytosanitary problems that arise from the access of agricultural products to the respective markets of the Parties.

Article IX-19.- A Party may request technical consultations from the other Party in order to obtain information and clarifications on sanitary and phytosanitary measures adopted by it.

 

CHAPTER X

CONVERGENCE

On the occasion of the sessions of the Evaluation and Convergence Conferences referred to in Article 34 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the Parties will examine the possibility of proceeding with the progressive multilateralization of the treatments included in this Agreement.

 

 

CHAPTER XI

AGREEMENT ADMINISTRATION

Article XI-1.- Each Party shall designate a government entity to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter included in this Agreement. On the Brazilian side, this entity will be the Department of Latin American Integration of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or its successor. On the Mexican side, this entity will be the ALADI Deputy General Directorate of the Ministry of Economy, or its successor.

Article XI-2.- Each Party shall notify the other Party, to the extent possible, of any law, regulation or provision that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the interests of that other Party under the terms of this Agreement. . Each Party, at the request of another Party, will provide information regarding any measure in force in its territory that is of interest for the application of this Agreement. The notification or provision of information referred to in this article will be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

 

CHAPTER XII

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT REGIME

Controversies that arise between the Parties in relation to the interpretation, application or breach of this Agreement, will be governed by the provisions of the First Additional Protocol, which establishes the Dispute Settlement Regime, once the Parties have completed the necessary legal formalities. for the entry into force of said instrument.

 

CHAPTER XIII

ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE

Article XIII-1.- The Parties agree to establish an Administrative Commission, which will be made up of representatives of both Governments. The Representation in the Commission, on behalf of Mexico, will be in charge of the Undersecretary for International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Economy, or whoever he designates and, on the part of Brazil, under the Undersecretary General for Integration, Economic and Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or whoever it designates.

 

ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATING COMMISSION

Article XIII-2.- The Commission shall have the following powers:

to. ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement;

b. recommend to the Parties modifications to this Agreement;

c. review the regimes of origin, certification of origin, safeguard clauses and unfair trade practices of this Agreement and propose any modifications deemed necessary;

d. submit to the Parties a periodic report on the operation of this Agreement, accompanied by the recommendations it deems appropriate for its improvement and its fullest use;

and. establish mechanisms that ensure active participation of representatives of business sectors;

F. establish working groups to facilitate the fulfillment of their powers and supervise their work, as well as that of those created in accordance with this Agreement; and

g. the others that derive from this Agreement or that are entrusted to it by the Parties.

 

CHAPTER XIV

VALIDITY

This Agreement shall enter into force jointly thirty (30) days after the exchange of communications that prove compliance with the legal formalities necessary for the application of these instruments. This Agreement will cease to apply when an Agreement between Mercosur and Mexico enters into force, or when there is a complaint by one of the Parties in accordance with Chapter XVI.

 

CHAPTER XV

ACCESSION

This Agreement is open to adherence, after negotiation, by the remaining ALADI member countries, and this will be formalized by signing an additional protocol to this Agreement, which will enter into force thirty (30) days after its deposit in the ALADI Secretariat.

 

CHAPTER XVI

COMPLAINT

Any Party may denounce this Agreement, having to communicate its decision to the other Party ninety (90) days prior to the deposit of the denunciation instrument with the General Secretariat of ALADI. Ninety (90) days after said formalization, the rights acquired and the obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will automatically cease for both Parties.

 

CHAPTER XVII

TRANSITORY DISPOSITIONS

Until the First Additional Protocol to this Agreement enters into force, the Parties shall be governed by the following:

to. The Parties shall endeavor to resolve disputes arising in connection with this Agreement through direct consultations and negotiations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution. Either Party may request in writing to the other the holding of consultations and direct negotiations. The request shall indicate the subject of the controversy and the reasons on which it is based.

b. The Parties shall provide the information that allows the analysis of the matter. The Parties will give confidential treatment to the exchanged written or verbal information. They will carry out consultations and direct negotiations between them to reach a solution within 30 days following the presentation of the request, unless the Parties, by mutual agreement, extend that period. Consultations and direct negotiations will not prejudice the rights of any of the Parties in other forums.

c. If, after the period established in accordance with subparagraph b), a Party considers that the other Party adopts a measure incompatible with this Agreement, and a mutually satisfactory solution has not been reached, the Party against whose merchandise the measure is applied may impose, prior written communication to the other Party, temporary compensatory measures, such as suspension of concessions or others that have substantially equivalent effects to those of the measure in question.

d. When a party considers that its measure is not inconsistent with this Agreement or that the compensatory measures adopted are excessive, it may request consultations in accordance with subparagraph a).

 

CHAPTER XVIII

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article XVIII-1.- This Agreement applies exclusively to the goods included in Annex I.

Article XVIII-2.- The importation of the Federative Republic of Brazil of the merchandise included in the Present Agreement will not be subject to the application of the Additional Freight for the Renewal of the Merchant Navy, established by Decree Law no.2404 of 23 December 1987, in accordance with the provisions of Decree No. 97945 (Article 5) of July 11, 1989, modified by Decree No. 429/92 of January 17, 1992.

Article XVIII-3.- As of the entry into force of this Agreement, all the provisions and preferences contained in the Partial Scope of Renegotiation Agreement No. 9 and its Modifying or Additional Protocols remain without effect.

The General Secretariat of the Latin American Integration Association will be the depositary of this Agreement, of which it will send authenticated copies to the signatory countries.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries sign this Economic Complementation Agreement in the city of Brasilia, Brazil, on the third day of July two thousand and two, in two copies in Portuguese and Spanish, both texts being equally authentic. (Signed.:) For the Federative Republic of Brazil: Celso Lafer; Minister of Foreign Affairs; For the United Mexican States: Luis Ernesto Derbez Bautista, Secretary of Economy

