Partial Scope Economic Complementation Agreement No. 41, Signed
Under Article 25 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, between the
Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of Suriname

 

Date signed: April 21, 2005

 

FOR THE GRANTING OF TARIFF PREFERENCES FOR
RICE TRADE

 

The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Republic of Suriname (hereinafter referred to as "Parties"),

Considering that Article 25 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, to which the Federative Republic of Brazil is a Signatory Party, authorizes the signing of Partial Scope Agreements with other countries and economic integration areas of Latin America, in accordance with the various modalities provided for in that Treaty;

Considering that Article 12 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, mentioned above, provides for the modality of Partial Scope Agreement with the objective of promoting and regulating intraregional agricultural trade;

Bearing in mind the 1973 Chaguaramas Agreement, of which the Republic of Suriname is a Signatory Party;

Considering the rights and obligations of the Parties to the Marrakesh Agreement, which establishes the World Trade Organization; and

Taking into account the different levels of economic development of the Parties;

They agree to sign, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, a Partial Scope Agreement for the Concession of Tariff Preferences for the Trade in Rice between the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of Suriname, which will be governed by the following provisions :

CHAPTER I
Objective of the Agreement

ARTICLE 1

The purpose of this Agreement is to grant tariff preferences to rice trade, under the terms of Article 5.

ARTICLE 2

The Signatory Countries establish that the tariff lines related to rice, discriminated in Article 4 of this Agreement, will be subject to trade without any other restriction than those required to guarantee their characteristics, compliance with verification practices, brands and others, applied accordingly. accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3

For the purposes set forth in the previous Article, the purpose of this Agreement is to make available to the consumer rice of adequate quality, duly conditioned and labeled as such.
 

CHAPTER II
Scope of Application

ARTICLE 4

In this Agreement, rice shall be understood as the tariff items NCM 1006.10.92 (unparboiled unhusked rice), NCM 1006.20.20 (unparboiled husked rice) and NCM 1006.30.21 (unparboiled husked rice - polished).

CHAPTER III
Liberalization Program

ARTICLE 5

Imports from Brazil, coming from Suriname, within the annual quota of 10,000 tons, will be free of taxes applied to imports, as well as customs duties and any other charge of equivalent effects, whether of a fiscal, monetary, or exchange nature. or of another nature, that affect imports. Taxes and similar charges for services rendered will not be included in this concept.

CHAPTER IV
Phytosanitary Cooperation

ARTICLE 6

The qualities of rice specified in this Agreement will be subject to the phytosanitary defense and control regime established by the competent national authorities.

ARTICLE 7

The regime established in the previous Article will be compatible with the international standardization systems used by the foreign trade of the signatory countries.

CHAPTER V
Origin Regime

ARTICLE 8

The benefits derived from the application of this Agreement shall apply exclusively to rice, as defined in Article 4 of this Agreement, entirely produced in the territory of the exporting Party.

ARTICLE 9

The Certificates of Origin issued by government authorities and other public entities or private organizations officially authorized by Brazil, accompanying imports of the merchandise referred to in the previous article, coming from Suriname, must conform to the model adopted in the General Regime of Origin of the ALADI.

CHAPTER VI
Membership

ARTICLE 10

This Agreement will be open to adherence, through negotiation, by the other member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) or the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).

ARTICLE 11

The adhesion will be formalized, after the negotiation between the Parties and the adhering country, through the signing of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement, which will enter into force 30 (thirty) days after its deposit in the General Secretariat of ALADI.

CHAPTER VII
Validity and Deposit

ARTICLE 12

This Agreement will enter into force when the Parties exchange communications in which they declare the respective internal legal procedures completed.

ARTICLE 13

The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil will deposit this Agreement with the ALADI General Secretariat in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and the Resolutions of the ALADI Council of Ministers.

ARTICLE 14

This Agreement shall have unlimited validity.

CHAPTER VIII
Complaint _

ARTICLE 15

Either Party may terminate this Agreement by communicating its decision to the other Party. The denunciation will take effect 180 (one hundred eighty) days, counted from the date on which the Party communicated the denunciation in writing to the other Party.

CHAPTER IX
Amendments and Modifications

ARTICLE 16

Either Party may submit a proposal to amend or modify the provisions of this Agreement by means of communication to the other Party. The decision to amend will be made by consensus and will take effect upon acceptance by the Parties.  

ARTICLE 17

Amendments or modifications to this Agreement will be formalized through Additional Protocols.

CHAPTER X
General Provisions

ARTICLE 18

The importation by the Federative Republic of Brazil of the tariff items mentioned in Article 4 of this Agreement, coming from the Republic of Suriname, will not be subject to the application of the Additional Freight for the Renewal of the Merchant Navy, established in Decree Law No. 2404, of December 23, 1987, in accordance with the provisions of Decree No. 97,945, of July 11, 1989, its modifications and additions.

In witness whereof, the Plenipotentiaries authorized in good and due form sign this Agreement.

Done in Brasilia, on April 21, 2005, in the Portuguese and English languages, both texts being equally valid.

(Signed:) FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL, Celso Amorim, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs; FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SURINAME: Radjendrakumar Nihalchand Sonny Hira, Ambassador of the Republic of Suriname.