SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE FRENCH REPUBLIC AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL ON COOPERATION IN THE
AREA OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE DEVELOPMENT AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROJECTS UNDER THE CLEAN DEVELOPMENT
MECHANISM OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL
The Government of the French Republic (hereinafter referred to as the French Party),
and the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil (hereinafter referred to as the Brazilian
Party),
Recalling the Framework Agreement on cooperation between the Government of the
French Republic and the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil of 28 May 1996,
Stressing the need to preserve and improve the environment for this and future generations
and the importance of sustainable development,
Recalling that the French Republic and the Federative Republic of Brazil are Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (hereinafter referred to as
the Convention) and to the Kyoto Protocol (hereinafter referred to as the Protocol),
Aware that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest possible cooperation
by all countries and their participation in an effective and appropriate international response,
in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities and their social and economic conditions,
Recalling the provisions of the Convention, in particular articles 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 and 11.5,
that stress the importance of cooperation between developed and developing countries in
addressing the issues of climate change,
In the light of article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol and Decision 17 adopted by the Seventh
Conference of the Parties to the Convention (17/CP.7) on modalities and procedures for a
clean development mechanism (CDM),
Committed to taking into account any decision relating to the implementation of
article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol that may be adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention (COP), the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to
the Protocol (COP/MOP) or the CDM Executive Board,
Considering that CDM participation is voluntary and that it involves mutual and balanced
cooperation,
Considering that CDM promotion will make an effective contribution to sustainable
development and to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions,
Desiring to express a political will to achieve lasting cooperation concerning the fight
against climate change by promoting rapid and effective CDM implementation,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. Objective
1. The objective of this Agreement is to foster cooperation between the two Parties
in the area of climate change, by establishing a process of regular policy-related consultations
and by supporting the development and implementation of greenhouse gas emission
reduction and sequestration projects in Brazil with the involvement of French and Brazilian
operators, in accordance with article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol, as adopted on
11 December 1997.
2. Understanding that the issue and transfer of certified emission reduction units
(CERUs) generated by a CDM project are the responsibility of the CDM Executive Board
(CDMEB) after verification of the reduced emissions has been certified by a designated operational
entity (DOE) and at the request of the participants in the project, the two Parties,
once a potential CDM project, supported by French entities, is officially registered with
CDMEB as a DCM project and has obtained CERUs, shall endeavour, if necessary, to facilitate
the transfer to French entities of a share, as agreed upon with them, of the CERUs
generated by the project.
3. These projects shall be designed in such a manner as to contributed to sustainable
development in Brazil and implemented in a spirit of partnership between the two Parties.
Article 2. Bilateral Working Group
1. The Parties shall set up a Bilateral Working Group to discuss their respective positions
concerning negotiations in the area of climate change and support the development
and implementation of CDM projects involving participants from both countries. The
Working Group shall include a focal point for each Party, to be appointed within two
months following the signature of this Agreement, and representatives of the national authorities
in charge of climate change issues in both countries.
2. The national focal points shall be responsible for all issues relating to the implementation
of this Agreement in their respective countries.
3. The Bilateral Working Group shall meet at least once a year during conferences
of Parties to the Convention or sessions of the subsidiary bodies of the Convention.
Article 3. Scope of implementation
1. Promotion of CDM projects: Decisions relating to the approval of a project and
the issue and transfer of the corresponding CERUs shall be made in accordance with Decision
17/CP.7 and relevant decisions taken by COP, COP/MOP or the CDM Executive
Board. The issue of an official letter of approval by the Brazilian Government for a CDM
project shall conform to the regulations established by the Interministerial Commission on
Global Climate Change, the Brazilian Designated National Authority for the CDM.
2. The Brazilian and French Parties shall keep each other informed about measures
taken to fulfil the obligations provided for in the Marrakesh Agreements concerning CDM
projects, particularly as regards the designation of the competent national authority.
3. This Agreement shall cover the period between 2005 and the end of the first commitment
period provided for in the Kyoto Protocol (2012). The limitation of this period
shall not, however, rule out the possibility of accruing emission reductions from the year
2000, in accordance with article 12.10 of the Protocol. Emission reductions from commitment
periods beyond 2012 that are determined by decisions adopted by COP/MOP in accordance
with article 3.9 of the Kyoto Protocol may also be covered by this Agreement, if
still in force.
4. Policy-related consultations: Politicy-related consultations shall take place at
meetings of the Bilateral Working Group. The Parties shall exchange views on international
negotiations on climate change, national and regional policies, and programmes and regulations
in the area of climate change.
5. Cooperation in other matters related to climate change: Strengthening of cooperation
in areas of climate change other than those referred to above is envisaged, particularly
as regards matters discussed in the framework of the Convention.
6. The Parties undertake to continue any other form of cooperation undertaken for
the purpose of combating climate change, in particular by the identification of greenhouse
gas emission reduction projects in Brazil that do not give rise to emission rights and cooperation
on energy, transport, and forestry waste management.
Article 4. Obligations of the French Party concerning CDM projects
The French Party, in consultation with the Brazilian Party, shall contribute to the development
and rapid implementation of CDM projects in Brazil:
(a) By fostering the participation of French operators in the development and implementation
of CDM projects in Brazil;
(b) By informing them about the portfolio of potential CDM projects in Brazil;
(c) By informing them about the technical, institutional and financial conditions associated
with the implementation of such projects;
(d) By facilitating, where necessary, the repurchase of CERUs resulting from such
projects by potential buyers.
Article 5. Obligations of the Brazilian Party concerning CDM projects
The Brazilian Party shall contribute to the development and rapid implementation of
CDM projects:
(a) By providing interested participants with relevant information for the identification
and formulation of CDM projects;
(b) By specifying national guidelines, criteria and acceptance procedures for CDM
projects and by ensuring the effectiveness of the approval procedure, in accordance with
article 12 of the Protocol and relevant decisions taken by COP, COP/MOP or the CDM Executive
Board;
(c) By providing French entities with information on national requirements and criteria
established by the Brazilian Party for national approval of projects;
(d) By informing French entities about procedures for the formal approval of projects
that fulfil the national criteria and comply with article 12.5 of the Kyoto Protocol and relevant
decisions taken by COP, COP/MOP or the CDM Executive Board;
(e) By informing French operators and the French authorities of its portfolio of CDM
projects.
Article 6. Exchange of information and views on CDM projects
The focal points shall meet regularly, particularly at Bilateral Working Group meetings,
to discuss CDM projects. They shall discuss, while observing an appropriate degree
of confidentiality, the following themes:
(a) Potential investors and project participants;
(b) The progress of projects and other activities carried out under this Agreement;
(c) Sources of funding available for projects and the policy framework needed to facilitate
access to such funding sources;
(d) Criteria, procedures and guidelines for the approval of CDM projects;
(e) Methodologies and mechanisms for determining emission baselines and project
additionality and for monitoring and verification of net greenhouse gas emission reductions.
Article 7. Intellectual property rights
In the event that any joint activity involves access to, sharing, transfer or joint development
of technology that is subject to patents or intellectual property rights, the activity
in question shall be subject to the relevant national legislation.
Article 8. Settlement of disputes
Divergent interpretations of international regulations or issues relating to specific
projects shall be discussed directly and without delay between the focal points. In the event
of disputes between participants in a CDM project, the Parties shall do their utmost to reach
consensus.
Article 9. Costs and expenditures
This Agreement does not entail any cost or expenditure on the part of the Brazilian and
French Governments.
Any expenditure relating to the implementation of projects or cooperation actions contemplated
herein shall be governed by a specific contract covering the project or action in
question.
Article 10. Entry into force, renewal, termination, amendments and adjustments
1. This Agreement shall enter into force as of the date of signature and shall expire
at the end of the first Kyoto Protocol commitment period. The Agreement shall be automatically
renewable for successive five-year periods unless one of the Parties declares ten
months before the end of a renewal period that it is not to be renewed.
Either Party may cease to implement this Agreement if it so informs the other Party in
writing through the diplomatic channel ten months before the date on which, for it, implementation
of this Agreement ceases.
This Agreement may be amended and supplemented by the Parties by mutual consent
expressed in writing.
2. Neither the execution of CDM projects approved by the Parties during the period
of implementation of this Agreement nor the validity or ownership of CERUs generated by
such projects, in accordance with the contracts governing such projects and participants' national
legislation, shall be affected by the denunciation of this Agreement.
Done at Paris, on 15 July 2005, in two copies, in the French and Portuguese languages,
both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of the French Republic:
PHILIPPE DOUSTE-BLAZY
Minister for Foreign Affairs
For the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil:
CELSO AMORIM
Minister for Foreign Affairs
