INTERIM AGREEMENT ON TRADE AND TRADE-RELATED MATTERS
BETWEEN THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY,
OF THE ONE PART,
AND BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA,
OF THE OTHER PART 
L 169/14 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY,
hereinafter referred to as "the Community",
 of the one part,
and
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA,
 of the other part,
together referred to as "the Parties", 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/15
WHEREAS:
(1) The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and its
Member States, of the one part, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, of the other part (hereinafter
referred to as "the Stabilisation and Association Agreement" or "the SAA"), was signed
in Luxembourg on the sixteenth day of June in the year two thousand and eight.
(2) The Stabilisation and Association Agreement is intended to establish a close and lasting
relationship based on reciprocity and mutual interest, which should allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to further strengthen and extend the already established relationship with the
European Union.
(3) It is necessary to ensure the development of trade links by strengthening and widening the
relations established previously.
(4) To this end it is necessary to implement as speedily as possible, by means of an Interim
Agreement, provisions of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement on trade and
trade-related matters.
(5) Some of the provisions included in Protocol 3 on land transport to the Stabilisation and
Association Agreement, which are related to road transit traffic, are directly linked to the free
movement of goods and should consequently be included in this Agreement.
(6) In the absence of pre-existing contractual structures this Agreement establishes an Interim
Committee for the implementation of this Agreement, 
L 169/16 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
HAVE DECIDED to conclude this Agreement and to this end have designated as their
plenipotentiaries:
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
Dimitrij RUPEL,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Slovenia,
President of the Council of the European Union
Olli REHN,
Member of the Commission of the European Communities (hereinafter referred to as
"European Commission") with responsibility for Enlargement
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Nikola ŠPIRIĆ,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
WHO, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/17
TITLE I
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
ARTICLE 1 (SAA Article 2)
Respect for democratic principles and human rights as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and as defined in the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, in the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris for a New Europe,
respect for principles of international law, including full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and the rule of law as well as the principles of market
economy as reflected in the Document of the CSCE Bonn Conference on Economic Cooperation,
shall form the basis of the domestic and external policies of the Parties and constitute essential
elements of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 2 (SAA Article 9)
This Agreement shall be fully compatible with and implemented in a manner consistent with the
relevant WTO provisions, in particular Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994 (GATT 1994) and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). 
L 169/18 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE II
FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS
ARTICLE 3 (SAA Article 18)
1. The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall gradually establish a free trade area over
a period lasting a maximum of five years starting from the entry into force of this Agreement in
accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in conformity with those of the GATT 1994
and the WTO. In so doing they shall take into account the specific requirements laid down
hereinafter.
2. The Combined Nomenclature shall be applied to the classification of goods in trade between
the Parties.
3. For the purpose of this Agreement customs duties and charges having equivalent effect to
customs duties include any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the importation
or exportation of a good, including any form of surtax or surcharge in connection with such
importation or exportation, but do not include any:
(a) charges equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with the provisions of paragraph 2
of Article III of the GATT 1994;
(b) antidumping or countervailing measures;
(c) fees or charges commensurate with the costs of services rendered. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/19
4. For each product, the basic duty to which the successive tariff reductions set out in this
Agreement are to be applied shall be:
(a) the Community Common Customs Tariff, established pursuant to Council Regulation (EEC)
No 2658/87 1
 actually applied erga omnes on the day of the signature of this Agreement;
(b) the Bosnia and Herzegovina's applied Customs Tariff for 2005 2
.
5. The reduced duties to be applied by Bosnia and Herzegovina calculated as set out in this
Agreement shall be rounded to the nearest decimal numbers using common arithmetical principles.
Therefore, all figures which have less than 5 after the first decimal point shall be rounded down to
the nearest decimal number and all figures which have more than 5 (included) after the first decimal
point shall be rounded up to the nearest decimal number.
6. If, after the signature of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes
basis, in particular reductions resulting:
(a) from the tariff negotiations in the WTO or,
(b) in the event of the accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the WTO or,

1
 Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 (OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1) as amended.
2
 Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina No 58/04 of 22.12.2004. 
L 169/20 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(c) from subsequent reductions after the accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the WTO,
such reduced duties shall replace the basic duty referred to in paragraph 4 as from the date when
such reductions are applied.
7. The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall communicate to each other their
respective basic duties and any changes thereof.
CHAPTER I
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 4 (SAA Article 19)
Definition
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products originating in the Community or in
Bosnia and Herzegovina listed in Chapters 25 to 97 of the Combined Nomenclature, with the
exception of the products listed in Annex I, paragraph I, (ii) of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.
2. Trade between the Parties in products covered by the Treaty establishing the European
Atomic Energy Community shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of that Treaty. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/21
ARTICLE 5 (SAA Article 20)
Community concessions on industrial products
1. Customs duties on imports into the Community and charges having equivalent effect shall
be abolished upon the entry into force of this Agreement on industrial products originating in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2. Quantitative restrictions on imports into the Community and measures having equivalent
effect shall be abolished upon the entry into force of this Agreement on industrial products
originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
ARTICLE 6 (SAA Article 21)
Bosnia and Herzegovina concessions on industrial products
1. Customs duties on imports into Bosnia and Herzegovina of industrial products originating in
the Community other than those listed in Annex I shall be abolished upon the entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. Charges having equivalent effect to customs duties on imports into Bosnia and Herzegovina
shall be abolished upon the entry into force of this Agreement on industrial products originating in
the Community. 
L 169/22 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
3. Customs duties on imports into Bosnia and Herzegovina of industrial products originating in
the Community which are listed in Annex I(a), I(b) and I(c) shall be progressively reduced and
abolished in accordance with timetables indicated in that Annex.
4. Quantitative restrictions on imports into Bosnia and Herzegovina of industrial products
originating in the Community and measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished upon the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 7 (SAA Article 22)
Duties and restrictions on exports
1. The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall abolish any customs duties on exports
and charges having equivalent effect in trade between them upon the entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall abolish between themselves any
quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect upon the entry into force
of this Agreement. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/23
ARTICLE 8 (SAA Article 23)
Faster reductions in customs duties
Bosnia and Herzegovina declares its readiness to reduce its customs duties in trade with the
Community more rapidly than is provided for in Article 6 (SAA Article 21) if its general economic
situation and the situation of the economic sector concerned so permit.
The Interim Committee shall analyse the situation in this respect and make the relevant
recommendations.
CHAPTER II
AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES
ARTICLE 9 (SAA Article 24)
Definition
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to trade in agricultural and fishery products
originating in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2. The term ''agricultural and fishery products" refers to the products listed in Chapters 1 to 24
of the Combined Nomenclature and the products listed in Annex I, paragraph I, (ii) of the WTO
Agreement on Agriculture. 
L 169/24 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
3. This definition includes fish and fishery products covered by Chapter 3, headings 1604
and 1605, and sub-headings 0511 91, 2301 20 00 and 1902 20 10.
ARTICLE 10 (SAA Article 25)
Processed agricultural products
Protocol 1 lays down the trade arrangements for processed agricultural products which are listed
therein.
ARTICLE 11 (SAA Article 26)
Elimination of quantitative restrictions
on agricultural and fishery products
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Community shall abolish all
quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect on imports of agricultural and
fishery products originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina shall abolish
all quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect on imports of agricultural and
fishery products originating in the Community. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/25
ARTICLE 12 (SAA Article 27)
Agricultural products
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Community shall abolish the
customs duties and charges having equivalent effect, on imports of agricultural products originating
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, other than those of headings 0102, 0201, 0202, 1701, 1702 and 2204 of
the Combined Nomenclature.
For the products covered by Chapters 7 and 8 of the Combined Nomenclature, for which the
Common Customs Tariff provides for the application of ad valorem customs duties and a specific
customs duty, the elimination applies only to the ad valorem part of the duty.
2. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Community shall fix the customs
duties applicable to imports into the Community of "baby beef" products defined in Annex II and
originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina at 20 % of the ad valorem duty and 20 % of the specific duty
as laid down in the Common Customs Tariff, within the limit of an annual tariff quota of
1 500 tonnes expressed in carcass weight.
3. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Community shall apply duty-free
access on imports into the Community for products originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina of
headings 1701 and 1702 of the Combined Nomenclature, within the limit of an annual tariff quota
of 12 000 tonnes (net weight). 
L 169/26 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
4. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina shall:
(a) abolish the customs duties applicable on imports of certain agricultural products originating in
the Community, listed in Annex III(a);
(b) reduce progressively the customs duties applicable on imports of certain agricultural products
originating in the Community, listed in Annex III(b), III(c) and III(d) in accordance with the
timetable indicated for each product in that Annex;
(c) abolish the customs duties applicable on imports of certain agricultural products originating in
the Community, listed in Annex III(e) within the limit of the tariff quota indicated for the
products concerned.
5. Protocol 6 lays down the arrangements applicable to the wine and spirit drinks products
referred to therein.
ARTICLE 13 (SAA Article 28)
Fish and fishery products
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement the Community shall abolish all customs
duties or charges having equivalent effect on fish and fishery products originating in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, other than those listed in Annex IV. Products listed in Annex IV shall be subject to
the provisions laid down therein. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/27
2. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement Bosnia and Herzegovina shall abolish
customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect on fish and fishery products originating in the
Community in line with the provisions as specified in Annex V.
ARTICLE 14 (SAA Article 29)
Review clause
Taking account of the volume of trade in agricultural and fishery products between the Parties, of
their particular sensitivities, of the rules of the Community common policies and of the policies for
agriculture and fisheries in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the role of agriculture and fisheries in the
economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina, of the consequences of the multilateral trade negotiations in
the framework of the WTO as well as of the eventual accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
WTO, the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall examine in the Interim Committee, no
later than three years after the entry into force of this Agreement, product by product and on an
orderly and appropriate reciprocal basis, the opportunities for granting each other further
concessions with a view to implementing greater liberalisation of the trade in agricultural and
fishery products. 
L 169/28 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 15 (SAA Article 30)
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Article 24 (SAA Article 39),
given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural and fisheries markets, if imports of products
originating in one Party, which are the subject of concessions granted pursuant to Articles 10, 11,
12 and 13 of this Agreement (SAA Articles 25 to 28), cause serious disturbance to the markets or to
their domestic regulatory mechanisms, in the other Party, both Parties shall enter into consultations
immediately to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Party concerned may take
the appropriate measures it deems necessary.
ARTICLE 16 (SAA Article 31)
Protection of geographical indications for agricultural and
fishery products and foodstuffs other than wine and spirit drinks
1. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall provide protection of geographical indications of the
Community registered in the Community under Council Regulation (EC) No 510/2006 of
20 March 2006 on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for
agricultural products and foodstuffs 1
, in accordance with the terms of this Article. Geographical
indications of Bosnia and Herzegovina for agricultural and fishery products shall be eligible for
registration in the Community under the conditions set out in that Regulation.

1
 OJ L 93, 31.3.2006, p 12. Regulation as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1791/2006
(OJ L 363, 20.12.2006, p. 1). 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/29
2. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall prohibit any use in its territory of the names protected in the
Community for comparable products not complying with the geographical indication's
specification. This shall apply even where the true geographical origin of the good is indicated, the
geographical indication in question is used in translation, the name is accompanied by terms such as
"kind", "type", "style", "imitation", "method" or other expressions of the sort.
3. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall refuse the registration of a trademark the use of which
corresponds to the situations referred to in paragraph 2.
4. Trademarks which have been registered in Bosnia and Herzegovina or established by use,
the use of which corresponds to the situations referred to in paragraph 2, shall no longer be used
within six years following the entry into force of this Agreement. However, this shall not apply to
trademarks registered in Bosnia and Herzegovina and trademarks established by use which are
owned by nationals of third countries, provided they are not of such a nature as to deceive in any
way the public as to the quality, the specification and the geographical origin of the goods.
5. Any use of the geographical indications protected in accordance with paragraph 1 as terms
customary in common language as the common name for such goods in Bosnia and Herzegovina
shall cease at the latest on 31 December 2013.
6. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall ensure the protection referred to in paragraphs 1 to 5 on its
own initiative as well as at the request of an interested party. 
L 169/30 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
CHAPTER III
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 17 (SAA Article 32)
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to trade in all products between the Parties except where
otherwise provided herein or in Protocol 1.
ARTICLE 18 (SAA Article 33)
Improved concessions
The provisions of this Title shall in no way affect the application, on a unilateral basis, of more
favourable measures by any Party.
ARTICLE 19 (SAA Article 34)
Standstill
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no new customs duties on imports or
exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be
increased, in trade between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/31
2. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no new quantitative restriction on
imports or exports or measure having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those existing
be made more restrictive, in trade between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
3. Without prejudice to the concessions granted under Articles 10, 11, 12 and 13 (SAA
Articles 25, 26, 27 and 28), the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall not restrict in
any way the pursuit of the respective agricultural and fishery policies of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and of the Community and the taking of any measures under those policies in so far as the import
regime in Annexes III to V and Protocol 1 is not affected.
ARTICLE 20 (SAA Article 35)
Prohibition of fiscal discrimination
1. The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall refrain from, and abolish where existing,
any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing, whether directly or indirectly,
discrimination between the products of one Party and like products originating in the territory of the
other Party.
2. Products exported to the territory of one of the Parties may not benefit from repayment of
internal indirect taxation in excess of the amount of indirect taxation imposed on them. 
L 169/32 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 21 (SAA Article 36)
Customs duties of a fiscal nature
The provisions concerning the abolition of customs duties on imports shall also apply to customs
duties of a fiscal nature.
ARTICLE 22 (SAA Article 37)
Customs unions, free trade areas, cross-border arrangements
1. This Agreement shall not preclude the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free
trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade except in so far as they alter the trade arrangements
provided for in this Agreement.
2. During the transitional periods specified in Article 3 (SAA Article 18), this Agreement shall
not affect the implementation of the specific preferential arrangements governing the movement of
goods either laid down in frontier agreements previously concluded between one or more Member
States of the European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina or resulting from the bilateral
agreements specified in Title III concluded by Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to promote regional
trade. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/33
3. Consultations between the Parties shall take place within the Interim Committee concerning
the Agreements described in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article and, where requested, on other major
issues related to their respective trade policies towards third countries. In particular in the event of
a third country acceding to the Union, such consultations shall take place so as to ensure that
account is taken of the mutual interests of the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina stated in
this Agreement.
ARTICLE 23 (SAA Article 38)
Dumping and subsidy
1. None of the provisions in this Agreement shall prevent any Party from taking trade defence
action in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article and Article 24 (SAA Article 39).
2. If one of the Parties finds that dumping and/or countervailable subsidisation is taking place
in trade with the other Party, that Party may take appropriate measures against this practice in
accordance with the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 or the
WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and the respective related internal
legislation. 
L 169/34 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 24 (SAA Article 39)
General safeguard clause
1. The provisions of Article XIX GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards are
applicable between the Parties.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, where any product of one Party is being
imported into the territory of the other Party in such increased quantities and under such conditions
as to cause or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injury to the domestic industry of like or directly competitive products in the territory
of the importing Party, or
(b) serious disturbances in any sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring about
serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region of the importing Party,
the importing Party may take appropriate bilateral safeguard measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedures laid down in this Article. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/35
3. Bilateral safeguard measures directed at imports from the other Party shall not exceed what
is necessary to remedy the problems, as defined in paragraph 2, which have arisen as a result of
application of this Agreement. The safeguard measure adopted should consist of a suspension in
the increase or in the reduction of the margins of preferences provided for under this Agreement for
the product concerned up to a maximum limit corresponding to the basic duty referred to in
Article 3(4)(a) and (b) and (6) (SAA Article 18(4)(a) and (b) and (6)) for the same product. Such
measures shall contain clear elements progressively leading to their elimination at the end of the set
period, at the latest, and shall not be taken for a period exceeding two years.
In very exceptional circumstances, measures may be extended for a further period of a maximum of
two years. No bilateral safeguard measure shall be applied to the import of a product that has
previously been subject to such a measure for a period of, at least, four years since the expiry of the
measure.
4. In the cases specified in this Article, before taking the measures provided for therein or, in
the cases to which paragraph 5(b) of this Article applies, as soon as possible, the Community on the
one part or Bosnia and Herzegovina on the other part, as the case may be, shall supply the Interim
Committee with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation, with a
view to seeking a solution acceptable to the two Parties concerned.
5. For the implementation of paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) the problems arising from the situation referred to in this Article shall be immediately referred
for examination to the Interim Committee, which may take any decisions needed to put an end
to such problems.
L 169/36 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
If the Interim Committee or the exporting Party has not taken a decision putting an end to the
problems, or no other satisfactory solution has been reached within 30 days of the matter
being referred to the Interim Committee, the importing Party may adopt the appropriate
measures to remedy the problem in accordance with this Article. In the selection of safeguard
measures, priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the
arrangements established in this Agreement. Safeguard measures applied in accordance with
Article XIX GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards shall preserve the
level/margin of preference granted under this Agreement;
(b) where exceptional and critical circumstances requiring immediate action make prior
information or examination, as the case may be, impossible, the Party concerned may, in the
situations specified in this Article, apply forth with provisional measures necessary to deal
with the situation and shall inform the other Party immediately thereof.
The safeguard measures shall be notified immediately to the Interim Committee and shall be the
subject of periodic consultations within that body, particularly with a view to establishing a
timetable for their abolition as soon as circumstances permit.
6. In the event of the Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina subjecting imports of products
liable to give rise to the problems referred to in this Article to an administrative procedure having as
its purpose the rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other
Party. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/37
ARTICLE 25 (SAA Article 40)
Shortage clause
1. Where compliance with the provisions of this Title leads to:
(a) a critical shortage, or threat thereof, of foodstuffs or other products essential to the exporting
Party; or
(b) re-export to a third country of a product against which the exporting Party maintains
quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or charges having equivalent effect,
and where the situations referred to above give rise, or are likely to give rise to major
difficulties for the exporting Party
that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the
procedures laid down in this Article.
2. In the selection of measures, priority must be given to those which least disturb the
functioning of the arrangements in this Agreement. Such measures shall not be applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination where the same
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade and shall be eliminated when the conditions no
longer justify their maintenance. 
L 169/38 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
3. Before taking the measures provided for in paragraph 1 or, as soon as possible in cases to
which paragraph 4 applies the Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the case may be, shall
supply the Interim Committee with all relevant information, with a view to seeking a solution
acceptable to the Parties. The Parties within the Interim Committee may agree on any means
needed to put an end to the difficulties. If no agreement is reached within 30 days of the matter
being referred to the Interim Committee, the exporting Party may apply measures under this Article
on the exportation of the product concerned.
4. Where exceptional and critical circumstances requiring immediate action make prior
information or examination, as the case may be, impossible, the Community or Bosnia and
Herzegovina, whichever is concerned, may apply forthwith the precautionary measures necessary to
deal with the situation and shall inform the other Party immediately thereof.
5. Any measures applied pursuant to this Article shall be immediately notified to the Interim
Committee and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within that body, particularly with a
view to establishing a timetable for their elimination as soon as circumstances permit.
ARTICLE 26 (SAA Article 41)
State monopolies
Bosnia and Herzegovina shall adjust any state monopolies of a commercial character so as to ensure
that, following the entry into force of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions
under which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals of the Member States of the
European Union and of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/39
ARTICLE 27 (SAA Article 42)
Rules of origin
Except if otherwise stipulated in this Agreement, Protocol 2 lays down the rules of origin for the
application of the provisions of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 28 (SAA Article 43)
Restrictions authorised
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in
transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of
health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic
or archaeological value or the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property, or rules
relating to gold and silver. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means
of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 29 (SAA Article 44)
Failure to provide administrative cooperation
1. The Parties agree that administrative cooperation is essential for the implementation and the
control of the preferential treatment granted under this Title and underline their commitment to
combat irregularities and fraud in customs and related matters. 
L 169/40 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. Where a Party has made a finding, on the basis of objective information, of a failure to
provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or fraud under this Title, the Party
concerned may temporarily suspend the relevant preferential treatment of the product(s) concerned
in accordance with this Article.
3. For the purpose of this Article a failure to provide administrative cooperation shall mean,
inter alia:
(a) a repeated failure to respect the obligations to verify the originating status of the product(s)
concerned;
(b) a repeated refusal or undue delay in carrying out and/or communicating the results of
subsequent verification of the proof of origin;
(c) a repeated refusal or undue delay in obtaining authorisation to conduct administrative
cooperation missions to verify the authenticity of documents or accuracy of information
relevant to the granting of the preferential treatment in question.
For the purpose of this Article a finding of irregularities or fraud may be made, inter alia, where
there is a rapid increase, without satisfactory explanation, in imports of goods exceeding the usual
level of production and export capacity of the other Party, that is linked to objective information
concerning irregularities or fraud. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/41
4. The application of a temporary suspension shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) the Party which has made a finding, on the basis of objective information, of a failure to
provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or fraud shall without undue delay
notify the Interim Committee of its finding together with the objective information and enter
into consultations within the Interim Committee, on the basis of all relevant information and
objective findings, with a view to reaching a solution acceptable to both Parties;
(b) where the Parties have entered into consultations within the Interim Committee as above and
have failed to agree on an acceptable solution within three months following the notification,
the Party concerned may temporarily suspend the relevant preferential treatment of the
product(s) concerned. A temporary suspension shall be notified to the Interim Committee
without undue delay;
(c) temporary suspensions under this Article shall be limited to the minimum necessary to protect
the financial interests of the Party concerned. They shall not exceed a period of six months,
which may be renewed. Temporary suspensions shall be notified immediately after their
adoption to the Interim Committee. They shall be subject to periodic consultations within the
Interim Committee in particular with a view to their termination as soon as the conditions for
their application no longer prevail. 
L 169/42 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
5. At the same time as the notification to the Interim Committee under paragraph 4(a) of this
Article, the Party concerned should publish a notice to importers in its Official Journal. The notice
to importers should indicate for the product concerned that there is a finding, on the basis of
objective information, of a failure to provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or
fraud.
ARTICLE 30 (SAA Article 45)
Financial responsibility
In case of error by the competent authorities in the proper management of the preferential system at
export, and in particular in the application of the provisions of Protocol 2, where this error leads to
consequences in terms of import duties, the Party facing such consequences may request the Interim
Committee to examine the possibilities of adopting all appropriate measures with a view to
resolving the situation.
ARTICLE 31 (SAA Article 46)
The application of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to the application of the provisions of
Community law to the Canary Islands. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/43
TITLE III
OTHER TRADE AND TRADE-RELATED PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 32 (SAA point 1 of Article 59)
Transit traffic
Definitions (SAA Protocol 3, Article 3(a) and (b))
1. For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Community transit traffic: the carriage, by a carrier established in the Community, of goods in
transit through the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina "en route" to or from a Member State
of the Community;
(b) Bosnia and Herzegovina's transit traffic: the carriage, by a carrier established in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of goods in transit from Bosnia and Herzegovina through Community territory
and destined for a third country or of goods from a third country destined for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
General Provisions (SAA Protocol 3, Article 11(2), (3) and (5))
2. The Parties hereby agree to grant unrestricted access to Community transit traffic through
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to Bosnia and Herzegovina's transit traffic through the Community
with effect from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 
L 169/44 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
3. If, as a result of the rights granted under paragraph 2, transit traffic by Community hauliers
increases to such a degree as to cause or threaten to cause serious harm to road infrastructure and/or
traffic fluidity on the axes mentioned in Article 5 of SAA Protocol 3, and under the same
circumstances problems arise on Community territory close to the borders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the matter shall be submitted to the Interim Committee in accordance with
Article 41(1) of this Agreement. The Parties may propose exceptional temporary,
non-discriminatory measures as are necessary to limit or mitigate such harm.
4. The Parties shall refrain from taking any unilateral action that might lead to discrimination
between Community carriers or vehicles and carriers or vehicles from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Each Party shall take all steps necessary to facilitate road transport to or through the territory of the
other Party.
Simplification of formalities (SAA Protocol 3, Article 19(1) and (3))
5. The Parties agree to simplify the flow of goods by rail and road, whether bilateral or in
transit.
6. The Parties agree, to the extent necessary, to take joint action on, and to encourage, the
adoption of further simplification measures.
 Implementation (SAA Protocol 3, Article 21(1) and (2)(d))
7. Cooperation between the Parties shall be carried out within the framework of a special
sub-committee to be created in accordance with Article 43 of this Agreement. It shall in particular
coordinate the monitoring, forecasting and other statistical work relating to international transport
and in particular transit traffic. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/45
ARTICLE 33 (SAA Article 60)
The Parties undertake to authorise, in freely convertible currency, in accordance with the provisions
of Article VIII of the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, any payments
and transfers on the current account of balance of payments between the Community and Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
ARTICLE 34 (SAA Article 67)
1. The Parties shall endeavour wherever possible to avoid the imposition of restrictive
measures, including measures relating to imports, for balance of payments purposes. A Party
adopting such measures shall present as soon as possible to the other Party a timetable for their
removal.
2. Where one or more Member States, or Bosnia and Herzegovina is in serious balance of
payments difficulties, or under imminent threat thereof, the Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as the case may be, may, in accordance with the conditions established under the WTO Agreement,
adopt restrictive measures, including measures relating to imports, which shall be of limited
duration and may not go beyond what is strictly necessary to remedy the balance of payments
situation. The Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the case may be, shall inform the other
Party forthwith.
3. Any restrictive measures shall not apply to transfers related to investment and in particular
to the repatriation of amounts invested or reinvested or any kind of revenues stemming there from. 
L 169/46 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 35 (SAA Article 69)
The provisions of this Agreement shall not prejudice the application by any Party of any measure
necessary to prevent the circumvention of its measures concerning third-country access to its
market through the provisions of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 36 (SAA Article 71)
Competition and other economic provisions
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement, insofar as
they may affect trade between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted
practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction
or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the Community
or of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole or in a substantial part thereof;
(c) any State aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain
undertakings or certain products. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/47
2. Any practices contrary to this Article shall be assessed on the basis of criteria arising from
the application of the competition rules applicable in the Community, in particular from Articles 81,
82, 86 and 87 of the Treaty establishing the European Community (hereinafter referred to as
"EC Treaty") and interpretative instruments adopted by the Community institutions.
3. The Parties shall ensure that an operationally independent public authority is entrusted with
the powers necessary for the full application of paragraph 1(a) and (b), regarding private and public
undertakings and undertakings to which special rights have been granted.
4. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall establish an operationally independent public authority, which
is entrusted with the powers necessary for the full application of paragraph 1(c) within two years
from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. This authority shall have, inter alia, the powers
to authorise State aid schemes and individual aid grants in conformity with paragraph 2, as well as
the powers to order the recovery of State aid that has been unlawfully granted.
5. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of State aid, inter alia by providing to the
other Party a regular annual report, or equivalent, following the methodology and the presentation
of the Community survey on State aid. Upon request by one Party, the other Party shall provide
information on particular individual cases of public aid.
6. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall establish a comprehensive inventory of aid schemes instituted
before the establishment of the authority referred to in paragraph 4 and shall align such aid schemes
with the criteria referred to in paragraph 2 within a period of no more than four years from the entry
into force of this Agreement. 
L 169/48 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
7. (a) For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraph 1(c), the Parties recognise that
during the first six years after the entry into force of this Agreement, any public aid
granted by Bosnia and Herzegovina shall be assessed taking into account the fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina shall be regarded as an area identical to those areas of the
Community described in Article 87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty.
(b) By the end of the fifth year from the entry into force of this Agreement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina shall submit to the European Commission its GDP per capita figures
harmonised at NUTS II level. The authority referred to in paragraph 4 and the
European Commission shall then jointly evaluate the eligibility of the regions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as well as the maximum aid intensities in relation thereto in order to
draw up the regional aid map on the basis of the relevant Community guidelines.
8. Protocol 3 establishes the special rules on State aid applicable to the restructuring of the
steel industry.
9. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II of Title II:
(a) paragraph 1(c) shall not apply;
(b) any practices contrary to paragraph 1(a) shall be assessed according to the criteria established
by the Community on the basis of Articles 36 and 37 of the EC Treaty and specific
Community instruments adopted on this basis. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/49
10. If one of the Parties considers that a particular practice is incompatible with the terms of
paragraph 1, it may take appropriate measures after consultation within the Interim Committee or
after 30 working days following referral for such consultation.
Nothing in this Article shall prejudice or affect in any way the taking, by either Party, of
anti-dumping or countervailing measures in accordance with the relevant Articles of the
GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and the respective
related internal legislation.
ARTICLE 37 (SAA Article 72)
Public undertakings
By the end of the third year following the entry into force of this Agreement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina shall apply to public undertakings and undertakings to which special and exclusive
rights have been granted the principles set out in the EC Treaty, with particular reference to its
Article 86.
Special rights of public undertakings during the transitional period shall not include the possibility
to impose quantitative restrictions or measures having an equivalent effect on imports from the
Community into Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
L 169/50 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 38 (SAA Article 73)
Intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights
1. Pursuant to the provisions of this Article and Annex VI, the Parties confirm the importance
that they attach to ensuring adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual,
industrial and commercial property rights.
2. From entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall grant to each others' companies
and nationals, in respect of the recognition and protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial
property, treatment no less favourable than that granted by them to any third country under bilateral
Agreements.
3. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall take all the necessary measures in order to guarantee no later
than five years after entry into force of this Agreement a level of protection of intellectual,
industrial and commercial property rights similar to that existing in the Community, including
effective means of enforcing such rights.
4. Bosnia and Herzegovina undertakes to accede, within the period referred to above, to the
multilateral conventions on intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights referred to in
Annex VI. The Parties affirm the importance they attach to the principles of the Agreement on
Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. The Interim Committee may decide to
oblige Bosnia and Herzegovina to accede to specific multilateral conventions in this area. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/51
5. If problems in the area of intellectual, industrial and commercial property affecting trading
conditions occur, they shall be referred urgently to the Interim Committee, at the request of either
Party, with a view to reaching mutually satisfactory solutions.
ARTICLE 39 (SAA Article 97)
Customs
The Parties shall establish cooperation in this area with a view to guarantee compliance with the
provisions to be adopted in the area of trade and to achieve the approximation of the customs
system of Bosnia and Herzegovina to that of the Community, thereby helping to pave the way for
the liberalisation measures planned under this Agreement and for the gradual approximation of the
customs legislation of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the acquis.
Cooperation shall take due account of priority areas related to the Community acquis in the field of
customs.
The rules on mutual administrative assistance between the Parties in the customs field are laid down
in Protocol 4. 
L 169/52 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE IV
INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 40
An Interim Committee is hereby established which shall supervise the application and
implementation of this Agreement. It shall hold meetings at regular intervals and when
circumstances require.
ARTICLE 41
1. The Interim Committee shall have the power to take decisions within the scope of this
Agreement in the cases provided for therein. The decisions taken shall be binding on the Parties,
which shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. The Interim Committee
may also formulate recommendations which it considers desirable for the purpose of attaining the
common objectives and the smooth functioning of this agreement. It shall draw up its decisions and
recommendations by agreement between the Parties.
2. The Interim Committee shall adopt its own Rules of Procedure. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/53
ARTICLE 42
1. The Interim Committee shall be composed of representatives of the Community, on the one
hand, and representatives of the Bosnia and Herzegovina, on the other. The members of the Interim
Committee may be represented as laid down in its rules of procedure.
2. The chairmanship of the Interim Committee will alternate between the Parties, in
accordance with the conditions laid down in the rules of procedures.
3. The Interim Committee shall act by mutual agreement of the Parties.
ARTICLE 43
The Interim Committee may create sub-committees.
ARTICLE 44
Each party shall refer to the Interim Committee any dispute relating to the application or
interpretation of this Agreement.
The Interim Committee may settle the dispute by means of a binding decision. 
L 169/54 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 45 (SAA Article 122)
Within the scope of this Agreement, each Party undertakes to ensure that natural and legal persons
of the other Party have access free of discrimination in relation to its own nationals to the competent
courts and administrative organs of the Parties to defend their individual rights and their property
rights.
ARTICLE 46 (SAA Article 123)
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures:
(a) which it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential
security interests;
(b) which relate to the production of, or trade in, arms, munitions or war materials or to research,
development or production indispensable for defence purposes, provided that such measures
do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically
military purposes;
(c) which it considers essential to its own security in the event of serious internal disturbances
affecting the maintenance of law and order, in time of war or serious international tension
constituting threat of war or in order to carry out obligations it has accepted for the purpose of
maintaining peace and international security. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/55
ARTICLE 47 (SAA Article 124)
1. In the fields covered by this Agreement and without prejudice to any special provisions
contained therein:
(a) the arrangements applied by Bosnia and Herzegovina in respect of the Community shall not
give rise to any discrimination between the Member States, their nationals, companies or
firms;
(b) the arrangements applied by the Community in respect of Bosnia and Herzegovina shall not
give rise to any discrimination between nationals, companies or firms of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall be without prejudice to the right of the Parties to apply
the relevant provisions of their fiscal legislation to taxpayers who are not in identical situations as
regards their place of residence.
ARTICLE 48 (SAA Article 125)
1. The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their obligations
under this Agreement. They shall ensure that the objectives set out in this Agreement are attained.
2. The Parties agree to consult promptly through appropriate channels at the request of either
Party to discuss any matter concerning the interpretation or implementation of this Agreement and
other relevant aspects of the relations between the Parties. 
L 169/56 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
3. Each Party shall refer to the Interim Committee any dispute relating to the application or
interpretation of this Agreement. In that case, Article 49 and, as the case may be, Protocol 5, shall
apply.
The Interim Committee may settle the dispute by means of a binding decision.
4. If either Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under this
Agreement, it may take appropriate measures. Before so doing, except in cases of special urgency,
it shall supply the Interim Committee with all relevant information required for a thorough
examination of the situation with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties.
In the selection of measures, priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of
this Agreement. These measures shall be notified immediately to the Interim Committee and shall
be the subject of consultations within the Interim Committee, if the other Party so requests.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall in no way affect and are without prejudice to
Articles 15, 23, 24, 25 and 29 (SAA Articles 30, 38, 39, 40 and 44) and Protocol 2.
ARTICLE 49 (SAA Article 126)
1. When a dispute arises between the Parties concerning the interpretation or the
implementation of this Agreement, any Party shall notify to the other Party and the Interim
Committee a formal request that the matter in dispute be resolved. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/57
Where a Party considers that a measure adopted by the other Party, or a failure of the other Party to
act, constitutes a breach of its obligations under this Agreement, the formal request that the dispute
be resolved shall give the reasons for this opinion and indicate, as the case may be, that the Party
may adopt measures as provided for in Article 48(4).
2. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve the dispute by entering into good faith consultations
within the Interim Committee and other bodies as provided in paragraph 3, with the aim of reaching
as soon as possible a mutually acceptable solution.
3. The Parties shall provide the Interim Committee with all relevant information required for a
thorough examination of the situation.
As long as the dispute is not resolved, it shall be discussed at every meeting of the Interim
Committee, unless the arbitration procedure as provided for in Protocol 5 has been initiated. A
dispute shall be deemed to be resolved when the Interim Committee has taken a binding decision to
settle the matter as provided for in Article 48(3), or when it has declared that there is no dispute
anymore.
Consultations on a dispute can also be held at any meeting of the Interim Committee or any other
relevant committee or body set up on the basis of Article 43, as agreed between the Parties or at the
request of any of the Parties. Consultations may also be held in writing.
All information disclosed during the consultations shall remain confidential. 
L 169/58 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
4. For matters within the scope of application of Protocol 5, any Party may submit the matter
in dispute for settlement through arbitration in accordance with that Protocol, when the Parties have
failed to resolve the dispute within two months after the initiation of the dispute settlement
procedure in accordance with paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 50
Annexes I to VI and Protocols 1 to 6 shall form an integral part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 51 (SAA Article 127)
This Agreement shall not, until equivalent rights for individuals and economic operators have been
achieved under this Agreement, affect rights ensured to them through existing Agreements binding
one or more Member States of the European Union, on the one hand, and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
on the other. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/59
ARTICLE 52 (SAA Article 17)
Cooperation with other countries candidate for EU accession
not concerned by the Stabilisation and Association process
1. Bosnia and Herzegovina should foster its cooperation and conclude a convention on regional
cooperation with any other country candidate for EU accession not concerned by the Stabilisation
and Association process in any of the fields of cooperation covered by this Agreement. Such
convention should aim to gradually align bilateral relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
that country with the relevant part of the relations between the Community and its Member States
and that country.
2. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall conclude before the end of the transitional periods referred to
in Article 3(1) (SAA Article 18(1)) with Turkey, which has established a customs union with the
Community, on a mutually advantageous basis, an agreement establishing a free trade area in
accordance with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 as well as liberalising the establishment and
supply of services between them at an equivalent level of this Agreement in accordance with
Article V of the GATS.
ARTICLE 53
This Agreement shall be applicable until the entry into force of the Stabilisation and Association
Agreement.
Either Party may denounce this Agreement by notifying the other Party. This Agreement shall
terminate six months after the date of such notification. 
L 169/60 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 54 (SAA Article 131)
This Agreement shall apply, on the one hand, to the territories in which the EC Treaty is applied
and under the conditions laid down in that Treaty, and to the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the other.
ARTICLE 55 (SAA Article 132)
The Secretary General of the Council of the European Union shall be the depositary of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 56 (SAA Article 130)
For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "Parties" shall mean the Community, or its Member
States, or the Community and its Member States, in accordance with their respective powers, of the
one part, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, of the other part.
ARTICLE 57 (SAA Article 133)
This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Bulgarian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian,
Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish,
Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish, Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian
languages, each text being equally authentic. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/61
ARTICLE 58
The Parties shall ratify or approve this Agreement in accordance with their own procedures.
The instruments of ratification or approval shall be deposited with the General Secretariat of the
Council of the European Union.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the first month following the date of the
deposit of the last instrument of ratification or approval. 
L 169/62 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
Съставено в Люксембург на шестнадесети юни две хиляди и осма година.
Hecho en Luxemburgo, el dieciseis de junio de dosmile ocho.
V Lucemburku dne šestnáctého června dva tisíce osm.
Udfærdiget i Luxembourg den sekstende juni to tusind og otte.
Geschehen zu Luxemburg am sechzehnten Juni zweitausendacht.
Kahe tuhande kaheksanda aasta juunikuu kuueteistkümnendal päeval Luxembourgis.
΄Εγινε στo Λουξεμβούργο, στις δέκα έξι Ιουνίου δύο χιλιάδες οκτώ.
Done at Luxembourg on the sixteenth day of June in the year two thousand and eight.
Fait à Luxembourg, le seize juin deux mille huit.
Fatto a Lussemburgo, addì sedici giugno duemilaotto.
Luksemburgā, divtūkstoš astotā gada sešpadsmitajā jūnijā.
Priimta du tūkstančiai aštuntų metų birželio šešioliktą dieną Liuksemburge.
Kelt Luxembourgban, a kétezer-nyolcadik év június tzenhatodik napján.
Magħmul fil-Lussemburgu, fis-sittax-il jum ta' Ġunju tas-sena elfejn u tmienja.
Gedaan te Luxemburg, de zestiende juni tweeduizend acht.
Sporządzono w Luksemburgu dnia szesnastego czerwca roku dwa tysiące ósmego.
Feito em Luxemburgo, em dezasseis de Junho de dois mil e oito.
Încheiat la Luxembourg, la şaisprezece iunie două mii opt.
V Luxemburgu dňa šestnásteho júna dvetisícosem.
V Luxembourgu, dne šestnajstega junija leta dva tisoč osem.
Tehty Luxemburgissa kuudentenatoista päivänä kesäkuuta vuonna kaksituhattakahdeksan.
Som skedde i Luxemburg den sextonde juni tjugohundraåtta.
Sačinjeno u Luksemburgu, šesnaestoga juna dvije hiljade osme godine.
Sačinjeno u Luksemburgu, šesnaestoga lipnja dvije tisuće osme godine.
Састављено у Луксембургу, шеснаестога јуна двије хиљаде осме године. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/63 
L 169/64 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
.LIST OF ANNEXES AND PROTOCOLS
ANNEXES
Annex I (Article 6) – Tariff concessions of Bosnia and Herzegovina for Community industrial
products
Annex II (Article 12(2)) – Definition of "baby beef" products
Annex III (Article 12) – Tariff concessions of Bosnia and Herzegovina for agricultural primary
products originating in the Community
Annex IV (Article 13) – Duties applicable to goods originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina on
import into the Community
Annex V (Article 13) – Duties applicable to goods originating in the Community on import into
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Annex VI (Article 38) – Intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/65
PROTOCOLS
Protocol 1 (Article 10) – On trade between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina in
processed agricultural products
Protocol 2 (Article 27) – Concerning the definition of the concept of "originating products" and
methods of administrative cooperation for the application of the provisions of this Agreement
between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina
Protocol 3 (Article 36) – On State aid to the steel industry
Protocol 4 (Article 39) – On mutual administrative assistance in customs matters
Protocol 5 (Article 49) – Dispute settlement
Protocol 6 (Article 12) – On reciprocal preferential concessions for certain wines, the reciprocal
recognition, protection and control of wine, spirit drinks and aromatised wine names
ANNEX VI
INTELLECTUAL, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL
PROPERTY RIGHTS
(Referred to in Article 38)
1. Article 38(4) of this Agreement (SAA Article 73(4)) concerns the following Multilateral
Conventions to which Member States are Parties, or which are de facto applied by Member
States:
– Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of Micro-organisms for
the Purposes of Patent Procedure (Budapest, 1977, as amended in 1980),
– Hague Agreement Concerning the International Deposit of Industrial Designs
(Geneva Act, 1999),
– Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
Marks (Madrid Protocol, 1989),
– Patent Law Treaty (Geneva, 2000),
– Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against Unauthorised
Duplications of their Phonograms (Phonograms Convention, Geneva, 1971), 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/341
– International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms
and Broadcasting Organizations (Rome Convention, 1961),
– Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the International Patent Classification
(Strasbourg, 1971, as amended in 1979),
– Vienna Agreement Establishing an International Classification of the Figurative
Elements of Marks (Vienna, 1973, as amended in 1985),
– WIPO Copyright Treaty (Geneva, 1996),
– WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (Geneva, 1996),
– International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV
Convention, Paris, 1961, as revised in 1972, 1978 and 1991),
– Convention on the Grant of European Patents (European Patent Convention – Munich,
1973 as amended, including 2000 revision),
– Trademark Law Treaty (Geneva, 1994). 
L 169/342 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. The Parties confirm the importance they attach to the obligations arising from the following
Multilateral Conventions:
– Convention establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO Convention, Stockholm, 1967, as amended in 1979),
– Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Paris Act, 1971),
– Brussels Convention Relating to the Distribution of Programme-Carrying Signals
Transmitted by Satellite (Brussels, 1974),
– Locarno Agreement Establishing an International Classification for Industrial Designs
(Locarno, 1968, as amended in 1979),
– Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks (Stockholm Act,
1967 and amended in 1979),
– Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for
the purposes of the Registration of Marks (Geneva, 1977 and amended in 1979), 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/343
– Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (Stockholm Act, 1967 and
amended in 1979),
– Patent Cooperation Treaty (Washington, 1970, as amended in 1979 and modified
in 1984).
 
L 169/344 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
PROTOCOL 1
ON TRADE BETWEEN THE COMMUNITY
AND BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
IN PROCESSED AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS 
ARTICLE 1
1. The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina apply to processed agricultural products the
duties, listed in Annex I and Annex II respectively in accordance with the conditions mentioned
therein, whether limited by quota or not.
2. The Interim Committee shall decide on:
(a) extensions of the list of processed agricultural products under this Protocol;
(b) amendments to the duties referred to in Annexes I and II;
(c) increases in or the abolition of tariff quotas.
3. The Interim Committee may replace the duties established by this Protocol by a regime
established on the basis of the respective market prices in the Community and Bosnia and
Herzegovina of agricultural products actually used in the manufacture of processed agricultural
products subject to this Protocol. 
L 169/346 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 2
The duties applied pursuant to Article 1 may be reduced by decision of the Interim Committee:
(a) when in trade between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina the duties applied to the
basic products are reduced, or
(b) in response to reductions resulting from mutual concessions relating to processed agricultural
products.
The reductions provided for under point (a) shall be calculated on the part of the duty designated as
the agricultural component which shall correspond to the agricultural products actually used in the
manufacture of the processed agricultural products in question and deducted from the duties applied
to these basic agricultural products.
ARTICLE 3
The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall inform each other of the administrative
arrangements adopted for the products covered by this Protocol. These arrangements should ensure
equal treatment for all interested parties and should be as simple and flexible as possible. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/347
ANNEX I TO PROTOCOL 1
DUTIES APPLICABLE UPON IMPORTS INTO THE COMMUNITY
OF GOODS ORIGINATING IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Duties are set to zero for imports into the Community of processed agricultural products originating
in Bosnia and Herzegovina as listed hereafter. 
PROTOCOL 2
CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF
"ORIGINATING PRODUCTS" AND METHODS OF
ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION FOR
THE APPLICATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE COMMUNITY AND BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 
L 169/408 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1 Definitions
TITLE II DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
Article 2 General requirements
Article 3 Cumulation in the Community
Article 4 Cumulation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Article 5 Wholly obtained products
Article 6 Sufficiently worked or processed products
Article 7 Insufficient working or processing
Article 8 Unit of qualification
Article 9 Accessories, spare parts and tools
Article 10 Sets
Article 11 Neutral elements
TITLE III TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Article 12 Principle of territoriality
Article 13 Direct transport
Article 14 Exhibitions 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/409
TITLE IV DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
Article 15 Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
TITLE V PROOF OF ORIGIN
Article 16 General requirements
Article 17 Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1
Article 18 Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
Article 19 Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
Article 20 Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin issued or
made out previously
Article 21 Accounting segregation
Article 22 Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
Article 23 Approved exporter
Article 24 Validity of proof of origin
Article 25 Submission of proof of origin
Article 26 Importation by instalments
Article 27 Exemptions from proof of origin
Article 28 Supporting documents
Article 29 Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
Article 30 Discrepancies and formal errors
Article 31 Amounts expressed in euro
TITLE VI ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION
Article 32 Mutual assistance 
L 169/410 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
Article 33 Verification of proofs of origin
Article 34 Dispute settlement
Article 35 Penalties
Article 36 Free zones
TITLE VII CEUTA AND MELILLA
Article 37 Application of the Protocol
Article 38 Special conditions
TITLE VIII FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 39 Amendments to the Protocol
List of Annexes
Annex I: Introductory notes to the list in Annex II
Annex II: List of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials
in order that the product manufactured can obtain originating status
Annex III: Specimens of movement certificate EUR.1 and application for a movement
certificate EUR.1
Annex IV: Text of the invoice declaration
Annex V: Products excluded from the cumulation provided for in Article 3 and Article 4
Joint Declarations
Joint declaration concerning the Principality of Andorra
Joint declaration concerning the Republic of San Marino 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/411
TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) "manufacture" means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific
operations;
(b) "material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the
manufacture of the product;
(c) "product" means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another
manufacturing operation;
(d) "goods" means both materials and products; 
L 169/412 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(e) "customs value" means the value as determined in accordance with the 1994 Agreement on
implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(WTO Agreement on customs valuation);
(f) "ex-works price" means the price paid for the product ex works to the manufacturer in the
Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina in whose undertaking the last working or
processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus
any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;
(g) "value of materials" means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating
materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price
paid for the materials in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
(h) "value of originating materials" means the value of such materials as defined in (g) applied
mutatis mutandis;
(i) "value added" shall be taken to be the ex-works price minus the customs value of each of the
materials incorporated which originate in the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 or,
where the customs value is not known or cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price
paid for the materials in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
(j) "chapters" and "headings" mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes) used in the
nomenclature which makes up the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System,
referred to in this Protocol as "the Harmonised System" or "HS"; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/413
(k) "classified" refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular heading;
(l) "consignment" means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one
consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the
exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;
(m) "territories" includes territorial waters. 
L 169/414 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE II
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
ARTICLE 2
General requirements
1. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered
as originating in the Community:
(a) products wholly obtained in the Community within the meaning of Article 5;
(b) products obtained in the Community incorporating materials which have not been wholly
obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing
in the Community within the meaning of Article 6.
2. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered
as originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina:
(a) products wholly obtained in Bosnia and Herzegovina within the meaning of Article 5; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/415
(b) products obtained in Bosnia and Herzegovina incorporating materials which have not been
wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or
processing in Bosnia and Herzegovina within the meaning of Article 6.
ARTICLE 3
Cumulation in the Community
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(1), products shall be considered as
originating in the Community if such products are obtained there, incorporating materials
originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the Community, in any country or territory participating
in the European Union's Stabilisation and Association process 1
, or incorporating the materials
originating in Turkey to which the Decision No 1/95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of
22 December 1995 2
 applies, provided that the working or processing carried out in the Community
goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary that such materials
have undergone sufficient working or processing.

1
 As defined in the Conclusions of the General Affairs Council in April 1997 and Commission
Communication of May 1999 on the establishment of the Stabilisation and Association
process with Western Balkan countries.
2
 Decision No 1/95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of 22 December 1995 applies to
products other than agricultural products as defined in the Agreement establishing an
Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey and other than coal and
steel products as defined in the Agreement between the European Coal and Steel Community
and the Republic of Turkey on trade in products covered by the treaty establishing the
European Coal and Steel Community. 
L 169/416 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. Where the working or processing carried out in the Community does not go beyond the
operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the
Community only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used
originating in any one of the other countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1. If this is not
so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country which accounts for the
highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in the Community.
3. Products, originating in one of the countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1, which
do not undergo any working or processing in the Community, retain their origin if exported into one
of these countries or territories.
4. The cumulation provided for in this Article may be applied only provided that:
(a) a preferential trade agreement in accordance with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is applicable between the countries or territories involved in the
acquisition of the originating status and the country of destination;
(b) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin
identical to those given in this Protocol;
and 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/417
(c) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply cumulation have been
published in the Official Journal of the European Union (C series) and in Bosnia and
Herzegovina according to its own procedures.
The cumulation provided for in this Article shall apply from the date indicated in the notice
published in the Official Journal of the European Union (C series).
The Community shall provide Bosnia and Herzegovina, through the European Commission, with
details of the Agreements and their corresponding rules of origin, which are applied with the other
countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1.
The products in Annex V shall be excluded from the cumulation provided for in this Article. 
L 169/418 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 4
Cumulation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2), products shall be considered as
originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina if such products are obtained there, incorporating materials
originating in the Community, Bosnia and Herzegovina, or in any country or territory participating
in the European Union's Stabilisation and Association Process 1
, or incorporating the materials
originating in Turkey to which the Decision No 1/95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of
22 December 1995 2
 applies, provided that the working or processing carried out in Bosnia and
Herzegovina goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary that such
materials have undergone sufficient working or processing.
2. Where the working or processing carried out in Bosnia and Herzegovina does not go beyond
the operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in
Bosnia and Herzegovina only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials
used originating in any one of the other countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1. If this is
not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country which accounts for the
highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

1
 As defined in the Conclusions of the General Affairs Council in April 1997 and Commission
Communication of May 1999 on the establishment of the Stabilisation and Association
process with Western Balkan countries.
2
 Decision No 1/95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of 22 December 1995 applies to
products other than agricultural products as defined in the Agreement establishing an
Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey and other than coal and
steel products as defined in the Agreement between the European Coal and Steel Community
and the Republic of Turkey on trade in products covered by the treaty establishing the
European Coal and Steel Community. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/419
3. Products, originating in one of the countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1, which
do not undergo any working or processing in Bosnia and Herzegovina, retain their origin if exported
into one of these countries or territories.
4. The cumulation provided for in this Article may be applied only provided that:
(a) a preferential trade agreement in accordance with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is applicable between the countries or territories involved in the
acquisition of the originating status and the country of destination;
(b) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin
identical to those given in this Protocol;
and
(c) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply cumulation have been
published in the Official Journal of the European Union (C series) and in Bosnia and
Herzegovina according to its own procedures.
The cumulation provided for in this Article shall apply from the date indicated in the notice
published in the Official Journal of the European Union (C series).
Bosnia and Herzegovina shall provide the Community, through the European Commission with
details of the Agreements, including their dates of entry into force, and their corresponding rules of
origin, which are applied with the other countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1.
The products in Annex V shall be excluded from the cumulation provided for in this Article. 
L 169/420 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 5
Wholly obtained products
1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in the Community or in Bosnia and
Herzegovina:
(a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed;
(b) vegetable products harvested there;
(c) live animals born and raised there;
(d) products from live animals raised there;
(e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;
(f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the territorial waters of
the Community or of Bosnia and Herzegovina by their vessels;
(g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in (f);
(h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including used tyres fit
only for retreading or for use as waste; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/421
(i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;
(j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside their territorial waters provided that
they have sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;
(k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in (a) to (j).
2. The terms "their vessels" and "their factory ships" in paragraph 1(f) and (g) shall apply only
to vessels and factory ships:
(a) which are registered or recorded in a Member State of the Community or in Bosnia and
Herzegovina;
(b) which sail under the flag of a Member State of the Community or of Bosnia and
Herzegovina;
(c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50 % by nationals of a Member State of the
Community or of Bosnia and Herzegovina, or by a company with its head office in one of
these States, of which the manager or managers, Chairman of the Board of Directors or the
Supervisory Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are nationals of a
Member State of the Community or of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of which, in addition, in
the case of partnerships or limited companies, at least half the capital belongs to those States
or to public bodies or nationals of the said States; 
L 169/422 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(d) of which the master and officers are nationals of a Member State of the Community or of
Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and
(e) of which at least 75 % of the crew are nationals of a Member State of the Community or of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
ARTICLE 6
Sufficiently worked or processed products
1. For the purposes of Article 2, products which are not wholly obtained are considered to be
sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list in Annex II are fulfilled.
The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by this Agreement, the working
or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and
apply only in relation to such materials. It follows that if a product which has acquired originating
status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product,
the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no
account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its
manufacture. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/423
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions
set out in the list, should not be used in the manufacture of a product may nevertheless be used,
provided that:
(a) their total value does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the product;
(b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating materials
are not exceeded through the application of this paragraph.
This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised
System.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply subject to the provisions of Article 7.
ARTICLE 7
Insufficient working or processing
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2 of this Article, the following operations shall be
considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products,
whether or not the requirements of Article 6 are satisfied:
(a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during transport
and storage; 
L 169/424 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;
(c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
(d) ironing or pressing of textiles;
(e) simple painting and polishing operations;
(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;
(g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;
(h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;
(i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching; (including the making-up of sets of
articles);
(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards and all
other simple packaging operations; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/425
(l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or
their packaging;
(m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; mixing of sugar with any other
material;
(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of products
into parts;
(o) a combination of two or more operations specified in (a) to (n);
(p) slaughter of animals.
2. All operations carried out either in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina on a given
product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing
undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 8
Unit of qualification
1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall be the
particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the
nomenclature of the Harmonised System. 
L 169/426 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
It follows that:
(a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of
the Harmonised System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification;
(b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same
heading of the Harmonised System, each product must be taken individually when applying
the provisions of this Protocol.
2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonised System, packaging is included with the
product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.
ARTICLE 9
Accessories, spare parts and tools
Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or
vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not
separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or
vehicle in question. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/427
ARTICLE 10
Sets
Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised System, shall be regarded as originating when
all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and
non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value
of the non-originating products does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the set.
ARTICLE 11
Neutral elements
In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin
of the following which might be used in its manufacture:
(a) energy and fuel;
(b) plant and equipment;
(c) machines and tools;
(d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the
product. 
L 169/428 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE III
TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 12
Principle of territoriality
1. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4 and paragraph 3 of this Article, the conditions for
acquiring originating status set out in Title II must be fulfilled without interruption in the
Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4, where originating goods exported from the
Community or from Bosnia and Herzegovina to another country return, they must be considered as
non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(a) the returning goods are the same as those exported;
and
(b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good
condition while in that country or while being exported. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/429
3. The acquisition of originating status in accordance with the conditions set out in Title II
shall not be affected by working or processing done outside the Community or Bosnia and
Herzegovina on materials exported from the Community or from Bosnia and Herzegovina and
subsequently re-imported there, provided:
(a) the said materials are wholly obtained in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina or
have undergone working or processing beyond the operations referred to in Article 7 prior to
being exported;
and
(b) it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(i) the re-imported goods have been obtained by working or processing the exported
materials;
and
(ii) the total added value acquired outside the Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina by
applying the provisions of this Article does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of
the end product for which originating status is claimed. 
L 169/430 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in
Title II shall not apply to working or processing done outside the Community or Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But where, in the list in Annex II, a rule setting a maximum value for all the
non-originating materials incorporated is applied in determining the originating status of the end
product, the total value of the non-originating materials incorporated in the territory of the party
concerned, taken together with the total added value acquired outside the Community or Bosnia and
Herzegovina by applying the provisions of this Article, shall not exceed the stated percentage.
5. For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4, "total added value" shall
be taken to mean all costs arising outside the Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
value of the materials incorporated there.
6. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which do not fulfil the
conditions set out in the list in Annex II or which can be considered sufficiently worked or
processed only if the general tolerance fixed in Article 6(2) is applied.
7. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products of Chapters 50 to 63 of the
Harmonised System.
8. Any working or processing of the kind covered by the provisions of this Article and done
outside the Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina shall be done under the outward processing
arrangements, or similar arrangements. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/431
ARTICLE 13
Direct transport
1. The preferential treatment provided for under this Agreement applies only to products,
satisfying the requirements of this Protocol, which are transported directly between the Community
and Bosnia and Herzegovina or through the territories of the other countries or territories referred to
in Articles 3 and 4. However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported
through other territories with, should the occasion arise, trans-shipment or temporary warehousing
in such territories, provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the
country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or
any operation designed to preserve them in good condition.
Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of the
Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to
the customs authorities of the importing country by the production of:
(a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting country through the
country of transit; or 
L 169/432 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:
(i) giving an exact description of the products;
(ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable, the
names of the ships, or the other means of transport used;
and
(iii) certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or
(c) failing these, any substantiating documents.
ARTICLE 14
Exhibitions
1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in a country other than those referred to in
Articles 3 and 4 and sold after the exhibition for importation in the Community or in Bosnia and
Herzegovina shall benefit on importation from the provisions of this Agreement provided it is
shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(a) an exporter has consigned these products from the Community or from Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/433
(b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in the
Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
(c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state
in which they were sent for exhibition;
and
(d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose
other than demonstration at the exhibition.
2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V
and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the normal manner. The name
and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary
evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or
similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business
premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under
customs control. 
L 169/434 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE IV
DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
ARTICLE 15
Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
1. Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in the
Community, in Bosnia and Herzegovina or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in
Articles 3 and 4 for which a proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with the provisions
of Title V shall not be subject in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina to drawback of, or
exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.
2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund, remission or
non-payment, partial or complete, of customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect,
applicable in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina to materials used in the manufacture,
where such refund, remission or non-payment applies, expressly or in effect, when products
obtained from the said materials are exported and not when they are retained for home use there. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/435
3. The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit at any
time, upon request from the customs authorities, all appropriate documents proving that no
drawback has been obtained in respect of the non-originating materials used in the manufacture of
the products concerned and that all customs duties or charges having equivalent effect applicable to
such materials have actually been paid.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging within the
meaning of Article 8(2), accessories, spare parts and tools within the meaning of Article 9 and
products in a set within the meaning of Article 10 when such items are non-originating.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials which are of the
kind to which this Agreement applies. Furthermore, they shall not preclude the application of an
export refund system for agricultural products, applicable upon export in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement. 
L 169/436 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE V
PROOF OF ORIGIN
ARTICLE 16
General requirements
1. Products originating in the Community shall, on importation into Bosnia and Herzegovina
and products originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina shall, on importation into the Community
benefit from this Agreement upon submission of either:
(a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III; or
(b) in the cases specified in Article 22(1), a declaration, subsequently referred to as the "invoice
declaration", given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial
document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be
identified; the text of the invoice declaration appears in Annex IV.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, originating products within the meaning of this
Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 27, benefit from this Agreement without it being
necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/437
ARTICLE 17
Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1
1. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting
country on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's
responsibility, by his authorised representative.
2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out both the
movement certificate EUR.1 and the application form, specimens of which appear in Annex III.
These forms shall be completed in one of the languages in which this Agreement is drawn up and in
accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If they are
hand-written, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products
must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box
is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the
empty space being crossed through.
3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be prepared to
submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country where the
movement certificate EUR.1 is issued, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of
the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. 
L 169/438 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
4. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of a Member State
of the Community or of Bosnia and Herzegovina if the products concerned can be considered as
products originating in the Community, Bosnia and Herzegovina or in one of the other countries or
territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
5. The customs authorities issuing movement certificates EUR.1 shall take any steps necessary
to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this
Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any
inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate. They shall also
ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check
whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner
as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
6. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in Box 11 of the
certificate.
7. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made
available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/439
ARTICLE 18
Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 17(7), a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be issued
after exportation of the products to which it relates if:
(a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or
special circumstances;
or
(b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate
EUR.1 was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.
2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the
place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and
state the reasons for his request.
3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only after
verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the
corresponding file. 
L 169/440 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
4. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively must be endorsed with the following
phrase in English: "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY".
5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the
movement certificate EUR.1.
ARTICLE 19
Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the exporter may
apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export
documents in their possession.
2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with the following word in English:
"DUPLICATE".
3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the
duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.
4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement
certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as from that date. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/441
ARTICLE 20
Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of
a proof of origin issued or made out previously
When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in the Community or in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more
movement certificates EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere
within the Community or Bosnia and Herzegovina. The replacement movement certificate(s)
EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.
ARTICLE 21
Accounting segregation
1. Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks of
originating and non-originating materials which are identical and interchangeable, the customs
authorities may, at the written request of those concerned, authorise the so-called "accounting
segregation" method to be used for managing such stocks. 
L 169/442 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. This method must be able to ensure that, for a specific reference-period, the number of
products obtained which could be considered as originating is the same as that which would have
been obtained if there had been physical segregation of the stocks.
3. The customs authorities may grant such authorisation, subject to any conditions deemed
appropriate.
4. This method is recorded and applied on the basis of the general accounting principles
applicable in the country where the product was manufactured.
5. The beneficiary of this facilitation may issue or apply for proofs of origin, as the case may
be, for the quantity of products which may be considered as originating. At the request of the
customs authorities, the beneficiary shall provide a statement of how the quantities have been
managed.
6. The customs authorities shall monitor the use made of the authorisation and may withdraw it
at any time whenever the beneficiary makes improper use of the authorisation in any manner
whatsoever or fails to fulfil any of the other conditions laid down in this Protocol. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/443
ARTICLE 22
Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
1. An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 16(1)(b) may be made out:
(a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23;
or
(b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing
originating products whose total value does not exceed EUR 6 000.
2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as
products originating in the Community, in Bosnia and Herzegovina or in one of the other countries
or territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at
the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country, all appropriate documents proving
the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements
of this Protocol.
4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on
the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration, the text of which
appears in Annex IV, using one of the linguistic versions set out in that Annex and in accordance
with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If the declaration is hand-written,
it shall be written in ink in printed characters. 
L 169/444 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript.
However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23 shall not be required to sign such
declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of the exporting country a written
undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which identifies him as if
it had been signed in manuscript by him.
6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it
relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing country no
longer than two years after the importation of the products to which it relates.
ARTICLE 23
Approved exporter
1. The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorise any exporter, hereinafter
referred to as "approved exporter", who makes frequent shipments of products under this
Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An
exporter seeking such authorisation must offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all
guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the
other requirements of this Protocol.
2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions
which they consider appropriate. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/445
3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation number
which shall appear on the invoice declaration.
4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved exporter.
5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so
where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, no longer
fulfils the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the
authorisation.
ARTICLE 24
Validity of proof of origin
1. A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the exporting
country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing
country.
2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country
after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of
applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is
due to exceptional circumstances.
3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing country may
accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the said final date. 
L 169/446 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 25
Submission of proof of origin
Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in
accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require a
translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a
statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the
implementation of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 26
Importation by instalments
Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of
the importing country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General
Rule 2(a) of the Harmonised System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or headings 7308
and 9406 of the Harmonised System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such
products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/447
ARTICLE 27
Exemptions from proof of origin
1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of
travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the
submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and
have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to
the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, this declaration can be made
on the customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.
2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the
recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is
evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.
3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the case of small
packages or EUR 1 200 in the case of products forming part of travellers' personal luggage. 
L 169/448 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 28
Supporting documents
The documents referred to in Articles 17(3) and 22(3) used for the purpose of proving that products
covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice declaration can be considered as products
originating in the Community, in Bosnia and Herzegovina or in one of the other countries or
territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol may
consist inter alia of the following:
(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods
concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal book-keeping;
(b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in the
Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina where these documents are used in accordance
with domestic law;
(c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in the Community or in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, issued or made out in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where
these documents are used in accordance with domestic law; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/449
(d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating status of
materials used, issued or made out in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
accordance with this Protocol, or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in
Articles 3 and 4, in accordance with rules of origin which are identical to the rules in this
Protocol;
(e) appropriate evidence concerning working or processing undergone outside the Community or
Bosnia and Herzegovina by application of Article 12, proving that the requirements of that
Article have been satisfied.
ARTICLE 29
Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least
three years the documents referred to in Article 17(3).
2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least three years a copy of
this invoice declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 22(3).
3. The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement certificate EUR.1 shall
keep for at least three years the application form referred to in Article 17(2).
4. The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep for at least three years the
movement certificates EUR.1 and the invoice declarations submitted to them. 
L 169/450 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 30
Discrepancies and formal errors
1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and
those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the
formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if
it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products submitted.
2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause this
document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of
the statements made in the document.
ARTICLE 31
Amounts expressed in euro
1. For the application of the provisions of Article 22(1)(b) and Article 27(3) in cases where
products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the national currencies of the
Member States of the Community, of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the other countries or
territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4 equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro shall be fixed
annually by each of the countries concerned. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/451
2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 22(1)(b) or Article 27(3) by
reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the
country concerned.
3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that
currency of the amounts expressed in euro as at the first working day of October. The amounts
shall be communicated to the European Commission by 15 October and shall apply from 1 January
the following year. The European Commission shall notify all countries concerned of the relevant
amounts.
4. A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its national
currency of an amount expressed in euro. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount
resulting from the conversion by more than 5 %. A country may retain unchanged its national
currency equivalent of an amount expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment
provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, prior to any rounding-off, results in an
increase of less than 15 % in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent
may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a decrease in that equivalent value.
5. The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the Interim Committee at the request of
the Community or of Bosnia and Herzegovina. When carrying out this review, the Interim
Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real
terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in euro. 
L 169/452 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE VI
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION
ARTICLE 32
Mutual assistance
1. The customs authorities of the Member States of the Community and of Bosnia and
Herzegovina shall provide each other, through the European Commission, with specimen
impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of movement certificates EUR.1
and with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for verifying those certificates and
invoice declarations.
2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the Community and Bosnia and
Herzegovina shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the
authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.1 or the invoice declarations and the correctness of
the information given in these documents. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/453
ARTICLE 33
Verification of proofs of origin
1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the
customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such
documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other
requirements of this Protocol.
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs authorities of
the importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and the invoice, if it has been
submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of these documents, to the customs authorities of the
exporting country giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and
information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall
be forwarded in support of the request for verification.
3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting country. For
this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the
exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.
4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of
preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification,
release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures
judged necessary. 
L 169/454 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this
verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are
authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the
Community, in Bosnia and Herzegovina or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in
Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten months of the date of the
verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the
authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs
authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.
ARTICLE 34
Dispute settlement
Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 33 which cannot be settled
between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for
carrying out this verification or where they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol,
they shall be submitted to the Interim Committee.
In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the
importing country shall be under the legislation of the said country. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/455
ARTICLE 35
Penalties
Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document
which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for
products.
ARTICLE 36
Free zones
1. The Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina shall take all necessary steps to ensure that
products traded under cover of a proof of origin which in the course of transport use a free zone
situated in their territory, are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo handling other than
normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.
2. By means of an exemption to the provisions contained in paragraph 1, when products
originating in the Community or in Bosnia and Herzegovina are imported into a free zone under
cover of a proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned shall issue
a new movement certificate EUR.1 at the exporter's request, if the treatment or processing
undergone is in conformity with the provisions of this Protocol. 
L 169/456 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE VII
CEUTA AND MELILLA
ARTICLE 37
Application of this Protocol
1. The term "Community" used in Article 2 does not cover Ceuta or Melilla.
2. Products originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina, when imported into Ceuta and Melilla,
shall enjoy in all respects the same customs regime as that which is applied to products originating
in the customs territory of the Community under Protocol 2 of the Act of Accession of the Kingdom
of Spain and the Portuguese Republic to the European Communities. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall
grant to imports of products covered by this Agreement and originating in Ceuta and Melilla the
same customs regime as that which is granted to products imported from and originating in the
Community.
3. For the purpose of the application of paragraph 2 concerning products originating in Ceuta
and Melilla, this Protocol shall apply mutatis mutandis subject to the special conditions set out in
Article 38. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/457
ARTICLE 38
Special conditions
1. Providing they have been transported directly in accordance with the provisions of
Article 13, the following shall be considered as:
1.1. products originating in Ceuta and Melilla:
(a) products wholly obtained in Ceuta and Melilla;
(b) products obtained in Ceuta and Melilla in the manufacture of which products other than
those referred to in point (a) are used, provided that:
(i) the said products have undergone sufficient working or processing within the
meaning of Article 6;
or that
(ii) those products are originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina or in the Community,
provided that they have been submitted to working or processing which goes
beyond the operations referred to in Article 7;
1.2. products originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina:
(a) products wholly obtained in Bosnia and Herzegovina; 
L 169/458 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(b) products obtained in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the manufacture of which products
other than those referred to in point (a) are used, provided that:
(i) the said products have undergone sufficient working or processing within the
meaning of Article 6;
 or that
(ii) those products are originating in Ceuta and Melilla or in the Community, provided
that they have been submitted to working or processing which goes beyond the
operations referred to in Article 7.
2. Ceuta and Melilla shall be considered as a single territory.
3. The exporter or his authorised representative shall enter "Bosnia and Herzegovina" and
"Ceuta and Melilla" in Box 2 of movement certificates EUR.1 or on invoice declarations. In
addition, in the case of products originating in Ceuta and Melilla, this shall be indicated in Box 4 of
movement certificates EUR.1 or on invoice declarations.
4. The Spanish customs authorities shall be responsible for the application of this Protocol in
Ceuta and Melilla. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/459
TITLE VIII
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 39
Amendments to this Protocol
The Interim Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this Protocol. 
L 169/460 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ANNEX I TO PROTOCOL 2
INTRODUCTORY NOTES TO THE LIST IN ANNEX II
Note 1
The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or
processed within the meaning of Article 6 of Protocol 2.
Note 2
2.1. The first two columns in the list describe the product obtained. The first column gives the
heading number or chapter number used in the Harmonised System and the second column
gives the description of goods used in that system for that heading or chapter. For each entry
in the first two columns, a rule is specified in column 3 or 4. Where, in some cases, the entry
in the first column is preceded by an "ex", this signifies that the rules in column 3 or 4 apply
only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.
2.2. Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 1 or a chapter number is
given and the description of products in column 2 is therefore given in general terms, the
adjacent rules in column 3 or 4 apply to all products which, under the Harmonised System,
are classified in headings of the chapter or in any of the headings grouped together in
column 1. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/461
2.3. Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within a heading, each
indent contains the description of that part of the heading covered by the adjacent rules in
column 3 or 4.
2.4. Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both columns 3 and 4, the
exporter may opt, as an alternative, to apply either the rule set out in column 3 or that set out
in column 4. If no origin rule is given in column 4, the rule set out in column 3 is to be
applied.
Note 3
3.1. The provisions of Article 6 of Protocol 2, concerning products having acquired originating
status which are used in the manufacture of other products, shall apply, regardless of whether
this status has been acquired inside the factory where these products are used or in another
factory in a party.
Example:
An engine of heading 8407, for which the rule states that the value of the non-originating
materials which may be incorporated may not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price, is made
from "other alloy steel roughly shaped by forging" of heading ex 7224. 
L 169/462 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
If this forging has been forged in the Community from a non-originating ingot, it has already
acquired originating status by virtue of the rule for heading ex 7224 in the list. The forging
can then count as originating in the value-calculation for the engine, regardless of whether it
was produced in the same factory or in another factory in the Community. The value of the
non-originating ingot is thus not taken into account when adding up the value of the
non-originating materials used.
3.2. The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or processing required, and the
carrying-out of more working or processing also confers originating status; conversely, the
carrying-out of less working or processing cannot confer originating status. Thus, if a rule
provides that non-originating material, at a certain level of manufacture, may be used, the use
of such material at an earlier stage of manufacture is allowed, and the use of such material at a
later stage is not.
3.3. Without prejudice to Note 3.2, where a rule uses the expression "Manufacture from materials
of any heading", then materials of any heading(s) (even materials of the same description and
heading as the product) may be used, subject, however, to any specific limitations which may
also be contained in the rule.
However, the expression "Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other
materials of heading ..." or "Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other
materials of the same heading as the product" means that materials of any heading(s) may be
used, except those of the same description as the product as given in column 2 of the list. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/463
3.4. When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufactured from more than one
material, this means that one or more materials may be used. It does not require that all be
used.
Example:
The rule for fabrics of headings 5208 to 5212 provides that natural fibres may be used and
that chemical materials, among other materials, may also be used. This does not mean that
both have to be used; it is possible to use one or the other, or both.
3.5. Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a particular
material, the condition obviously does not prevent the use of other materials which, because
of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See also Note 6.2 below in relation to
textiles).
Example:
The rule for prepared foods of heading 1904, which specifically excludes the use of cereals
and their derivatives, does not prevent the use of mineral salts, chemicals and other additives
which are not products from cereals. 
L 169/464 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
However, this does not apply to products which, although they cannot be manufactured from
the particular materials specified in the list, can be produced from a material of the same
nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.
Example:
In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made from non-woven materials, if the
use of only non-originating yarn is allowed for this class of article, it is not possible to start
from non-woven cloth – even if non-woven cloths cannot normally be made from yarn. In
such cases, the starting material would normally be at the stage before yarn – that is, the fibre
stage.
3.6. Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the maximum value of
non-originating materials that can be used, then these percentages may not be added together.
In other words, the maximum value of all the non-originating materials used may never
exceed the higher of the percentages given. Furthermore, the individual percentages must not
be exceeded, in relation to the particular materials to which they apply.
Note 4
4.1. The term "natural fibres" is used in the list to refer to fibres other than artificial or synthetic
fibres. It is restricted to the stages before spinning takes place, including waste, and, unless
otherwise specified, includes fibres which have been carded, combed or otherwise processed,
but not spun. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/465
4.2. The term "natural fibres" includes horsehair of heading 0503, silk of headings 5002 and 5003,
as well as wool-fibres and fine or coarse animal hair of headings 5101 to 5105, cotton fibres
of headings 5201 to 5203, and other vegetable fibres of headings 5301 to 5305.
4.3. The terms "textile pulp", "chemical materials" and "paper-making materials" are used in the
list to describe the materials, not classified in Chapters 50 to 63, which can be used to
manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or yarns.
4.4. The term "man-made staple fibres" is used in the list to refer to synthetic or artificial filament
tow, staple fibres or waste, of headings 5501 to 5507.
Note 5
5.1. Where, for a given product in the list, reference is made to this Note, the conditions set out in
column 3 shall not be applied to any basic textile materials used in the manufacture of this
product and which, taken together, represent 10 % or less of the total weight of all the basic
textile materials used. (See also Notes 5.3 and 5.4 below.)
ANNEX II TO PROTOCOL 2
LIST OF WORKING OR PROCESSING REQUIRED
TO BE CARRIED OUT
ON NON-ORIGINATING MATERIALS
IN ORDER THAT THE PRODUCT MANUFACTURED
CAN OBTAIN ORIGINATING STATUS
The products mentioned in the list may not be all covered by this Agreement. It is, therefore,
necessary to consult the other parts of this Agreement
PROTOCOL 3
ON STATE AID TO THE STEEL INDUSTRY 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/627
1. The Parties recognise the need that Bosnia and Herzegovina addresses promptly any
structural weaknesses of its steel sector to ensure the global competitiveness of its industry.
2. Further to the disciplines stipulated by Article 36(1)(c) of this Agreement (SAA
Article 71(1)(c)), the assessment of the compatibility of State aid to the steel industry as defined in
Annex I of the Guidelines on national regional aid for 2007-2013 shall be made on the basis of the
criteria arising from the application of Article 87 of the EC Treaty to the steel sector, including
secondary legislation.
3. For the purposes of applying the provisions of Article 36(1)(c) of this Agreement (SAA
Article 71(1)(c)) with regard to the steel industry, the Community recognises that, during five years
after the entry into force of this Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina may exceptionally grant State
aid for restructuring purposes to steel producing firms in difficulties, provided that:
(a) it leads to the long-term viability of the benefiting firms under normal market conditions at
the end of the restructuring period, and
(b) the amount and intensity of such aid are strictly limited to what is absolutely necessary in
order to restore such viability, and aid is, where appropriate, progressively reduced;
(c) the country presents a restructuring programme that is linked to a global rationalisation which
includes the closing of inefficient capacity. Every steel producing firm benefiting from
restructuring aid shall, as far as possible, provide for compensatory measures balancing the
distortion of competition caused by the aid. 
L 169/628 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
4. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall submit to the European Commission for assessment a
National Restructuring Programme and individual business plans for each of the companies
benefiting from restructuring aid which demonstrate that the above conditions are fulfilled.
The individual business plans shall have been assessed and agreed by the public authority
established under Article 36(4) of this Agreement (SAA Article 71(4)) in view of their compliance
with paragraph 3 of this Protocol.
The European Commission shall confirm that the National Restructuring Programme is in
compliance with the requirements of paragraph 3.
5. The European Commission shall monitor the implementation of the plans, in close
cooperation with the competent national authorities, in particular the public authority established
under Article 36(4) of this Agreement (SAA Article 71(4)).
If the monitoring indicates that aid to the beneficiaries which is not approved in the National
Restructuring Programme or any restructuring aid to steel firms not identified in the National
Restructuring Programme has been granted from the date of signature of this Agreement onwards,
the respective State aid monitoring authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina shall ensure that any such
aid is reimbursed. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/629
6. Upon request, the Community shall provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with technical support
for the preparation of the National Restructuring Programme and the individual business plans.
7. Each Party shall ensure full transparency with respect to State aid. In particular, as regards
State aid granted to steel production in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the implementation of the
restructuring programme and the business plans, a full and continuous exchange of information
shall take place.
8. The Interim Committee shall monitor the implementation of the requirements set out in
paragraphs 1 to 4 above. To this effect, the Interim Committee may draft implementing rules.
9. If one of the Parties considers that a particular practice of the other Party is incompatible
with the terms of this Protocol, and if that practice causes or threatens to cause prejudice to the
interests of the first Party or material injury to its domestic industry, this Party may take appropriate
measures after consultation within the Sub-Committee dealing with competition matters or after
thirty working days following referral for such consultation. 
L 169/630 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
PROTOCOL 4
ON MUTUAL ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE
IN CUSTOMS MATTERS 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/631
ARTICLE 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) "customs legislation" shall mean any legal or regulatory provisions applicable in the
territories of the Parties governing the import, export and transit of goods and their placing
under any other customs regime or procedure, including measures of prohibition, restriction
and control;
(b) "applicant authority" shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been
designated by a Party for this purpose and which makes a request for assistance on the basis
of this Protocol;
(c) "requested authority" shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been
designated by a Party for this purpose and which receives a request for assistance on the basis
of this Protocol;
(d) "personal data" shall mean all information relating to an identified or identifiable individual;
(e) "operation in breach of customs legislation" shall mean any violation or attempted violation
of customs legislation. 
L 169/632 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 2
Scope
1. The Parties shall assist each other, in the areas within their competence, in the manner and
under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, to ensure the correct application of the customs
legislation, in particular by preventing, investigating and combating operations in breach of that
legislation.
2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall apply to any
administrative authority of the Parties which is competent for the application of this Protocol. It
shall not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in criminal matters. Nor shall it cover
information obtained under powers exercised at the request of a judicial authority, except where
communication of such information is authorised by that authority.
3. Assistance to recover duties, taxes or fines is not covered by this Protocol.
ARTICLE 3
Assistance on request
1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall provide it with all
relevant information which may enable it to ensure that customs legislation is correctly applied,
including information regarding activities noted or planned which are or could be operations in
breach of customs legislation. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/633
2. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall inform it:
(a) whether goods exported from the territory of one of the Parties have been properly imported
into the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure
applied to the goods;
(b) whether goods imported into the territory of one of the Parties have been properly exported
from the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure
applied to the goods.
3. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, within the framework
of its legal or regulatory provisions, take the necessary steps to ensure special surveillance of:
(a) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that
they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;
(b) places where stocks of goods have been or may be assembled in such a way that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that these goods are intended to be used in operations in
breach of customs legislation;
(c) goods that are or may be transported in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation;
(d) means of transport that are or may be used in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation. 
L 169/634 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 4
Spontaneous assistance
The Parties shall assist each other, at their own initiative and in accordance with their legal or
regulatory provisions, if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs
legislation, particularly by providing information obtained pertaining to:
(a) activities which are or appear to be operations in breach of customs legislation and which
may be of interest to the other Party;
(b) new means or methods employed in carrying out operations in breach of customs legislation;
(c) goods known to be subject to operations in breach of customs legislation;
(d) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that
they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;
(e) new means of transport in respect of which there are reasonable grounds for believing that
they have been, are, or may be used in operations in breach of customs legislation. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/635
ARTICLE 5
Delivery, notification
At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, in accordance with legal or
regulatory provisions applicable to the latter, take all necessary measures in order:
(a) to deliver any documents; or
(b) to notify any decisions,
emanating from the applicant authority and falling within the scope of this Protocol, to an addressee
residing or established in the territory of the requested authority.
Requests for delivery of documents or notification of decisions shall be made in writing in an official
language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to that authority.
ARTICLE 6
Form and substance of requests for assistance
1. Requests pursuant to this Protocol shall be made in writing. They shall be accompanied by
the documents necessary to enable compliance with the request. When required because of the
urgency of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in writing
immediately. 
L 169/636 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include the following information:
(a) the applicant authority;
(b) the measure requested;
(c) the object of and the reason for the request;
(d) the legal or regulatory provisions and other legal elements involved;
(e) indications as exact and comprehensive as possible on the natural or legal persons who are
the target of the investigations;
(f) a summary of the relevant facts and of the enquiries already carried out.
3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the requested authority or in a
language acceptable to that authority. This requirement shall not apply to any documents that
accompany the request under paragraph 1.
4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements set out above, its correction or
completion may be requested; in the meantime precautionary measures may be ordered. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/637
ARTICLE 7
Execution of requests
1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority shall proceed,
within the limits of its competence and available resources, as though it were acting on its own
account or at the request of other authorities of that same Party, by supplying information already
possessed, by carrying out appropriate enquiries or by arranging for them to be carried out. This
provision shall also apply to any other authority to which the request has been addressed by the
requested authority when the latter cannot act on its own.
2. Requests for assistance shall be executed in accordance with the legal or regulatory
provisions of the requested Party.
3. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party and subject
to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present to obtain in the offices of the requested
authority or any other concerned authority in accordance with paragraph 1, information relating to
activities that are or may be operations in breach of customs legislation which the applicant
authority needs for the purposes of this Protocol.
4. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party and subject
to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present at enquiries carried out in the latter's territory. 
L 169/638 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 8
Form in which information is to
be communicated
1. The requested authority shall communicate results of enquiries to the applicant authority in
writing together with relevant documents, certified copies or other items.
2. This information may be in computerised form.
3. Original documents shall be transmitted only upon request in cases where certified copies
would be insufficient. These originals shall be returned at the earliest opportunity.
ARTICLE 9
Exceptions to the obligation to
provide assistance
1. Assistance may be refused or may be subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions or
requirements, in cases where a Party is of the opinion that assistance under this Protocol would:
(a) be likely to prejudice the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina or that of a Member State
which has been requested to provide assistance under this Protocol; or
(b) be likely to prejudice public policy, security or other essential interests, in particular in the
cases referred to under Article 10(2); or 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/639
(c) violate an industrial, commercial or professional secret.
2. Assistance may be postponed by the requested authority on the ground that it will interfere
with an ongoing investigation, prosecution or proceeding. In such a case, the requested authority
shall consult with the applicant authority to determine if assistance can be given subject to such
terms or conditions as the requested authority may require.
3. Where the applicant authority seeks assistance which it would itself be unable to provide if
so requested, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. It shall then be for the requested
authority to decide how to respond to such a request.
4. For the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the decision of the requested authority and
the reasons therefore must be communicated to the applicant authority without delay.
ARTICLE 10
Information exchange and confidentiality
1. Any information communicated in whatsoever form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of a
confidential or restricted nature, depending on the rules applicable in each of the Parties. It shall be
covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shall enjoy the protection extended to similar
information under the relevant laws of the Party that received it and the corresponding provisions
applying to the Community authorities. 
L 169/640 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. Personal data may be exchanged only where the Party which may receive them undertakes
to protect such data in at least an equivalent way to the one applicable to that particular case in the
Party that may supply them. To that end, Parties shall communicate to each other information on
their applicable rules, including, where appropriate, legal provisions in force in the Member States
of the Community.
3. The use, in judicial or administrative proceedings instituted in respect of operations in
breach of customs legislation, of information obtained under this Protocol, is considered to be for
the purposes of this Protocol. Therefore, the Parties may, in their records of evidence, reports and
testimonies and in proceedings and charges brought before the courts, use as evidence information
obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. The
competent authority which supplied that information or gave access to those documents shall be
notified of such use.
4. Information obtained shall be used solely for the purposes of this Protocol. Where one of
the Parties wishes to use such information for other purposes, it shall obtain the prior written
consent of the authority which provided the information. Such use shall then be subject to any
restrictions laid down by that authority. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/641
ARTICLE 11
Experts and witnesses
An official of a requested authority may be authorised to appear, within the limitations of the
authorisation granted, as an expert or witness in judicial or administrative proceedings regarding the
matters covered by this Protocol, and produce such objects, documents or certified copies thereof, as
may be needed for the proceedings. The request for appearance must indicate specifically before
which judicial or administrative authority the official will have to appear, on what matters and by
virtue of what title or qualification the official will be questioned.
ARTICLE 12
Assistance expenses
The Parties shall waive all claims on each other for the reimbursement of expenses incurred pursuant
to this Protocol, except, as appropriate, for expenses to experts and witnesses, and those to interpreters
and translators who are not public service employees. 
L 169/642 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 13
Implementation
1. The implementation of this Protocol shall be entrusted on the one hand to the customs
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and on the other hand to the competent services of the
European Commission and the customs authorities of the Member States as appropriate. They shall
decide on all practical measures and arrangements necessary for its application, taking into
consideration the rules in force in particular in the field of data protection. They may recommend to
the competent bodies amendments which they consider should be made to this Protocol.
2. The Parties shall consult each other and subsequently keep each other informed of the
detailed rules of implementation which are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this
Protocol.
ARTICLE 14
Other agreements
1. Taking into account the respective competencies of the Community and the Member States,
the provisions of this Protocol shall:
(a) not affect the obligations of the Parties under any other international agreement or
convention; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/643
(b) be deemed complementary to Agreements on mutual assistance which have been or may be
concluded between individual Member States and Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
(c) not affect the Community provisions governing the communication between the competent
services of the European Commission and the customs authorities of the Member States of
any information obtained under this Protocol which could be of interest to the Community.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the provisions of this Protocol shall take
precedence over the provisions of any bilateral Agreement on mutual assistance which has been or
may be concluded between individual Member States and Bosnia and Herzegovina insofar as the
provisions of the latter are incompatible with those of this Protocol.
3. In respect of questions relating to the applicability of this Protocol, the Parties shall consult
each other to resolve the matter in the framework of the Interim Committee. 
L 169/644 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
PROTOCOL 5
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/645
CHAPTER I
OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
ARTICLE 1
Objective
The objective of this Protocol is to avoid and settle disputes between the Parties with a view to
arrive at mutually acceptable solutions.
ARTICLE 2
Scope
The provisions of this Protocol shall only apply with respect to any differences concerning the
interpretation and application of the following provisions, including where a Party considers that a
measure adopted by the other Party, or a failure of the other Party to act, is in breach of its
obligations under these provisions:
(a) Title II (SAA Title IV) (Free movement of goods), except Articles 16, 23 and 24(1), (4)
and (5) (SAA Articles 31, 38 and 39(1), (4) and (5)) (insofar as these concern measures
adopted under paragraph 1 of Article 24 (SAA Article 39)) and Article 30 (SAA Article 45); 
L 169/646 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(b) Title III (Other trade and trade-related provisions):
Articles 33 to 35 (SAA Articles 60, 67 and 69) and Article 38(2) (SAA Article 73(2)).
CHAPTER II
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION I
ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
ARTICLE 3
Initiation of the arbitration procedure
1. Where the Parties have failed to resolve the dispute, the complaining Party may under the
conditions of Article 49 of this Agreement (SAA Article 126), submit a request in writing for the
establishment of an arbitration panel to the Party complained against as well as to the Interim
Committee.
2. The complaining Party shall state in its request the subject-matter of the dispute and, as the
case may be, the measure adopted by the other Party, or the failure to act, which it considers to be in
breach of the provisions referred to in Article 2 of this Protocol. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/647
ARTICLE 4
Composition of the arbitration panel
1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.
2. Within 10 days of the date of the submission of the request for the establishment of an
arbitration panel to the Interim Committee, the Parties shall consult in order to reach an agreement
on the composition of the arbitration panel.
3. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on its composition within the time frame laid
down in paragraph 2, either Party may request the chairperson of the Interim Committee, or her or
his delegate, to select all three members by lot from the list established under Article 15, one among
the individuals proposed by the complaining Party, one among the individuals proposed by the
Party complained against and one among the arbitrators selected by the Parties to act as chairperson.
In case the Parties agree on one or more of the members of the arbitration panel, any remaining
members shall be appointed in accordance with the same procedure.
4. The selection of the arbitrators by the chairperson of the Interim Committee, or her or his
delegate, shall be done in the presence of a representative of each Party. 
L 169/648 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
5. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the chairperson
of the panel is informed of the appointment in common agreement between the Parties of the three
arbitrators or, as the case may be, the date of their selection in accordance with paragraph 3.
6. Where a Party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the requirements of the
Code of Conduct referred to in Article 18, the Parties shall consult and, if they so agree, replace the
arbitrator and select a replacement pursuant to paragraph 7 of this Article. If the Parties fail to
agree on the need to replace an arbitrator, the matter shall be referred to the chairperson of the
arbitration panel, whose decision will be final.
Where a Party considers that the chairperson of the arbitration panel does not comply with the Code
of Conduct referred to in Article 18, the matter shall be referred to one of the remaining members of
the pool of arbitrators selected to act as chairperson, her or his name being drawn by lot by the
chairperson of the Interim Committee, or her or his delegate, in the presence of a representative of
each Party, unless otherwise agreed between the Parties.
7. If an arbitrator is unable to participate in the proceeding, withdraws or is replaced pursuant
to paragraph 6, a replacement shall be selected within five days in accordance with the selection
procedures followed to select the original arbitrator. The panel proceedings will be suspended for
the period taken to carry out this procedure. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/649
ARTICLE 5
Arbitration panel ruling
1. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Parties and to the Interim Committee
within 90 days from the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel. Where it considers that
this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the panel must notify the Parties and the Interim
Committee in writing, stating the reasons for the delay. Under no circumstances should the ruling
be issued later than 120 days from the date of the establishment of the panel.
2. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods, the arbitration panel shall
make every effort to issue its ruling within 45 days from the date of the establishment of the panel.
Under no circumstance should it take longer than 100 days from the date of the establishment of the
panel. The arbitration panel may give a preliminary ruling within 10 days of its establishment on
whether it deems the case to be urgent.
3. The ruling shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions of
this Agreement and the basic rationale behind any findings and conclusions that it makes. The
ruling may contain recommendations on the measures to be adopted for compliance with it. 
L 169/650 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
4. The complaining Party may withdraw its complaint by written notification to the
chairperson of the arbitration panel, the Party complained against and the Interim Committee, at any
time before the ruling is notified to the Parties and the Interim Committee. Such withdrawal is
without prejudice to the complaining Party's right to introduce a new complaint regarding the same
measure at a later point in time.
5. The arbitration panel shall, at the request of both Parties, suspend its work at any time for a
period not exceeding 12 months. Once the period of 12 months has been exceeded, the authority
for the establishment of the panel will lapse, without prejudice to the right of the complaining Party
to request at a later stage the establishment of a panel on the same measure.
SECTION II
COMPLIANCE
ARTICLE 6
Compliance with the arbitration panel ruling
Each Party shall take any measure necessary to comply with the arbitration panel ruling, and the
Parties will endeavour to agree on the reasonable period of time to comply with the ruling. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/651
ARTICLE 7
Reasonable period of time for compliance
1. No later than 30 days after the notification of the arbitration panel ruling to the Parties, the
Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party of the time it will require for
compliance (hereinafter referred to as "reasonable period of time"). Both parties shall endeavour to
agree on the reasonable period of time.
2. If there is disagreement between the Parties on the reasonable period of time to comply with
the arbitration panel ruling, the complaining Party may request the Interim Committee, within
20 days of the notification made under paragraph 1, to reconvene the original arbitration panel to
determine the length of the reasonable period of time. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling
within 20 days from the date of the submission of the request.
3. In the event of the original panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene, the
procedures set out in Article 4 shall apply. The time limit for notifying the ruling remains 20 days
from the date of the panel's establishment. 
L 169/652 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 8
Review of any measure taken to comply
with the arbitration panel ruling
1. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party and the Interim Committee before
the end of the reasonable period of time of any measure that it has taken to comply with the
arbitration panel ruling.
2. In the event that there is disagreement between the Parties concerning the compatibility of
any measure notified under paragraph 1 of this Article with the provisions referred to in Article 2,
the complaining Party may request the original arbitration panel to rule on the matter. Such request
shall explain why the measure is not in conformity with this Agreement. Once re-convened, the
arbitration panel will issue its ruling within 45 days of the date of its re-establishment.
3. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to
reconvene, the procedures laid down in Article 4 shall apply. The time limit for notifying the ruling
remains 45 days from the date of the panel's establishment. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/653
ARTICLE 9
Temporary remedies in case of non-compliance
1. If the Party complained against fails to notify any measure taken to comply with the
arbitration panel ruling before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or if the arbitration panel
rules that the measure notified under Article 8(1) is not in conformity with that Party's obligations
under this Agreement, the Party complained against shall, if so requested by the complaining Party,
present an offer for temporary compensation.
2. If no agreement on compensation is reached within 30 days of the end of the reasonable
period of time, or of the arbitration panel ruling under Article 8 that a measure taken to comply is
not in conformity with this Agreement, the complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification to
the other Party and to the Interim Committee, to suspend the application of benefits granted under
the provisions referred to in Article 2 at a level equivalent to the adverse economic impact caused
by the violation. The complaining Party may implement the suspension 10 days after the date of the
notification, unless the Party complained against has requested arbitration under paragraph 3 of this
Article. 
L 169/654 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
3. If the Party complained against considers that the level of suspension is not equivalent to the
adverse economic impact caused by the violation, it may request in writing to the chairperson of the
original arbitration panel before the expiry of the 10 day period referred to in paragraph 2 for the
reconvening of the original arbitration panel. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling on the
level of the suspension of benefits to the Parties and to the Interim Committee within 30 days of the
date of the submission of the request. Benefits shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has
issued its ruling, and any suspension shall be consistent with the ruling of the arbitration panel.
4. The suspension of benefits shall be temporary and shall be applied only until any measure
found to violate this Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity
with this Agreement, or until the Parties have agreed to settle the dispute.
ARTICLE 10
Review of any measure taken to comply
after the suspension of benefits
1. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party and the Interim Committee of any
measure it has taken to comply with the ruling of the arbitration panel and of its request for an end
to the suspension of benefits applied by the complaining Party. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/655
2. If the Parties do not reach an agreement on the compatibility of the notified measure with
this Agreement within 30 days of the date of the submission of the notification, the complaining
Party may request in writing to the chairperson of the original arbitration panel to rule on the matter.
Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the other Party and to the Interim Committee. The
arbitration panel ruling shall be notified within 45 days of the date of the submission of the request.
If the arbitration panel rules that any measure taken to comply is not in conformity with this
Agreement, the arbitration panel will determine whether the complaining party can continue the
suspension of benefits at the original or at a different level. If the arbitration panel rules that any
measure taken to comply is in conformity with this Agreement, the suspension of benefits shall be
terminated.
3. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to
reconvene, the procedures laid down in Article 4 shall apply. The period for notifying the ruling
remains 45 days from the date of the panel's establishment. 
L 169/656 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
SECTION III
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 11
Open Hearings
The meetings of the arbitration panel shall be open to the public under the conditions laid down in
the Rules of Procedure referred to in Article 18, unless the arbitration panel decides otherwise on its
own motion or at the request of the Parties.
ARTICLE 12
Information and technical advice
At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the panel may seek information from any source
it deems appropriate for the panel proceeding. The panel will also have the right to seek the opinion
of experts as it deems appropriate. Any information obtained in this manner must be disclosed to
both Parties and shall be open for comments. Interested parties shall be authorised to submit
amicus curiae briefs to the arbitration panel under the conditions laid down in the Rules of
Procedure referred to in Article 18. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/657
ARTICLE 13
Interpretation principles
Arbitration panels shall apply and interpret the provisions of this Agreement in accordance with
customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties. They shall not give an interpretation of the acquis communautaire. The fact
that a provision is identical in substance to a provision of the Treaty establishing the European
Communities shall not be decisive in the interpretation of that provision.
ARTICLE 14
Arbitration panel decisions and rulings
1. All decisions of the arbitration panel, including the adoption of the ruling, shall be taken by
majority vote.
2. All rulings of the arbitration panel shall be binding on the Parties. They shall be notified to
the Parties and to the Interim Committee, which shall make them publicly available unless it
decides by consensus not to do so. 
L 169/658 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
CHAPTER III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 15
List of arbitrators
1. The Interim Committee shall, no later than six months after the entry into force of this
Protocol, establish a list of fifteen individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators. Each
of the Parties shall select five individuals to serve as arbitrators. The Parties shall also agree on five
individuals which shall act as chairperson to arbitration panels. The Interim Committee will ensure
that the list is always maintained at this level.
2. Arbitrators should have specialised knowledge and experience of law, international law,
Community law and/or international trade. They shall be independent, serve in their individual
capacities and not be affiliated with, or take instructions from any organisation or government, and
shall comply with the Code of Conduct referred to in Article 18. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/659
ARTICLE 16
Relation with WTO obligations
Upon the eventual accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the World Trade Organisation (WTO),
the following shall apply:
(a) Arbitration panels set up under this Protocol shall not adjudicate disputes on each Party's
rights and obligations under the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation.
(b) The right of any of the Parties to have recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this
Protocol shall be without prejudice to any action in the WTO framework, including dispute
settlement action. However, where a Party has, with regard to a particular measure, instituted
a dispute settlement proceeding, either under Article 3(1) of this Protocol or under the WTO
Agreement, it may not institute a dispute settlement proceeding regarding the same measure
in the other forum until the first proceeding has ended. For purposes of this paragraph,
dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are deemed to be initiated by a
Party's request for the establishment of a panel under Article 6 of the Understanding on Rules
and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes of the WTO.
(c) Nothing in this Protocol shall preclude a Party from implementing the suspension of
obligations authorised by a WTO Dispute Settlement Body. 
L 169/660 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
ARTICLE 17
Time limits
1. All time limits laid down in this Protocol shall be counted in calendar days from the day
following the act or fact to which they refer.
2. Any time limit referred to in this Protocol may be extended by mutual agreement of the
Parties.
3. Any deadline referred to in this Protocol may also be extended by the chairperson of the
arbitration panel, on a reasoned request of either of the Parties or upon his or her own duly based
initiative.
ARTICLE 18
Rules of Procedure, Code of Conduct
and modification of this Protocol
1. The Interim Committee shall, no later than six months after the entry into force of this
Protocol establish Rules of Procedure for the conduct of the arbitration panel proceedings. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/661
2. The Interim Committee shall, no later than six months after the entry into force of this
Protocol complement the Rules of Procedure with a Code of Conduct guaranteeing the
independence and impartiality of arbitrators.
3. The Interim Committee may decide to modify this Protocol. 
L 169/662 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
PROTOCOL 6
ON RECIPROCAL PREFERENTIAL CONCESSIONS
FOR CERTAIN WINES,
THE RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION,
PROTECTION AND CONTROL OF WINE,
SPIRIT DRINKS AND AROMATISED WINE NAMES 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/663
ARTICLE 1
This Protocol includes:
1) an Agreement on reciprocal preferential trade concessions for certain wines (Annex I to this
Protocol),
2) an Agreement on reciprocal recognition, protection and control of wine, spirits drinks and
aromatised wine names (Annex II to this Protocol).
ARTICLE 2
The Agreements referred to in Article 1 apply to:
1) wines falling under heading 22.04 of the Harmonised System of the International Convention
on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System, done at Brussels on
14 June 1983 which have been produced from fresh grapes,
L 169/664 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(a) originate in the Community and have been produced in accordance with the rules
governing the oenological practices and processes referred to in Title V of Council
Regulation (EC) No 1493/1999 of 17 May 1999 on the common organisation of the
market in wine 1
, and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1622/2000 of 24 July 2000
laying down detailed rules for implementing Regulation (EC) No 1493/1999 on the
common market organisation in wine and establishing a Community code of
oenological practices and processes 2
;
or
(b) originate in Bosnia and Herzegovina and have been produced in accordance with the
rules governing the oenological practices and processes in conformity with the law of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. These rules governing the oenological practices and processes
shall be in conformity with the Community legislation;

1
 OJ L 179, 14.7.1999, p. 1. Regulation as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007
(OJ L 299, 16.11.2007, p. 1).
2
 OJ L 194, 31.7.2000, p. 1. Regulation as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1300/2007
(OJ L 289, 7.11.2007, p. 8). 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/665
2) spirit drinks falling under heading 22.08 of the Convention referred to in paragraph 1 which:
(a) originate in the Community and comply with Council Regulation (EEC) No 1576/89 of
29 May 1989 laying down general rules on the definition, description and presentation
of spirit drinks 1
 and Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1014/90 of 24 April 1990
laying down detailed implementing rules on the definition, description and presentation
of spirit drinks 2
;
or
(b) originate in Bosnia and Herzegovina and have been produced in conformity with the
law of Bosnia and Herzegovina which shall be in conformity with Community
legislation;

1
 OJ L 160, 12.6.1989, p. 1. Regulation as last amended by the Act of accession of 2005.
2
 OJ L 105, 25.4.1990, p. 9. Regulation as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 2140/98
(OJ L 270, 7.10.1998, p. 9). 
L 169/666 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
3) aromatised wines falling under heading 22.05 of the Convention referred to in paragraph 1,
which:
(a) originate in the Community and comply with Council Regulation (EEC) No 1601/91 of
10 June 1991 laying down general rules on the definition, description and presentation
of aromatised wines, aromatised wine-based drinks and aromatised wine-product
cocktails 1
;
or
(b) originate in Bosnia and Herzegovina, have been produced in conformity with the law of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which shall be in conformity with Community legislation.


1
 OJ L 149, 14.6.1991, p. 1. Regulation as last amended by the Act of accession of 2005. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/667
ANNEX I TO PROTOCOL 6
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE COMMUNITY
AND BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
ON RECIPROCAL PREFERENTIAL TRADE CONCESSIONS
FOR CERTAIN WINES
1. Imports into the Community of the following wines referred to in Article 2 of this Protocol
shall be subject to the concessions set out below: 
ANNEX II TO PROTOCOL 6
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE COMMUNITY
AND BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
ON THE RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION,
PROTECTION AND CONTROL OF WINE,
SPIRIT DRINKS AND AROMATISED WINE NAMES
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. The Parties shall, on the basis of non-discrimination and reciprocity, recognise, protect and
control names of the products referred to in Article 2 of this Protocol in accordance with the
conditions provided for in this Annex.
2. The Parties shall take all general and specific measures necessary to ensure that the
obligations laid down by this Annex are fulfilled and that the objectives set out in this Annex are
attained. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/671
ARTICLE 2
Definitions
For the purposes of the Agreement in this Annex and except where otherwise expressly provided
herein:
(a) "originating", when used in relation to the name of a Party, shall mean that:
– a wine is produced entirely within the Party concerned solely from grapes which have
been wholly harvested in that Party,
– a spirit drink or aromatised wine is produced within that Party;
(b) "geographical indication" as listed in Appendix 1 means an indication as defined in
Article 22(1) of the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(hereinafter referred to as "the TRIPS Agreement");
(c) "traditional expression" means a traditionally used name, as specified in Appendix 2, referring
in particular to the method of production or to the quality, colour, type or place, or a particular
event linked to the history of the wine concerned and recognised by the laws and regulations
of a Party for the purpose of describing and presenting of such a wine originating in the
territory of that Party; 
L 169/672 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(d) "homonymous" means the same geographical indication or same traditional expression, or
such a term so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, to denote different places,
procedures or things;
(e) "description" means the words used to describe a wine, spirit drink or aromatised wine on a
label or documents accompanying the transport of wine, spirit drink or aromatised wine, on
commercial documents particularly invoices and delivery notes, and advertising material;
(f) "labelling" means all descriptions and other references, signs, designs, geographical
indications or trademarks which distinguish wines, spirit drinks or aromatised wines and
which appear on the same container, including its sealing device or the tag attached to the
container and the sheathing covering the neck of bottles;
(g) "presentation" means the entirety of terms, allusions and the like referring to a wine, spirit
drink or aromatised wine used on the labelling, on the packaging; on the containers, the
closure, in advertising and/or sales promotion of any kind;
(h) "packaging" means the protective wrappings, such as papers, straw envelopes of any kind,
cartons and cases, used in transport of one or more containers or for sale to the ultimate
consumer; 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/673
(i) "produced" means the entire process of wine-making, spirit drink-making and aromatised
wine-making;
(j) "wine" means solely the beverage resulting from full or partial alcoholic fermentation of fresh
grapes of the vine varieties, referred to in the Agreement in this Annex whether or not
pressed, or of its must;
(k) "vine varieties" means varieties of plants of Vitis Vinifera without prejudice to any legislation
which a Party may have in respect of the use of different vine varieties in wine produced in
that Party;
(l) "WTO Agreement" means the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade
Organisation done on 15 April 1994.
ARTICLE 3
General importation and marketing rules
Unless otherwise provided for in the Agreement in this Annex, importation and marketing of the
products referred to in Article 2 of this Protocol shall be conducted in compliance with the laws and
regulations applying in the territory of the Party. 
L 169/674 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE I
RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF WINE,
SPIRIT DRINKS AND
AROMATISED WINE NAMES
ARTICLE 4
Protected names
Without prejudice to Articles 5, 6 and 7 of this Annex, the following shall be protected:
(a) as regards the products referred to in Article 2 of this Protocol:
(i) references to the name of the Member State in which the wine, spirit drink and
aromatised wine originates or other names to indicate the Member State,
(ii) the geographical indications, listed in Appendix 1, Part A, points (a) for wines (b) for
spirit drinks and (c) for aromatised wines,
(iii) the traditional expressions listed in Appendix 2;
(b) as regards wines, spirit drinks or aromatised wines originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina:
(i) references to the name "Bosnia and Herzegovina" or any other name designating that
country, 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/675
(ii) the geographical indications, listed in Appendix 1, Part B, points (a) for wines (b) for
spirit drinks and (c) for aromatised wines.
ARTICLE 5
Protection of names referring to
the Member States of the Community and to Bosnia and Herzegovina
1. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, references to the Member States of the Community, and other
names used to indicate a Member State, for the purpose of identifying origin of the wine, spirit
drink and aromatised wine:
(a) shall be reserved for wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines originating in the Member
State concerned, and
(b) shall not be used otherwise than under the conditions provided for by the laws and regulations
of the Community.
2. In the Community, references to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and other names used to indicate
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the purpose of identifying origin of the wine, spirit drink and
aromatised wine:
(a) shall be reserved for wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines originating in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and 
L 169/676 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(b) shall not be used otherwise than under the conditions provided for by the laws and regulations
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
ARTICLE 6
Protection of geographical indications
1. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the geographical indications for the Community which are
listed in Appendix 1, Part A:
(a) shall be protected for wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines originating in the Community,
and
(b) shall not be used otherwise than under the conditions provided for by the laws and regulations
of the Community.
2. In the Community, the geographical indications for Bosnia and Herzegovina which are
listed in Appendix 1, Part B:
(a) shall be protected for wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines originating in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and
(b) shall not be used otherwise than under the conditions provided for by the laws and regulations
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/677
3. The Parties shall take all measures necessary, in accordance with the Agreement in this
Annex, for the reciprocal protection of the geographical indications referred to in Article 4(a)(ii)
and 4(b)(ii), which are used for the description and presentation of wines, spirit drinks and
aromatised wines originating in the territory of the Parties. To that end, each Party shall make use
of the appropriate legal means referred to in Article 23 of the TRIPS Agreement to ensure an
effective protection and prevent geographical indications from being used to identify wines, spirit
drinks and aromatised wines not covered by the indications or the descriptions concerned.
4. The geographical indications referred to in Article 4 shall be reserved exclusively for the
products originating in the territory of the Party to which they apply and may be used only under the
conditions laid down in the laws and regulations of that Party.
5. The protection provided for in the Agreement in this Annex shall prohibit in particular any
use of protected names for wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines which do not originate in the
geographical area indicated, and shall apply even when:
(a) the true origin of the wine, spirit drink or aromatised wine is indicated;
(b) the geographical indication in question is used in translation; 
L 169/678 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(c) the name is accompanied by terms such as "kind", "type", "style", "imitation", "method" or
other expressions of the sort;
(d) the protected name is used in any way for products falling under heading No 20.09 of the
Harmonised System of the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity
Description and Coding System, done at Brussels on 14 June 1983.
6. If geographical indications listed in Appendix 1 are homonymous, protection shall be
granted to each indication provided that it has been used in good faith. The Parties shall mutually
decide the practical conditions of use under which the homonymous geographical indications will
be differentiated from each other, taking into account the need to ensure equitable treatment of the
producers concerned and that consumers are not misled.
7. If a geographical indication listed in Appendix 1 is homonymous with a geographical
indication for a third country, Article 23(3) of the TRIPS Agreement applies.
8. The provisions of the Agreement in this Annex shall in no way prejudice the right of any
person to use, in the course of trade, that person's name or the name of that person's predecessor in
business, except where such name is used in such a manner as to mislead consumers.
9. Nothing in the Agreement in this Annex shall oblige a Party to protect a geographical
indication of the other Party listed in Appendix 1 which is not or ceases to be protected in its
country of origin or which has fallen into disuse in that country. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/679
10. On the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall no longer deem that the protected
geographical names listed in Appendix 1 are customary in the common language of the Parties as a
common name for wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines as foreseen in Article 24(6) of the
TRIPS Agreement.
ARTICLE 7
Protection of traditional expressions
1. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the traditional expressions for the Community listed in
Appendix 2:
(a) shall not be used for the description or presentation of wine originating in Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and
(b) may not be used for the description or presentation of wine originating in the Community
otherwise than in relation to the wines of the origin and the category and in the language as
listed in Appendix 2 and under the conditions provided for by the laws and regulations of the
Community. 
L 169/680 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall take the measures necessary, in accordance with the
Agreement in this Annex, for the protection of the traditional expressions referred to in Article 4
and used for the description and presentation of wines originating in the territory of the Community.
To that end, Bosnia and Herzegovina shall provide appropriate legal means to ensure an effective
protection and prevent traditional expressions from being used to describe wine not entitled to those
traditional expressions, even where the traditional expressions used are accompanied by expressions
such as "kind", "type", "style", "imitation", "method" or the like.
3. The protection of a traditional expression shall apply only:
(a) to the language or languages in which it appear(s) in Appendix 2 and not in translation; and
(b) for a category of product in relation to which it is protected for the Community as set out in
Appendix 2.
ARTICLE 8
Trademarks
1. The responsible offices of the Parties shall refuse the registration of a trademark for a wine,
spirit drink or aromatised wine which is identical with, or similar to, or contains or consists of a
reference to a geographical indication protected under Article 4 with respect to such wine, spirit
drink or aromatised wine not having this origin and not complying with the relevant rules governing
its use. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/681
2. The responsible offices of the Parties shall refuse the registration of a trademark for a wine
which contains or consists of a traditional expression protected under the Agreement in this Annex
if the wine in question is not one to which the traditional expression is reserved as indicated in
Appendix 2.
3. Bosnia and Herzegovina shall adopt the necessary measures to amend all trademarks so as to
fully remove all reference to Community geographical indications protected under Article 4. All
said references shall be removed at the latest by 31 December 2008.
ARTICLE 9
Exports
The Parties shall take all steps necessary to ensure that, where wines, spirit drinks and aromatised
wines originating in a Party are exported and marketed outside that Party, the protected
geographical indications referred to in Article 4(a)(ii) and (b)(ii) and in the case of wines, the
traditional expressions of that Party referred to in Article 4(a)(iii) are not used to describe and
present such products which originate in the other Party. 
L 169/682 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
TITLE II
ENFORCEMENT AND MUTUAL ASSISTANCE
BETWEEN COMPETENT AUTHORITIES
AND MANAGEMENT OF THIS AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 10
Working Group
1. A Working Group functioning under the auspices of the Sub-committee on Agriculture to be
created in accordance with Article 43 of the Interim Agreement (SAA Article 119) shall be
established.
2. The Working Group shall see to the proper functioning of the Agreement in this Annex and
shall examine all questions which may arise in implementing it.
3. The Working Group may make recommendations, discuss and put forward suggestions on
any matter of mutual interest in the wine, spirit drink and aromatised wine sector which would
contribute to the attainment of the objectives of the Agreement in this Annex. It shall meet at the
request of either of the Parties, alternatively in the Community and in Bosnia and Herzegovina, at
time and a place and in a manner mutually determined by the Parties. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/683
ARTICLE 11
Tasks of the Parties
1. The Parties shall either directly or through the Working Group referred to in Article 10
maintain contact on all matters relating to the implementation and functioning of the Agreement in
this Annex.
2. Bosnia and Herzegovina designates the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations
as its representative body. The Community designates the Directorate-General Agriculture and
Rural Development of the European Commission as its representative body. A Party shall notify
the other Party if it changes its representative body.
3. The representative body shall ensure the coordination of the activities of all the bodies
responsible for ensuring the enforcement of the Agreement in this Annex.
4. The Parties shall:
(a) mutually amend the lists referred to in Article 4 by decision of the Interim Committee to take
account of any amendments to the laws and regulations of the Parties;
(b) mutually decide, by decision of the Interim Committee, that the Appendices to the Agreement
in this Annex should be modified. The Appendices shall be deemed to be modified from the
date recorded in an exchange of letters between the Parties, or the date of the Working Group
decision, as the case requires; 
L 169/684 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(c) mutually decide the practical conditions referred to in Articles 6(6);
(d) inform each other of the intention to decide new regulations or amendments of existing
regulations of public policy concern, such as health or consumer protection, with implications
for the wine, spirit and aromatised wine sector;
(e) notify each other of any legislative, administrative and judicial decisions concerning the
implementation of the Agreement in this Annex and inform each other of measures adopted
on the basis of such decisions.
ARTICLE 12
Application and operation
of the Agreement in this Annex
The Parties designate the contact points set out in Appendix 3 to be responsible for the application
and operation of the Agreement in this Annex. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/685
ARTICLE 13
Enforcement and mutual assistance between the parties
1. If the description or presentation of a wine, spirit drink or aromatised wine in particular on
the labelling, in official or commercial documents or in advertising, is in breach of the Agreement
in this Annex, the Parties shall apply the necessary administrative measures and/or shall initiate
legal proceedings with a view to combating unfair competition or preventing the wrongful use of
the protected name in any other way.
2. The measures and proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 shall be taken in particular:
(a) where descriptions or translation of description, names, inscriptions or illustrations relating to
wine, spirit or aromatised wine drinks whose names are protected under the Agreement in this
Annex are used, directly or indirectly, which give false or misleading information as to the
origin, nature or quality of the wine, spirit drink or aromatised wine;
(b) where, for packaging, containers are used which are misleading as to the origin of the wine.
3. If one of the Parties has reason to suspect that:
(a) a wine, spirit drink or aromatised wine as defined in Article 2 of this Protocol, being or having
been traded in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Community, does not comply with rules
governing the wine, spirit drink or aromatised wine sector in the Community or in Bosnia and
Herzegovina or with this Agreement; and 
L 169/686 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
(b) this non-compliance is of particular interest to the other Party and could result in
administrative measures and/or legal proceedings being taken,
it shall immediately inform the representative body of the other Party.
4. The information to be provided in accordance with paragraph 3 shall include details of the
non-compliance with the rules governing the wine, spirit drink and aromatised wine sector of the
Party and/or the Agreement in this Annex and shall be accompanied by official, commercial or
other appropriate documents, with details of any administrative measures or legal proceedings that
may, if necessary, be taken.
ARTICLE 14
Consultations
1. The Parties shall enter into consultations if one of them considers that the other has failed to
fulfil an obligation under the Agreement in this Annex.
2. The Party which requests the consultations shall provide the other Party with all the
information necessary for a detailed examination of the case in question.
3. In cases where any delay could endanger human health or impair the effectiveness of
measures to control fraud, appropriate interim protective measures may be taken, without prior
consultation, provided that consultations are held immediately after the taking of these measures. 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/687
4. If, following the consultations provided for in paragraphs 1 and 3, the Parties have not
reached agreement, the Party which requested the consultations or which took the measures referred
to in paragraph 3 may take appropriate measures in accordance with Article 49 of the Interim
Agreement (SAA Article 126) so as to permit the proper application of the Agreement in this
Annex.
TITLE III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 15
Transit of small quantities
1. The Agreement in this Annex shall not apply to wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines,
which:
(a) pass in transit through the territory of one of the Parties, or
(b) originate in the territory of one of the Parties and which are consigned in small quantities
between those Parties under the conditions and according to the procedures provided for in
paragraph 2. 
L 169/688 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
2. The following products referred to wines, spirit drinks and aromatised wines shall be
considered to be small quantities:
(a) quantities in labelled containers of not more than 5 litres fitted with a non-reusable closing
device where the total quantity transported, whether or not made up of separate consignments,
does not exceed 50 litres;
(b) (i) quantities which are contained in the personal luggage of travellers in quantities not
 exceeding 30 litres;
(ii) quantities which are sent in consignments from one private individual to another in
quantities not exceeding 30 litres;
(iii) quantities which are part of the belongings of private individuals who are moving
house;
(iv) quantities which are imported for the purpose of scientific or technical experiments,
subject to a maximum of 1 hectolitre;
(v) quantities which are imported for diplomatic, consular or similar establishments as part
of their duty-free allowance;
(vi) quantities which are held on board international means of transport as victualling
supplies.
The case of exemption referred to in point (a) may not be combined with one or more of the cases
of exemption referred to in point (b). 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/689
ARTICLE 16
Marketing of pre-existing stocks
1. Wines, spirit drinks or aromatised wines which, at the time of the entry into force of this
Agreement, have been produced, prepared, described and presented in compliance with the internal
laws and regulations of the Parties but are prohibited by the Agreement in this Annex may be sold
until stocks run out.
2. Except where provisions to the contrary are adopted by the Parties, wines, spirit drinks or
aromatised wines which have been produced, prepared, described and presented in compliance with
the Agreement in this Annex but whose production, preparation, description and presentation cease
to comply therewith as a result of an amendment thereto may continue to be marketed until stocks
run out. 
L 169/690 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
APPENDIX 1
LIST OF PROTECTED NAMES
(as referred to in Articles 4 and 6 of Annex II of Protocol 6)
PART A: IN THE COMMUNITY
(A) – WINES ORIGINATING IN THE COMMUNITY 
FINAL ACT 
L 169/800 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
The plenipotentiaries of the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY,
hereinafter referred to as "the Community",
 of the one part, and
the plenipotentiaries of BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA,
 of the other part,
meeting in Luxembourg on the sixteenth day of June in the year two thousand and eight for the
signature of the Interim Agreement on Trade and Trade-related Matters between the European
Community, of the one part, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, of the other part, hereinafter referred to
as "this Agreement", have adopted the following texts:
this Agreement and its Annexes I to VI, namely:
– Annex I (Article 6) – Tariff concessions of Bosnia and Herzegovina for Community industrial
products
– Annex II (Article 12(2)) – Definition of "baby beef" products 
30.6.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 169/801
– Annex III (Article 12) – Tariff concessions of Bosnia and Herzegovina for agricultural
primary products originating in the Community
– Annex IV (Article 13) – Duties applicable to goods originating in Bosnia and Herzegovina on
import into the Community
– Annex V (Article 13) – Duties applicable to goods originating in the Community on import
into Bosnia and Herzegovina
– Annex VI (Article 38) – Intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights
and the following Protocols:
– Protocol 1 (Article 10) – On trade between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina in
processed agricultural products
– Protocol 2 (Article 27) – Concerning the definition of the concept of "originating products"
and methods of administrative cooperation for the application of the provisions of this
Agreement between the Community and Bosnia and Herzegovina 
L 169/802 EN Official Journal of the European Union 30.6.2008
– Protocol 3 (Article 36) – On State aid to the steel industry
– Protocol 4 (Article 39) – On mutual administrative assistance in customs matters
– Protocol 5 (Article 49) – Dispute settlement
– Protocol 6 (Article 12) – On reciprocal preferential concessions for certain wines, the
reciprocal recognition, protection and control of wine, spirit drinks and aromatised wine
names. 
The plenipotentiaries of the Community and the plenipotentiaries of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
adopted the text of the joint declaration listed below and annexed to this Final Act:
– Joint Declaration on Article 38 (SAA Article 73)
The plenipotentiaries of Bosnia and Herzegovina have taken note of the declaration listed below
and annexed to this Final Act:
– Declaration by the Community concerning the exceptional trade measures granted by the
Community on the basis of Regulation (EC) No 2007/2000. 
JOINT DECLARATION
Joint Declaration on Article 38 (SAA Article 73)
The Parties agree that for the purpose of this Agreement, intellectual and industrial property
includes in particular copyright, including the copyright in computer programmes, and
neighbouring rights, the rights relating to databases, patents including supplementary protection
certificates, industrial designs, trademarks and service marks, topographies of integrated circuits,
geographical indications, including appellation of origins, and plant variety rights.
The protection of commercial property rights includes in particular the protection against unfair
competition as referred to in Article 10bis of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property and the protection of undisclosed information as referred to in Article 39 of the Agreement
on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement).
The Parties further agree that the level of protection referred to in Article 38(3) of this Agreement
(SAA Article 73(3)) shall include the availability of the measures, procedures and remedies
provided for in Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property rights 
DECLARATION BY THE COMMUNITY
Declaration by the Community concerning the exceptional trade measures granted by the
Community on the basis of Regulation (EC) No 2007/2000
Considering that exceptional trade measures are granted by the Community to countries
participating or linked to the EU Stabilisation and Association Process including Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the basis of Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2000 of 18 September 2000
introducing exceptional trade measures for countries and territories participating in or linked to the
European Union's Stabilisation and Association process 1
, the Community declares:
– that, in application of Article 19 of this Agreement (SAA Article 34), those of the unilateral
autonomous trade measures which are more favourable will apply in addition to the
contractual trade concessions offered by the Community in this Agreement as long as
Regulation (EC) No 2007/2000 applies;
– that, in particular, for the products covered by Chapters 7 and 8 of the Combined
Nomenclature, for which the Common Customs Tariff provides for the application of
ad valorem customs duties and a specific customs duty, the reduction shall apply also to the
specific customs duty in derogation from the relevant provision of Article 13(2) of this
Agreement (SAA Article 28(2)). 