PROTOCOL ACCOMPANYING CONVENTION TO REGULATE THE LEVEL OF
LAKE OF THE WOODS
At the moment of signing the Convention between His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in
respect of the Dominion of Canada, and the United States of America, regarding the regulation of
the level of Lake of the Woods, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have agreed as follows:-
1.
The plans of the necessary works for the enlargement of the outflow capacity of the outlets of
Lake of the Woods provided for in Article 7 of the Convention, as well as of the necessary works
and dams for controlling and regulating the outflow of the water, shall be referred to the International
Lake of the Woods Control Board for an engineering report upon their suitability and sufficiency for
the purpose of permitting the discharge of not less than forty-seven thousand cubic feet of water per
second (47,000 c.f.s.) when the level of the lake is at elevation 1061 sea-level datum. Any
disagreement between the members of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board in regard
to the matters so referred shall be immediately submitted by the Board to the International Joint
Commission whose decision shall be final.
2.
Should it become necessary to set up a special tribunal to determine the cost of the acquisition of
the flowage easement in the United States provided for in Article 8 of the Convention, the
Government of Canada shall be afforded an opportunity to be represented thereon. Should the cost
be determined by means of the usual judicial procedure in the United States, the Government of
Canada shall be given the privilege of representation by counsel in connection therewith.
3.
Since Canada is incurring extensive financial obligations in connection with the protective works
and measures provided for in the United States along the shores of Lake of the Woods and the banks
of Rainy River, under Article 8 of the Convention, the plans, together with the estimates of cost, of
all such protective works and measures as the Government of the United States may propose to
construct or provide for within five years of the coming into force of the Convention shall be referred
to the International Lake of the Woods Control Board for an engineering report upon their suitability
and sufficiency for the purpose of the regulation of the level of the lake under the Convention. Any
disagreement between the members of the International Lake of the Woods Control Board in regard
to the matters so referred shall be immediately submitted by the Board to the International Joint
Commission whose decision shall be final.
4.
In order to ensure the fullest measure of co-operation between the International Lake of the
Woods Control Board and the Canadian Lake of the Woods Control Board provided for in Article
3 of the Convention, the Government of Canada will appoint one member of the Canadian Board
as its representative on the International Board.
5.
Until the outlets of Lake of the Woods have been enlarged in accordance with Article 7 of the
Convention, the upper limit of the ordinary range in the levels of the lake provided for in Article 4
of the Convention shall be elevation 1060.5 sea-level datum, and the International Lake of the
Woods Control Board may advise the Canadian Lake of the Woods Control Board in respect of the
rate of total discharge of water from the lake which may be permitted.
In faith whereof the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Protocol and affixed
thereto their respective seals.
Done in duplicate at Washington the 24th day of February, 1925.
(Seal) ERNEST LAPOINTE.
(Seal) CHARLES EVANS HUGHES.
