AGREEMENT BETWEEN CANADA AND FRANCE ON
THEIR MUTUAL FISHING RELATIONS
The Government of Canada and the Government of France,
Having regard to the fact that the Canadian Government has deemed it
necessary, notably with a view to ensuring the protection of Canadian fisheries,
to adopt certain measures relating to the delimitation of the territorial sea and
the fishing zones of Canada,
Considering it desirable to adapt to present circumstances their mutual
relations in fishery matters,
Have agreed as follows :
Article I
The Government of France renounces the privileges established to its
advantage in fishery matters by the Convention signed at London, on April 8,
1904, between the United Kingdom and France. The present Agreement
supersedes all previous treaty provisions relating to fishing by French nationals
off the Atlantic coast of Canada.
Article 2
In return, the Canadian Government undertakes in the event of a modifi
cation to the juridical regime relating to the waters situated beyond the present
limits of the territorial sea and fishing zones of Canada on the Atlantic coast,
to recognize the right of French nationals to fish in these waters subject to
possible measures for the conservation of resources, including the establishment
of quotas. The French Government undertakes for its part to grant reciprocity
to Canadian nationals off the coast of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon.
Article 3
Fishing vessels registered in metropolitan France may continue to fish
from January 15 to May 15 each year, up to May 15, 1986, on an equal footing
with Canadian vessels, in the Canadian fishing zone within the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, east of the meridian of longitude 61 degrees 30 mins. west, subject to
the provisions of articles 5 and 6.
Article 4
In view of the special situation of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon and as an
arrangement between neighbours :
(a) French coastal fishing boats registered in Saint-Pierre and Miquelon may
continue to fish in the areas where they have traditionally fished along the
coasts of Newfoundland, and Newfoundland coastal fishing boats shall
enjoy the same right along the coasts of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon;
(b) A maximum often French trawlers registered in Saint-Pierre and Miquelon,
of a maximum length of 50 metres, may continue to fish along the coasts of
Newfoundland, of Nova Scotia (with the exception of the Bay of Fundy),
and in the Canadian fishing zone within the Gulf of St. Lawrence, on an
equal footing with Canadian trawlers; Canadian trawlers registered in the
ports on the Atlantic coast of Canada may continue to fish along the coasts
of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon on an equal footing with French trawlers.
Article 5
French fishing vessels covered by the provision of article 3 must not direct
their fishing effort to the taking of species other than those which they have
traditionally exploited in the five-year period immediately preceding this
Agreement, nor shall they substantially increase the level of such effort.
Article 6
1. Canadian fishery regulations shall be applied without discrimination
in fact or in law to the French fishing vessels covered by articles 3 and 4,
including regulations concerning the dimensions of vessels authorized to fish
less than 12 miles from the Atlantic coast of Canada.
2. French fishery regulations shall be applied under the same conditions
to the Canadian fishing vessels covered by article 4.
3. Before promulgating new regulations applicable to these vessels, the
authorities of each of the Parties shall give three months prior notice to the
authorities of the other Party.
Article 7
The French patrol vessel which usually accompanies the French fishing
fleet may continue to exercise its functions of assistance in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence.
Article 8
The line defined in the annex to the present Agreement determines, .in the
area between Newfoundland and the islands of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon, the
limit of the territorial waters of Canada and of the zones submitted to the fishery
jurisdiction of France.
Article 9
No provision of the present Agreement shall be interpreted as prejudicing
the views and future claims of either Party concerning internal waters, territorial
waters or jurisdiction with respect to fisheries or the resources of the continental
shelf, or the bilateral or multilateral agreements to which either Government is
a party.
Article 10
1. The Contracting Parties shall establish a Commission to consider all
disputes concerning the application of this Agreement.
2. The Commission shall consist of one national expert nominated by
each of the Parties for ten years. In -addition, the two Governments shall
designate by mutual agreement a third expert who shall not be a national of
either Party.
3. If, in connection with any dispute referred to the Commission by either
of the Contracting Parties, the Commission has not within one month reached a
decision acceptable to the Contracting Parties, reference shall be made to the
third expert. The Commission shall then sit as an arbitral tribunal under the
chairmanship of the third expert.
4. Decisions of the Commission sitting as an arbitral tribunal shall be
taken by a majority, and shall be binding on the Contracting Parties.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorized for this purpose by
their respective Governments, have signed the present Agreement and have
affixed thereto their seals.
DONE in two copies at Ottawa in the English and French languages, each
version being equally authentic, this 27th day of March, 1972.
EN FOI DE QUOI, les soussignes, dument autorises a cet effet par leurs
Gouvernements respectifs, ont signe le present Accord et y ont appose leurs
sceaux.
FAIT en deux exemplaires a Ottawa, en langues anglaise et francaise,
chaque version faisant egalement foi, ce 27e jour de mars 1972.
For the Government of Canada :
Pour le Gouvernement-du Canada :
[Signed-Signe}
MITCHELL SHARP
For the Government of France :
Pour le Gouvernement de la France :
[Signed - Signe]
PIERRE SIRAUD

ANNEX TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN CANADA AND FRANCE
The line which determines the limit of the territorial waters of Canada and the
zones submitted to the fishery jurisdiction of France extends northward and westward
in a series of eight connected straight lines joining the following points :
Point (1) Equidistant 12 nautical miles from L'Enfant Perdu (France) and Lamaline
Shag Rock (Canada). Latitude 46&#186; 38' 46" N., Longitude 55&#186; 54' 12" W. approxi
mately.
Point (2) Equidistant from L'Enfant Perdu (France) and Lamaline Shag Rock and
  Otter Rock (Canada). Latitude 46&#186; 41' 56" N., Longitude 55&#186; 55' 28" W. approxi
mately.
Point (3) Equidistant from L'Enfant Perdu (France) and Otter Rock and Enfant
Perdu (Canada). Latitude 46&#186; 48' 10" N., Longitude 55&#186; 58' 57" W. approximately.
Point (4) The low Vater mark on the south-westernmost point of Enfant Perdu
(Canada). Latitude 46&#186; 51' 20" N., Longitude 56&#186; 05' 30" W. approximately.
  Point (5) The low water mark on the west point of the south-westernmost island of
  the Little Green Island group. Latitude 46&#186; 51' 36" N., Longitude 56&#186; 05' 58" W.
approximately.
Point (6) The intersection of the French mid-channel line of 1907 with a line parallel
to, and 3 miles distant from a line joining Green Island to Dantzig Point. Latitude
46&#186; 55' 52" N., Longitude 56&#186; 07' 47" W. approximately.
Point (7) The intersection of the French mid-channel line of 1907 with the median
line, equidistant from Bout du Nordet (France) and Little Plate Island (Canada).
Latitude 47&#186; 06' 02" N., Longitude 56&#186; 06' 18" W. approximately.
  Point (8) Equidistant from Cap du Nid a l'Aigle (France) and Little Plate Island and
the southwest Wolf Rock (Canada). Latitude 47&#186; 18' 19" N., Longitude 56&#186; 15' 18"
  W. approximately.
  Point (9) The intersection of the French mid-channel line of 1907 with the outer limit
  of Canada's 12-mile territorial Sea. Latitude 47&#186; 21' 54" N., Longitude 56&#186; 29' 40"
  W. approximately.
  
  EXCHANGE OF LETTERS
  LETTER I
  EMBASSY OF FRANCE IN CANADA
  Ottawa, March 27, 1972
  Sir,
  I have the honour to inform you that it has been brought to the attention
  of the Government of France that certain vessels in the Gulf of St. Lawrence
  encountered some administrative difficulties when they attempted to enter the
Strait of Belle Isle.
The Government of France recognizes that fishing vessels using this route
shall be subject to the applicable Canadian fishery and pollution-control
regulations, and will ask its nationals to comply closely with these provisions.
It considers that, with the above reservation, French fishing vessels have at
all times the right of innocent passage in the Strait of Belle Isle.
Accept, Sir, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
[Signed]
PIERRE SIRAUD
Ambassador of France
The Honourable Mitchell Sharp
Secretary of State for External Affairs
Ottawa, Ontario
LETTER II
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Ottawa, March 27, 1972
Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of March 27,
1972, which reads as follows :
[See letter I]
I thank you for your note and I confirm that French fishing vessels have at
all times the right of innocent passage in the Strait of Belle Isle, subject to the
condition stated in your letter.
Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.
MITCHELL SHARP
Secretary of State for External Affairs
His Excellency Pierre Siraud
Ambassador of France
Ottawa
