AGREEMENT ON THE CANADA-INDIA COLOMBO
PLAN ATOMIC REACTOR PROJECT
New Delhi, 28 April 1956

The Government of Canada and the Government of India, desiring
to conclude an agreement concerning the Canadian Government's
contribution under the Colombo Plan, have agreed as follows:
Article I
As part of its contribution under the Colombo Plan, the
Government of Canada will provide an NRX atomic research and
experimental reactor to the Government of India.
Article II
The Government of India will make the facilities of the reactor
available to scientists approved by the Government of India from other
countries including Colombo Plan countries in South and Southeast
Asia.
Article III
The Government of India will ensure that the reactor and any
products resulting from its use will be employed for peaceful purposes
only.
Article IV
The contribution of the Government of Canada will comprise the
external costs of designing the reactor, the rotunda, all auxiliary
services within the rotunda and the specific auxiliary equipment set
out in the annex. It will also include the external costs of
manufacturing or procuring the reactor and the auxiliary equipment
set out in the annex, together with the external costs of the supervision
of their installation and erection.
Article V
The Government of India will provide the site for the reactor. It
will also be responsible for the foundation work, for constructing the
buildings and for supplying the specific auxiliary equipment set out
in the annex. The Government of India will provide all mechanical,
electrical, administrative and other services and facilities required at
the site. In accordance with normal Colombo Plan practice the
Government of India will be responsible for providing local labour and
materials as required. The Government of India, following past
practices in relation to Colombo Plan shipments from Canada, will
arrange for shipment and bear freight charges and will arrange for
and assume the cost of insurance on any equipment and materials
destined for the project or will bear the cost of replacement in the
event of loss.
Article VI
The distribution of the various costs between Canada and India
will be in accordance with the understanding reached between
representatives of the two Governments, which is recorded in the
annex.
Article VII
The annex to this agreement may be amended from time to time
m ways not inconsistent with the agreement by letters exchanged
between the High Commissioner for Canada in India and the
Department of Atomic Energy of India.
Article VIII
The Government of Canada will provide such training as is
practicable for the staff of the reactor.
Article IX
The Government of Canada will provide at the site during the
construction period and for the initial period of operation such technical
experts as may be required from Canada.
Article X
In order to ensure that all phases of the project are effectively
coordinated, the Canadian engineering and supervisory authorities
responsible for designing and installing the reactor will also supervise
all other aspects of the work and will be responsible for the inspection
and acceptance of all work undertaken at the site including the erection
of the reactor and the construction of the rotunda. All related auxiliary
equipment and its installation will also be subject to inspection and
acceptance by these authorities.
Article XI
It is the intention of both Governments that the fuel elements
for the initial fuel charge and for. the continuing requirements of the
reactor will be supplied from Canada save to the extent that India
provides them from sources within India. Arrangements for the
provision of the fuel elements to India from Canada will be agreed
upon by the two Governments before the reactor is ready to operate;
if an international agency acceptable to both Governments has come
into being or is in prospect at that time, the terms of such agreement
will be in keeping with the principles of that agency.
Article XII
This agreement takes the place of all previous agreements and
understandings on this matter between the two Governments or
between officials of the two (',overnments.
Article XIII
The present agreement shall enter into force on the date of
signature.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned being duly authorised by
their respective Governments have signed the present agreement and
have affixed thereto their seals.
DONE in duplicate at New Delhi this twenty-eighth day of April,
1956, in the English language.
On behalf of the Government of
Canada
Sd. Escott REID
High Commissioner
On behalf of the Government of
India
Sd. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Prime Minister
