EXCHANGE OF NOTES (January 22, 1964), WITH ATTACHED PROTOCOL BETWEEN CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA CONCERNING THE COLUMBIA RIVER TREATY, SIGNED AT WASHINGTON, JANUARY 17, 1961.

NOTE I.
Ottawa, 22 January 1964
The Honourable
Dean Rusk,
Secretary of State of the
United States of America,
Washington.
Sir,
I have the honor to refer to discussions which have been held between representatives of the
Government of Canada and of the Government of the United States of America regarding the Treaty
between Canada and the United States of America relating to cooperative development of the water
resources of the Columbia River Basin signed at Washington on 17 January 1961. On the basis of these
discussions, the Government of Canada understands that the two Governments have agreed to the terms of
the attached Protocol.
I should like to propose that, if agreeable to your Government, this Note together with the Protocol
attached thereto and your reply, shall constitute an agreement between our two Governments, relating to the
carrying out of the provisions of the Treaty with effect from the date of the exchange of instruments of
ratification of the Treaty.
Accept, Sir, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
Secretary of State for
External Affairs

NOTE II.
Washington, 22 January 1964
The Honorable Paul Martin, P.C., Q.C.
Secretary of State for External Affairs, Ottawa
Sir,
I have the honor to refer to your Note dated 22 January 1964, together with the Annex thereto regard-ing the
Treaty between Canada and the United States of America relating to cooperative development of the water
resources of the Columbia River Basin signed at Washington on 17 January 1961.
I wish to advise you that the Government of the United States of America agrees that your Note with the
Annex thereto, together with this reply, shall constitute an agreement between our two Governments relating to
the carrying out of the provisions of the Treaty with effect from the date of the exchange of instruments of
ratification of the Treaty.
Accept, Sir, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
Secretary of State

Protocol
ANNEX TO EXCHANGE OF NOTES
Dated January 22, 1964 Between the Governments of Canada
And The United States Regarding the Columbia River Treaty
I. If the United States entity should call upon Canada to operate storage in the Columbia River Basin to
meet flood control needs of the United States of America pursuant to Article IV(2)(b) or Article IV(3) of the
Treaty, such call shall be made only to the extent necessary to meet forecast flood control needs in the territory
of the United States of America that cannot adequately be met by flood control facilities in the United States of
America in accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the Permanent Engineering Board, the need to use Canadian flood control
facilities under Article IV(2)(b) of the Treaty shall be considered to have arisen only in the case of potential
floods which could result in a peak discharge in excess of 600,000 cubic feet per second at The Dalles,
Oregon, assuming the use of all related storage in the United States of America existing and under
construction in January 1961, storage provided by any dam constructed pursuant to Article XII of the Treaty
and the Canadian storage described in Article IV(2)(a) of the Treaty.
(2) The United States entity will call upon Canada to operate storage under Article IV(3) of the Treaty
only to control potential floods in the United States of America that could not be adequately controlled by
all the related storage facilities in the United States of America existing at the expiration of 60 years from
the ratification date but in no event shall Canada be required to provide any greater degree of flood control
under Article IV(3) of the Treaty than that provided for under Article IV(2) of the Treaty.
(3) A call shall be made only if the Canadian entity has been consulted whether the need for flood
control is, or is likely to be, such that it cannot be met by the use of flood control facilities in the United States
of America in accordance with subparagraphs (1) or (2) of this paragraph. Within ten days of receipt of a
call, the Canadian entity will communicate its acceptance, or its rejection or proposals for modification of the
call, together with supporting considerations. When the communication indicates rejection or modification of
the call the United States entity will review the situation in the light of the communication and subsequent
developments and will then withdraw or modify the call if practicable. In the absence of agreement on the
call or its terms the United States entity will submit the matter to the Permanent Engineering Board provided
for under Article XV of the Treaty for assistance as contemplated in Article XV(2)(c) of the Treaty. The
entities will be guided by any instructions issued by the Permanent Engineering Board. If the Permanent
Engineering Board does not issue instructions within ten days of receipt of a submission the United States
entity may renew the call for any part or all of the storage covered in the original call and the Canadian entity
shall forthwith honor the request.
II. In preparing the flood control operating plans in accordance with paragraph 5 of Annex A of the
Treaty, and in making calls to operate for flood control pursuant to Articles IV(2)(b) and IV(3) of the
Treaty, every effort will be made to minimize flood damage in both Canada and the United States of
America.
III. The exchange of Notes provided for in Article VIII(1) of the Treaty shall take place contemporaneously
with the exchange of the Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty provided for in Article
XX of the Treaty.
IV. (1) During the period and to the extent that the sale of Canada's entitlement to downstream
power benefits within the United States of America as a result of an exchange of Notes pursuant to
Article VIII(1) of the Treaty relieves the United States of America of its obligation to provide east-west
standby transmission service as called for by Article X(1) of the Treaty, Canada is not required to make
payment for the east-west standby transmission service with regard to Canada's entitlement to
downstream power benefits sold in the United States of America.
(2) The United States of America is not entitled to any payments of the character set out in
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph in respect of that portion of Canada's entitlement to downstream
power benefits delivered by the United States of America to Canada at any point on the
Canada-United States of America boundary other than at a point near Oliver, British Columbia,
and the United States of America is not required to provide the east-west standby transmission
service referred to in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph in respect of the portion of Canada's
entitlement to downstream power benefits which is so delivered.
V. Inasmuch as control of historic streamflows of the Kootenay River by the dam provided for in
Article XII(1) of the Treaty would result in more than 200,000 kilowatt years per annum of energy benefit
downstream in Canada, as well as important flood control protection to Canada, and the oper-ation of that
dam is therefore of concern to Canada, the entities shall, pursuant to Article XIV(2)(a) of the Treaty,
cooperate on a continuing basis to coordinate the operation of that dam with the operation of hydroelectric
plants on the Kootenay River and elsewhere in Canada in accordance with the provisions of Article XII(5)
and Article XII(6) of the Treaty.
VI. (1) Canada and the United States of America are in agreement that Article XIII(1) of the
Treaty provides to each of them a right to divert water for a consumptive use.
(2) Any diversion of water from the Kootenay River when once instituted under the provisions
of Article XIII of the Treaty is not subject to any limitation as to time.
VII. As contemplated by Article IV(1) of the Treaty, Canada shall operate the Canadian storage in
accordance with Annex A and hydroelectric operating plans made thereunder. Also, as contemplated by
Annexes A and B of the Treaty and Article XIV(2)(k) of the Treaty, these operating plans before they are agreed
to by the entities will be conditioned as follows:
(1) As the downstream power benefits credited to Canadian storage decrease with time, the storage
required to be operated by Canada pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 9 of Annex A of the Treaty, will be that
required to produce those benefits.
(2) The hydroelectric operating plans, which will be based on Step I of the studies referred to in
paragraph 7 of Annex B of the Treaty, will provide a reservoir-balance relationship for each month of the
whole of the Canadian storage committed rather than a separate relationship for each of the three Canadian
storages. Subject to compliance with any detailed operating plan agreed to by the entities as permitted by
Article XIV(2)(k) of the Treaty, the manner of operation which will achieve the specific storage or release of
storage called for in a hydroelectric operating plan consistent with optimum storage use will be at the
discretion of the Canadian entity.
(3) Optimum power generation at-site in Canada and downstream in Canada and the United States of
America referred to in paragraph 7 of Annex A of the Treaty will include power generation at-site and
downstream in Canada of the Canadian storages referred to in Article II(2) of the Treaty, power generation
in Canada which is coordinated therewith, downstream power benefits from the Canadian storage which are
produced in the United States of America and measured under the terms of Annex B of the Treaty, power
generation in the Pacific Northwest Area of the United States of America and power generation coordinated
therewith.
VIII. The determination of downstream power benefits pursuant to Annex B of the Treaty, in respect of
each year until the expiration of thirty years from the commencement of full operation in accordance with Article
IV of the Treaty of that portion of the Canadian storage described in Article II of the Treaty which is last placed
in full operation, and thereafter until otherwise agreed upon by the entities, shall be based upon stream flows for
the thirty-year period beginning July 1928 as contained in the report "Extension of Modified Flows Through
1958 - Columbia River Basin" and dated June 29, 1961, by the Water Management Subcommittee of the
Columbia Basin Inter-Agency Committee.
IX. (1) Each load used in making the determinations required by Steps II and III of paragraph 7 of
Annex B of the Treaty shall have the same shape as the load of the Pacific Northwest area as that area
is defined in that paragraph.
(2) The capacity credit of Canadian storage shall not exceed the difference between the firm load
carrying capabilities of the projects and installations included in Step II of paragraph 7 of Annex B of the
Treaty and the projects and installations included in Step III of paragraph 7 of Annex B of the Treaty.
X. In making all determinations required by Annex B of the Treaty the loads used shall include the
power required for pumping water for consumptive use into the Banks Equalizing Reservoir of the Columbia
Basin Federal Reclamation Project but mention of this particular load is not intended in any way to exclude
from those loads any use of power that would normally be part of such loads.
XI. In the event operation of any of the Canadian storages is commenced at a time which would result in the
United States of America receiving flood protection for periods longer than those on which the amounts of flood
control payments to Canada set forth in Article VI(1) of the Treaty are based, the United States of America and
Canada shall consult as to the adjustments, if any, in the flood control payments that may be equitable in the light
of all relevant factors. Any adjustment would be calculated over the longer period or periods on the same basis
and in the same manner as the calculation of the amounts set forth in Article VI(1) of the Treaty. The
consultations shall begin promptly upon the determination of definite dates for the commencement of operation of
the Canadian storages.
XII. Canada and the United States of America are in agreement that the Treaty does not estab-lish any
general principle or precedent applicable to waters other than those of the Columbia River Basin and does not
detract from the application of the Boundary Waters Treaty, 1909, to other waters.
