FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE SWISS CONFEDERATION
AND
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF
CHINA
PREAMBLE
The Swiss Confederation (hereinafter referred to as “Switzerland”) and the People’s
Republic of China (hereinafter referred to as “China”), hereinafter individually referred
to as a “Party”, or collectively as “the Parties”;
RECOGNISING their long-term and close relations and cooperation in the fields of
politics and economy;
COMMITTED to strengthening the bonds of friendship and collaboration between the
Parties by establishing and deepening close and lasting relations;
RECOGNISING further that a free trade agreement shall produce mutual benefits to
each other and enhance bilateral economic and trade cooperation;
MINDFUL that economic development, social development and environmental
protection are interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable
development and that closer economic partnership can play an important role in
promoting sustainable development;
RECOGNISING that this Agreement should be implemented with a view to promoting
the public welfare in the Parties, including raising the standard of living, as well as
creating new job opportunities and promoting sustainable development in a manner
consistent with environmental protection and conservation;
RECALLING the progress made in bilateral relations after the establishment of
diplomatic relations and in particular after the signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding between the Swiss Federal Council and the Government of the People’s
Republic of China on Promoting Dialogue and Cooperation in 2007 and committed to
deepen and expand dialogue and cooperation in such areas;
COMMITTED to the promotion of prosperity, democracy, social progress and
harmony and to uphold freedom, equality, justice and the rule of law, reaffirming their
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and fundamental norms of
international relations;
DETERMINED to uphold the spirit of reciprocity and promote mutually beneficial
trade relations through the establishment of a well-functioning and mutually
advantageous bilateral preferential trade regime;
ACKNOWLEDGING the importance of good corporate governance and corporate
social responsibility for sustainable development, and affirming their aim to encourage
enterprises to observe internationally recognised guidelines and principles in this
respect;
CONVINCED that this Agreement will reinforce market economy principles and
enhance the competitiveness of the firms of the Parties in global markets;
SHARING the belief of the importance of, and determined to promote and further
strengthen the multilateral trading system as embodied in the Marrakesh Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organization (hereinafter referred to as the “WTO
Agreement”);
BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement and
other multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements;
HAVE AGREED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Agreement
(referred to as “this Agreement”):
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.1
Objectives
1. Based on Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(hereinafter referred to as the “GATT 1994”) and Article V of the General Agreement
on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred to as the “GATS”), China and Switzerland
shall establish a free trade area by means of this Agreement with a view to spurring
prosperity and sustainable development.
2. The objectives of this Agreement, which is based on trade relations between
market economies are:
(a) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in goods;
(b) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in services;
(c) to mutually enhance investment opportunities;
(d) to promote competition in the Parties’ markets;
(e) to ensure adequate and effective protection and enforcement of
intellectual property rights;
(f) to achieve further understanding of the government procurement of the
Parties and lay the ground for future cooperation in this field;
(g) to remove and avoid unnecessary technical barriers to trade, including
sanitary and phytosanitary measures;
(h) to develop international trade in such a way as to contribute to the
objective of sustainable development and to ensure that this objective is
integrated and reflected in the Parties’ trade relationship;
and to contribute in this way to the harmonious development and expansion of world
trade,
3. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of
its objectives set out in paragraph 2 and in accordance with customary rules of
interpretation of public international law.
3
ARTIcLE 1.2
Geographical Scope
Except as otherwise specified, this Agreement shall apply to:
(a) with respect to China, the entire customs territory of the People’s
Republic of China, including land, maritime and air space, and the
exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf within which it
exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with
international law and its domestic law; and
(b) with respect to Switzerland, the territory of Switzerland, including land,
internal waters and air space, in accordance with international law and its
domestic law.
ARTIcLE 1.3
Relationship to other Agreements
1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement and
the other agreements negotiated thereunder to which they are parties and any other
international agreement to which they are parties.
2. If a Party considers that the maintenance or establishment of customs unions,
free trade areas, arrangements for frontier trade or other preferential agreements by the
other Party has the effect of altering the trade regime provided for by this Agreement, or
that there is inconsistency between this Agreement and other agreements to which both
Parties are parties, it may request consultations. The other Party shall afford adequate
opportunity for consultations with the requesting Party with a view to finding a
mutually satisfactory solution in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of
public international law.
ARTIcLE 1.4
C’entral, Regional and Local Government
Each Party shall ensure the observance of all obligations and commitments
under this Agreement by its respective regional and local governments and authorities,
and by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of governmental powers delegated to
them by central, regional and local governments or authorities.
ARTICLE 1.5
Transparency
1. The Parties shall publish, or otherwise make publicly available, their laws,
regulations, judicial decisions, administrative rulings of general application and their
respective international agreements, which may affect the operation of this Agreement.
4
2. The Parties shall respond to specific questions and provide, upon request,
information to each other on matters referred to in paragraph 1, to the extent possible
within 30 days’ following the request.
3. The information referred to in paragraph 2 can be considered to have been
provided by copying a notification to WTO for the same matter or by referring to the
official, public and free of charge accessible website of the Party concerned.
4. In case of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Article and
provisions relating to transparency in other Chapters, the latter shall prevail to the extent
of the inconsistency.
5. The contact points established in Article 14.2 shall facilitate communications
between the Parties on matters covered in this Article. Upon request of the other Party,
the contact point shall identify the office or official responsible for the matter and assist,
as necessary, in facilitating communication with the responding Party.
ARTICLE 1.6
Disclosure ofInformation
Nothing in this Agreement shall require the Parties to disclose information that
would impede law enforcement, is contrary to its laws or otherwise contrary to the
public interest, or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of any economic
operator.
1 For the purposes of this Agreement, “days” means calendar days.
5
CHAPTER 2
TRADE IN GOODS
ARTIcLE 2.1
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply, as specified therein, to any product traded between the
customs territories of the Parties. The customs territory of Switzerland includes the
territory of the Principality of Liechtenstein, as long as the Customs Union Treaty of 29
March 1923 between the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein
remains in force.
2. Goods and products shall be understood to have the same meaning, unless the
context otherwise requires.
ARTICLE 2.2
National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation
Each Party shall accord national treatment to the products of the customs
territory of the other Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994. To this
end, Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes shall apply and are hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutalis mutandis.
ARTIcLE 2.3
Customs Duties on Imports
1. Customs duty on imports means any duty or charge of any kind imposed in
connection with the importation of a product, but does not include any:
(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with paragraph
2 of Article III of the GATT 1994;
(b) anti-dumping or countervailing duty applied consistently with Article VI
of the GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article
VI of the GATT 1994, or the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures; and
(c) fee or other charge in connection with the importation commensurate
with the cost of services rendered, imposed consistently with the
provisions of Article VIII of the GATT 1994.
2. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, each Party shall, upon entry
into force of this Agreement, eliminate or reduce its customs duties imposed in
connection with the importation of products originating in either Party, in accordance
with the terms and conditions set out in its Schedule in Annex I.
6
3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall increase any
existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on an originating product of the
other Party, which is not in accordance with the terms and conditions set out in its
schedule in Annex I.
ARTIcLE 2.4
Base Rate of Customs Duties on Imports
1. For each product the base rate of customs duty to which the successive
reductions set out in Annex 1 are to be applied, shall be the most-favoured nation
(hereinafter referred to as “MFN”) import customs duty rate applied on 1 January 2010.
2. If a Party reduces its applied MFN import customs duty rate after 1 January
2010 and before the end of the tariff elimination period, the tariff elimination schedule
of that Party set out in Annex I shall be applied to the reduced rate as from the date on
which the reduction is applied.
3. The reduced import customs duty rates calculated in accordance with Annex I,
shall be applied rounded to the first decimal place.
ARTIcLE 2.5
Import and Export Restrictions
With respect to export and import restrictions, Article XI of the GATT 1994
shall apply and is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.
ARTICLE 2.6
State Trading Enterprises
With respect to state trading enterprises, Article XVII of the GATT 1994 and the
Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XVII of the GATT 1994 shall apply and
are hereby incorporated into and made part ofthis Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 2.7
Exceptions
With respect to general and security exceptions, Articles XX and XXI of the
GATT 1994 shall apply and are hereby incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
7
ARTIcLE 2.8
Review Mechanism
Two years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall in the
Joint Committee review this Chapter and the Tariff Schedules of the Parties set out in
Annex I. The Parties shall thereafter conduct biennial reviews of this matter in the Joint
Committee.
8
CHAPTER 3
RULES OF ORIGIN AND IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
SECTION I
RULES OF ORIGIN
ARTICLE 3.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) “Party” means either China or Switzerland. This Chapter applies to the
customs territory of China and the customs territory of Switzerland as
defined in paragraph 1 of Article 2.1;
(b) “production” means methods of obtaining products including, but not
limited to, growing, mining, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting,
manufacturing, processing or assembling a product;
(c) “material” means ingredients, parts, components, subassemblies and/or
products that were physically incorporated into another product or were
subject to a process in the production of another product;
(d) “non-originating product” or “non-originating material” mean a product
or material that does not qualify as originating under this Chapter;
(e) “originating product” or “originating material” mean a product or
material that qualifies as originating under this Chapter;
(f) “customs value” means the value as determined in accordance with the
Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (Customs Valuation Agreement);
(g) “ex-works price” means the price paid for the product ex-works to the
producer located in a Party in whose undertaking the last working or
processing is carried out, provided that the price includes the value of all
the materials used, wage and any other cost, and profit minus any internal
taxes returned or repaid when the product obtained is exported;
(h) “Harmonized System” and “HS” mean the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding System;
(i) “chapter”, “heading” and “subheading” mean a chapter (two-digit codes),
heading (four-digit codes) or subheading (six-digit codes) of the
Harmonized System; and
9
(j) “authorised body” means any body designated under domestic law of a
Party or by the governmental authority of a Party to issue a Certificate of
Origin.
ARTIcLE 3.2
Originating Products
For the purpose of this Agreement, and unless otherwise required in this Chapter,
a product shall be considered as originating in a Party if:
(a) it has been wholly obtained in a Party, in accordance with Article 3.3;
(b) the non-originating materials used in the working or processing of that
product have undergone substantial transformation in a Party 2 in
accordance with Article 3.4, and meets the other applicable provisions of
this Chapter; or
(c) it has been produced in a Party exclusively from originating materials of
one or both Parties.
ARTICLE 3.3
Wholly Obtained Products
For the purpose of subparagraph (a) of Article 3.2, the following products shall
be considered as wholly obtained in a Party:
(a) mineral products and other non-living naturally occurring substances
extracted or taken from their soil, internal waters, territorial sea, seabed
or subsoil;
(b) vegetable products harvested, picked or gathered there;
(c) live animals born and raised there, and products obtained from such
animals;
(d) products obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering, capturing or
aquaculture conducted there;
(e) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the territorial sea or
the Exclusive Economic Zone of a Party by vessels registered with that
Party and flying the flag of that Party;
(f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the high sea by
vessels registered with a Party and flying the flag of that Party;
(g) products processed or made on board factory ships registered with a
Party and flying the flag of that Party, exclusively from products referred
2 working or processing of that product may be carried out in different factories within a Party.
10
to in subparagraph (e) and (f);
(h) products taken from the seabed and subsoil outside the territorial waters
of a Party, provided that the Party has the rights to exploit such seabed or
subsoil under domestic law in accordance with international law;
(i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there
which fit only for the recovery of raw materials;
(j) used products collected there which fit only for the recovery of raw
materials; and
(k) products obtained or produced there exclusively from products referred
to in subparagraphs (a) to (j).
ARTIcLE 3.4
Substantial Transformation
1. A product obtained using non-originating materials shall be considered to have
undergone substantial transformation if the requirements specified in Annex II are
fulfilled.
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1, the operations provided for in Article 3.6 are
considered as insufficient to obtain originating status.
3. Where Annex II refers to a percentage of the value of non-originating material
(VNM), it shall mean the maximum percentage of the VNM allowed in relation to the
ex-works price of a product. That percentage shall be calculated as follows:
VNM% VNM x 100
ex-works price
4. VNM shall be determined on the basis of the customs value at the time of
importation of the non-originating materials, including materials of undetermined
origin. If such value is unknown and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price
paid or payable for the materials in a Party shall be applied.
5. If a product which has acquired originating status in accordance with paragraph
1 in a Party is further processed in that Party and used as material in the manufacture of
another product, no account shall be taken of the non-originating components of that
material in the determination of the originating status of the product.
ARTIcLE 3.5
De Minimis
1. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of Article 3.4, non-originating materials do not
have to fulfil the conditions set out in Annex II provided that their total value does not
exceed 10% of the ex-works price.
11
2. This Article does not apply to value criteria set out in Annex II.
ARTICLE 3.6
Minimal Operations or Processes
1. iotwithstanding Article 3.4, a product shall not be considered as originating, if
it has only undergone one or more of the following operations or processes:
(a) operations to ensure the preservation of products in good condition
during transport and storage;
(b) freezing or thawing;
(c) packaging and re-packaging;
(d) washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
(e) ironing or pressing of textiles or textile products;
(f) simple painting and polishing;
(g) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and
rice;
(h) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;
(i) peeling and removal of stones and shells from fruits, nuts and vegetables;
(j) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
(k) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching;
(1) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards
or boards and all other simple packaging operations;
(m) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing
signs on products or their packaging;
(n) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds;
(o) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or
disassembly of products into parts;
(p) slaughter of animals.
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1, “simple” describes activities which need neither
special skills nor machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed to
carry out the activity.
3. All operations in the production of a given product carried out in a Party shall be
taken into account when determining whether the working or processing undergone by
that product is considered as minimal operations or processes referred to in paragraph 1.
12
ARTICLE 3.7
Accumulation
1. Without prejudice to Article 3.2, a product originating in a Party, which is used
as material in the production of a product in the other Party, shall be considered as
originating in the Party where the last operations beyond those referred to in paragraph
1 of Article 3.6 have been carried out.
2. A product originating in a Party, which is exported from a Party to the other
Party and does not undergo working or processing beyond those referred to in paragraph
1 of Article 3.6, shall retain its origin.
ARTICLE 3.8
Unit ofQualfication
1. For the purpose of determining the originating status, the unit of qualification of
a product or material shall be considered as the basic unit and determined in accordance
with the Harmonized System.
2. Pursuant to paragraph 1,
(a) where a set of articles is classified under a single heading or subheading
in accordance with General Interpretative Rule 3 of the Harmonized
System, it shall constitute the unit of qualification;
(b) where a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified
under a single heading or subheading of the Harmonized System, each
product shall be considered separately in determining whether it qualifies
as an originating product of a Party; and
(c) packaging shall be included with the product if it is included and
classified with that product in accordance with General Interpretative
Rule 5 of the Harmonized System. Packaging used for retail sale shall be
considered as materials of the product in calculating the value of non
originating materials used in its production.
3. Packing materials and containers for shipment that are used to protect a product
during transportation shall be disregarded in determining the origin of the product.
ARTICLE 3.9
Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools
1. Accessories, spare parts, tools and instruction and information material
presented together and classified with the product shall be considered as part of the
product in question provided that:
(a) they are invoiced together; and
13
(b) their quantities are considered as normal for this product.
2. Accessories, spare parts, tools and instruction and information material shall be
considered as materials of the product in calculating the value of non-originating
materials used in its production.
ARTICLE 3.10
Neutral Elements
When determining whether a product is an originating product, the origin of
neutral elements used in the production, testing or inspection of the product but not
physically incorporated into the product by themselves, shall not be taken into account.
Such neutral elements include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) fuel, energy, catalysts and solvents;
(b) equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or inspecting the
products;
(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and supplies;
(d) tools, dies and moulds;
(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and
buildings; and
(f) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used in
production or used to operate equipment and buildings.
ARTICLE 3.11
Fungibie Materials
1. Where originating and non-originating fungible materials are used in the
working or processing of a product, the determination of whether the materials used are
originating may be determined on the basis of an inventory management system.
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1, “fungible materials” means interchangeable
materials that are of the same kind and commercial quality, which cannot be
distinguished from one another once they are incorporated into the finished product.
3. The inventory management system shall be based on generally accepted
accounting principles applicable in the Party in which the product is manufactured and
ensure that no more final products receive originating status than would have been the
case if the materials had been physically segregated. A producer using such a system
shall keep records of the operation of the system that are necessary to verify compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
4. For the purpose of this Article, a Party may require an inventory management
system in accordance with the legislation of that Party.
14
ARTICLE 3.12
Principle of Territoriality
The conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Articles 3.2 to 3.10
shall be fulfilled without any interruption in a Party.
ARTICLE 3.13
Direct Transport
1. Preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement shall only be granted to
originating products which are transported directly between the Parties.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products which are transported
through the territories of non-parties may still be considered as being transported
directly between the Parties, provided that:
(a) they do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading, or any
operation confined to preserve them in good condition; and
(b) they remain under customs control in those non-parties.
Consignments of originating products may be split up in non-parties for further
transport subject to the fulfilment of conditions listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b).
3. For the purpose of paragraph 1, an originating product may be transported by
pipeline across territories of non-parties.
4. The customs authorities of the importing Party may require that the importer of
the above products shall submit sufficient evidence to prove to their satisfaction that the
conditions set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 have been fulfilled.
SECTION II
IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 3.14
Documentary Evidence of Origin
To qualify for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement, either of the
following documentary evidences of origin shall be submitted to the customs authority
of the importing Party:
(a) Certificate of Origin as referred to in Article 3.15; or
(b) an Origin Declaration by an Approved Exporter as referred to in Article
3.16.
15
ARTICLE 3.15
Certificate of Origin
1. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the authorised body of the exporting
Party.
2. The Certificate of Origin shall be issued before or at the time of exportation
whenever the products to be exported can be considered originating in that Party subject
to the provisions of this Chapter. The exporter or, in accordance with the domestic
legislation, his authorised representative shall submit a vTitten application for the
Certificate of Origin together with appropriate supporting documents proving that the
products to be exported qualify for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin.
3. In exceptional cases where a Certificate of Origin has not been issued before or
at the time of exportation, the Certificate of Origin may be issued retrospectively
bearing the remark “IS SUED RETROSPECTIVELY”.
4. The Certificate of Origin, based on the formats as set out in Annex III shall be
completed in English and duly signed and stamped. A Certificate of Origin shall be
valid only within twelve months from the date of its issuance.
5. For cases of theft, loss or accidental destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the
exporter or producer may make a written request to the authorised bodies of the
exporting Party for issuing a certified copy, provided that the original copy previously
issued has been verified not to be used. The certified copy shall bear the words either
“CERTIFIED TRUE COPY of the original Certificate of Origin number dated
or “DUPLICATE” together with the reference number and the date of issuance of the
original Certificate of Origin. The certified copy shall be valid during the term of
validity of the original Certificate of Origin.
6. Certificates of Origin which are submitted to the customs authority of the
importing Party after the validity may be accepted when failure to observe the time limit
is due to force majeure or other valid causes beyond the control of the exporter or
importer.
ARTICLE 3.16
Origin Declaration by Approved Exporter
1. A Party may implement an Approved Exporter system under this Agreement,
which allows the Approved Exporter to complete an Origin Declaration. The Approved
Exporter shall be approved and administered by the exporting Party in accordance with
its domestic legislation.
2. An Approved Exporter shall complete the Origin Declaration according to the
text as provided for in Annex IV. The Origin Declaration shall contain the registration
number of the Approved Exporter and the serial number of the Origin Declaration. An
Origin Declaration shall be produced in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
exporting Party by an Approved Exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice
or other commercial documents, as deemed valid by the importing customs
16
administration, which describe the product concerned in such a detail so as to render it
identifiable.
3. An Origin Declaration shall be valid only within twelve months from the date of
the issuance of the invoice or other commercial documents, as deemed valid by the
importing customs administration.
4. Before 31st of March each year, the exporting Party shall provide the importing
Party with information on the name and registration number of each approved exporter,
along with corresponding serial numbers of all the Origin Declaration made in the
preceding year. If any discrepancies are discovered because of this information a Party
shall inform the other Party of such discrepancies for further investigation or
clarification on behalf of that Party. To facilitate the communication of the information
above, the Parties shall work towards establishing an electronic system on the exchange
of that information.
ARTIcLE 3.17
Retention of Origin Documents
1. Each Party shall require its producers, exporters and importers to retain
documents related to the origin of the products as well as the fulfilment of the other
requirements of this Chapter for at least three years.
2. Each Party shall require that its authorised bodies retain copies of Certificates of
Origin and other documentary evidence of origin for at least three years.
3. Exporters and importers benefitting from this Agreement shall, within the
framework of this Agreement and subject to domestic legislation of the exporting Party
and importing Party respectively, comply with the requirements of that Party and
submit, at their request, supporting documents regarding the fulfilment of the
requirements of this Chapter.
ARTIcLE 3.18
Requirements Regarding Importation
1. Each Party shall grant preferential tariff treatment in accordance with this
Agreement to originating products imported from the other Party on the basis of a
documentary evidence of origin as defined in Article 3.14.
2. In order to obtain preferential tariff treatment, the importer shall, in accordance
with the procedures applicable in the importing Party, request preferential tariff
treatment at the time of importation of an originating product and submit the
documentary evidence of origin specified in Article 3.14, as well as other documentary
evidence upon requirements of the customs authorities of the importing Party.
3. For the purpose of paragraph 2, a documentary evidence of origin shall be
submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party within 12 months from the
date of issuance.
17
4. If the importer is not in possession of a documentary evidence of origin at the
time of importation, the importer may, in accordance with the domestic legislation of
the importing Party, make a claim for preferential tariff treatment at the time of
importation and present the documentary evidence of origin and, if required, other
documentation relating to the importation within a period as specified in the legislation
of the importing Party. The customs authorities of the importing Party shall complete
the import formalities in accordance with the domestic legislation.
ARTICLE 3.19
Waiver of documentary evidence oforigin
1. For the purpose of granting preferential tariff treatment under this Chapter, a
Party may waive the requirements for the presentation of a documentary evidence of
origin and grant preferential tarifftreatment to:
(a) any consignment of originating products of a value not exceeding US$
600 or its equivalent amount in the Party’s currency; or
(b) other originating products as provided under its domestic legislation.
2. Waivers provided for in paragraph 1 shall not be applicable when it is
established by the customs authorities of the importing Party that the importation forms
part of a series of importations that may reasonably be considered to have been
undertaken or arranged for the purpose of avoiding the submission of a formal
documentary evidence of origin.
ARTICLE 3.20
Origin Verification
1. To ensure the effective application of this Chapter, the Parties shall assist each
other to carry out verification on the authenticity of the documentary evidence of origin,
the correctness of the information given therein, the originating status of the products
concerned, and the fulfilment of any other requirements under this Chapter.
2. The competent governmental authorities of the exporting Party shall carry out
verifications referred to in paragraph 1 upon request of the customs authority of the
importing Party.
3. The importing Party shall submit the verification request to the exporting Party
within 36 months from the completion or issuance of the documentary evidence of
origin. The exporting Party is not obliged to conduct verifications based on verification
requests received after that deadline.
4. The verification request shall include a copy of the documentary evidence of
origin and, if appropriate, any other document or information giving reason to believe
that the documentary evidence of origin is invalid. The reasons for the request shall be
specified.
18
5. The customs authorities of the importing Party may, in accordance with their
domestic legislation, suspend preferential tariff treatment or require payment of a
deposit equivalent to the full amount of duties on a product covered by a documentary
evidence of origin until the verification procedure has been accomplished.
6. The competent governmental authorities of the exporting Party may request
evidence, carry out inspections at exporter’s or producer’s premises, check the
exporter’s and the producer’s accounts and take other appropriate measures to verify
compliance with this Chapter.
7. The requested Party shall notify the requesting Party of the results and findings
of the verification within six months from the date of the verification request, unless the
Parties agree upon another time frame on justified grounds. If the requesting Party
receives no reply within six months or another time frame as agreed upon by the Parties,
or if the reply does not state clearly whether the documentary evidence of origin is valid
or whether a product is an originating product, the requesting Party may deny
preferential tariff treatment to the product covered by the documentary evidence of
origin concerned.
ARTIcLE 3.21
Denial ofPreferential Tarjff Treatment
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the importing Party may deny a
claim for preferential tariff treatment, if:
(a) the documentary evidence of origin does not meet the requirement of this
Chapter;
(b) the compliance with Article 3.13 is not proven;
(c) it is proven based on the results of the origin verification in the exporting
Party that the documentary evidence of origin is not authentic or not
accurate;
(d) in a case according to paragraph 7 of Article 3.20; or
(e) the products do not meet the requirements of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.22
Not4fications
Prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall provide each
other with:
(a) for the purpose of Article 3.15, the names and addresses of the authorised
bodies issuing the certificate of origin and specimen impressions of
official seals used by such authorised bodies. Any change in names,
19
addresses, or official seals shall be promptly notified to the customs
administration of the importing Party;
(b) for the purpose of Article 3.16, the names, registration numbers and
contact details of the Approved Exporters. Any change in the information
above shall be advised promptly to the other Party;
(c) the addresses of the competent governmental authorities of the Parties
responsible for verifications referred to in Article 3.20 and other issues
related to the implementation or application of this Chapter; and
(d) information on the interpretation, application and administration of this
Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.23
Confidentiality
Subject to the domestic legislation of each Party, all information which is
specified by a Party as confidential or provided on a confidential basis shall not be
disclosed without the explicit permission of the person or authority providing it.
ARTICLE 3.24
Sub-Committee on the Implementation of Origin Matters
1. The Sub-Committee on the Implementation of Origin Matters (hereinafter
referred to in this Article as the “Sub-Committee”) consisting of representatives of both
Parties is hereby established under the Joint Committee.
2. The Sub-Committee shall deal with the following issues:
(a) monitor and review of measures taken and implementation of
commitments;
(b) exchange of information and review developments;
(c) other matters as the Parties may agree;
(d) other matters that are referred to the Sub-Committee by the Joint
Committee; and
(e) make recommendations and report to the Joint Committee as necessary.
3. The Sub-Committee shall be co-chaired by representatives of the customs
administrations of the Parties. The host Party shall act as the chair. The chairperson
shall prepare a provisional agenda for each meeting of the Sub-Committee in
consultation with the other Party and forward it to the other Party before the meeting.
4. The Sub-Committee shall meet as often as necessary upon instruction of the
Joint Committee or as agreed by the Parties. The meeting shall take place either in
20
China or Switzerland as mutually agreed by the Parties.
5. The Sub-Committee shall prepare a written report on the results of each meeting.
ARTICLE 3.25
Products Transported en Route after Exportation
The provisions of this Chapter may be applied to products which, on the date of
entry into force of this Agreement, are transported en route after exportation, including
transit, before the arrival in the other Party. For such products, documentary evidence of
origin may be completed retrospectively up to six months after the entry into force of
this Agreement, provided that the provisions of this Chapter and in particular Article
3.13 have been fulfilled.
21
CHAPTER 4
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION
ARTICLE 4.1
Scope
This Chapter applies to the customs territory of China and the customs territory
of Switzerland as defined in Article 2.1.
ARTICLE 4.2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) “customs administration” means:
(i) in relation to China, the General Administration of Customs; and
(ii) in relation to Switzerland, the Federal Customs Administration.
(b) “customs law” means the statutory and regulatory provisions of a Party
relating to the importation, exportation, movement or storage of goods, the
administration and enforcement of which are specifically charged to the
customs, and any regulations made by the customs under their statutory
powers;
(c) “customs procedures” means the treatment applied by the customs
administration of a Party to goods and the means of transport, which are
subject to that Party’s customs law;
(d) “Customs Valuation Agreement” means the Agreement on Implementation
of Article VII ofthe General Agreement on Tariff and Trade 1994, which is
a part ofthe WTO Agreement; and
(e) “means of transport” means any vessels, road vehicles, aircrafts, railway
rolling stock and pack-animals which enter or leave the territory carrying
persons and/or goods.
ARTICLE 4.3
General Principles
The Parties, aiming to serve the interests of their respective business
communities and to create a trading environment allowing them to benefit from the
opportunities offered by this Agreement, agree that in particular the following principles
are the basis for the development and administration by competent authorities of trade
facilitation measures:
22
(a) transparency, efficiency, simplification, harmonisation and consistency
of trade procedures;
(b) promotion of international standards;
(c) consistency with multilateral instruments;
(d) the best possible use of information technology;
(e) high standards of public service;
(f) governmental controls based on risk management;
(g) cooperation within each Party among customs and other border
authorities;
(h) consultations between the Parties and their respective business
communities; and
(i) assurance of trade security.
ARTICLE 4.4
Transparency
1. Each Party shall promptly publish on the Internet, and as far as practicable in
English, all laws, regulations and rules of general application relevant to trade in goods
between China and Switzerland.
2. Each Party shall establish enquiry points for customs and other matters covered
under this Chapter, which may be contacted as far as practicable in English via the
Internet.
3. Each Party shall consult its respective business community on its needs with
regard to the development and implementation of trade facilitation measures, noting that
particular attention should be given to the interests of small and medium-sized
enterprises.
4. Each Party shall publish in advance, and in particular on the Internet, draft laws
and regulations of general application relevant to international trade, with a view to
affording the public, especially interested persons, an opportunity to provide comments
on them.
5. Each Party shall ensure that a reasonable interval is provided between the
publication of laws and regulations of general application relevant to international trade
in goods and their entry into force.
6. Each Party shall administer in a uniform, impartial and reasonable manner all its
laws, regulations and rules relevant to international trade in goods.
23
ARTICLE 4.5
Cooperation
1. The Parties may identify, and submit to the Joint Committee for consideration,
further measures with a view to facilitating trade between the Parties, as appropriate.
2. The Parties shall promote international cooperation in relevant multilateral fora
on trade facilitation. The Parties shall review relevant international initiatives on trade
facilitation in order to identify, and submit to the Joint Committee for consideration,
further areas where joint action could contribute to their common objectives.
ARTICLE 4.6
Advance Rulings
1. A Party shall in a reasonable, time-bound manner, issue a binding, written
advance ruling 3upon submission of a written request that contains all necessary
information to an importer, producer or exporter 4with regard to:
(a) tariff classification of a product;
(b) the method of the transaction value to be used for determining the
customs value under a particular set offacts;
(c) the rules of origin it will accord to a product; and
(d) such other matters as the Parties may agree.
2. A Party that declines to issue an advance ruling shall promptly notify the
requester in writing, setting forth the basis for its decision to decline to issue the
advance ruling.
3. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings take effect on the date they are
issued, or on another reasonable date specified in the ruling, provided that the facts or
circumstances on which the ruling is based, remain unchanged.
4. The Parties may limit the validity of advance rulings to a period determined by
domestic legislation.
5. Each Party shall endeavour to make information on advance rulings which it
considers to be of significant interest to other traders, publicly available, taking into
account the need to protect confidential information.
For greater certainty, an importer, exporter, or producer may submit a request for an advance ruling
through a duly authorised representative.
An applicant for an advance ruling from China Customs shall be registered with China Customs.
24
ARTICLE 4.7
Simplfication ofInternational Trade Procedures
1. Each Party’s procedures related to customs controls and international trade shall
be simple, reasonable, objective and impartial.
2. The Parties shall limit controls, formalities and the number of documents
required in the context of trade in goods between the Parties to those necessary and
appropriate to ensure compliance with legal requirements, thereby simplifying, to the
greatest extent possible, the related procedures.
3. The importing Party shall not require an original or a copy of the export
declaration from the importer.
4. The Parties shall use efficient trade procedures, based, as appropriate, on
international standards, aiming to reduce costs and unnecessary delays in trade between
them, in particular the standards and recommended practices of the World Customs
Organisation (hereinafter referred to as the “WCO”), including the principles of the
revised International Convention on the Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs
Procedures (Revised Kyoto Convention).
5. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:
(a) provide for advance electronic submission and processing of information
before the physical arrival of goods in order to expedite their clearance;
(b) may allow importers to obtain the release of goods prior to meeting all
import requirements of that Party if the importer provides sufficient and
effective guarantees and where it is decided that neither further
examination, physical inspection nor any other submission is required;
and
(c) provide for guarantee to be discharged without delay when it is no longer
required.
ARTICLE 4.8
Customs Valuation
The Parties shall apply Article VII of the GATT 1994 and the Customs
Valuation Agreement to goods traded between them. 5
5 Switzerland applies customs duties based on weight or quantity rather than ad valorem duties
(notification to the WTO: G/VAL/N/1/CHE/1 of 28 August 1995).
25
ARTICLE 4.9
Tarjff C!assflcation
The Parties shall apply the International Convention on the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System to goods traded between them.
ARTICLE 4.10
Competent Customs Offices
1. The Parties shall designate the customs offices at which goods may be presented
or cleared. In determining the competence and location of these offices and their hours
of business, the factors to be taken into account shall include in particular the
requirements of trade.
2. Each Party shall, subject to the availability of resources, perform customs
controls and procedures outside the designated hours of business or away from customs
offices if so requested by a trader for valid reasons. Any expenses chargeable by the
customs shall be limited to the approximate cost of the services rendered.
ARTICLE 4.11
Risk Management
1. Each Party shall determine which persons, goods or means of transport are to be
examined and the extent of the examination, based on risk management.
2. In identifying and addressing risks related to the entry, exit, transit, transfer or
end-use of goods moved between the customs territory of a Party and the other Party, or
the presence of goods that are not in free circulation, the Parties shall systematically
apply objective risk management procedures and practices.
3. Risk management shall be applied in such a manner that it does not create
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination under the same conditions or disguised
restriction on international trade.
4. Each Party’s procedures related to customs controls and international trade,
including its documentary examinations, physical examinations or post-audit
examinations, shall not be more onerous than necessary in order to limit its exposure to
these risks.
5. The Parties shall adopt effective and efficient customs controls with a view to
expediting the release of goods.
26
ARTICLE 4.12
Customs Audit
1. Customs audit is the process whereby the examination and verification of the
goods is conducted by customs after release of the goods within a specified period of
time.
2. The customs audit shall be implemented in a transparent manner. Parties shall
notify the persons concerned of the result of the case, the rights and obligations it has, as
well as the evidences and reasons for the result.
3. The Parties shall, wherever practicable, use the result of customs audit in
applying risk management and identifying authorised traders.
ARTICLE 4.13
Authorised Economic Operator System
A Party operating an Authorised Economic Operator System or security
measures affecting international trade flows shall:
(a) afford the other Party the possibility to negotiate mutual recognition of
authorisation and security measures for the purpose of facilitating
international trade while ensuring effective customs control; and
(b) draw on relevant international standards, in particular the WCO
Framework of Standards.
ARTICLE 4.14
Customs Brokers
The Parties shall ensure that legislation regarding customs brokers is based on
transparent rules. The Parties shall allow legal persons to operate with their own
customs brokers, as defined in their respective national law.
ARTICLE 4.15
Fees and Charges
1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article VIII of the
GATT 1994, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than customs duties,
charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge applied consistently with
paragraph 2 of Article III of the GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and countervailing
duties) imposed on or in connection with import or export are limited in amount to the
approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent an indirect protection to
domestic goods or a taxation on imports or exports for fiscal purposes.
27
2. Each Party shall publish information on fees and charges. The Parties shall
endeavour to publish this information on the Internet, in English, as appropriate. Such
information may include the type of the fee or charge, the fees and charges that will be
applied and the way they are calculated.
3. Upon request, a Party shall provide information on fees and charges applicable
to imports of goods into that Party.
ARTICLE 4.16
Consular Transaction
A Party shall not require consular transaction, including related fees and charges
in connection with the importation of any goods of the other Party.
ARTICLE 4.17
Temporary Admission of Goods
1. Each Party shall facilitate temporary admission of goods.
2. For the purposes of this Article, “temporary admission” means customs
procedures under which certain goods may be brought into a customs territory
conditionally relieved from payment of customs duties. Such goods shall be imported
for a specific purpose, and shall be intended for re-exportation within a specified period
and without having undergone any change except normal depreciation due to the use
made of them.
ARTICLE 4.18
Inward and Outward Processing
1. Each Party shall allow inward and outward processing of goods, in accordance
with international standards and practices subject to terms and conditions as may be
specified in the national legislation.
2. For the purposes of this Article, “inward processing” means customs procedures
under which certain goods can be brought into a customs territory conditionally relieved
from payment of customs duties, on the basis that such goods are intended for
manufacturing, processing or repair and subsequent exportation.
3. For the purposes of this Article, “outward processing” means customs
procedures under which certain goods, which are in free circulation in a customs
territory, may be temporarily exported for manufacturing, processing or repair abroad
and then re-imported with total or partial exemption from customs duties and taxes.
28
ARTICLE 4.19
Border Agency Cooperation
A Party shall ensure that its authorities and agencies involved in border and
other import and export controls cooperate and coordinate their procedures in order to
facilitate trade.
ARTICLE 4.20
Review andAppeal
Each Party shall ensure that importers, exporters and producers have the right to
at least one level of independent administrative review or appeal and judicial appeal in
accordance with its domestic legislation.
ARTICLE 4.21
Confidentiality
All information provided in relation with the importation, exportation, advance
rulings or transit of goods shall be treated as confidential by the Parties and shall be
covered by the obligation of professional secrecy, in accordance with the respective
laws of each Party. This information shall not be disclosed by the authorities of a Party
without the express permission of the person or authority providing it.
ARTICLE 4.22
Consultation
Either Party may request consultations on matters arising from the operation or
implementation of this Chapter. Such consultation shall be conducted through the
relevant contact points of the respective customs administration. Information on the
contact points shall be provided to the other Party and any amendment of the said
information shall be notified promptly.
ARTICLE 4.23
Sub-Committee on Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation
1. A Sub-Committee on Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation (hereinafter
referred to in this Article as the “Sub-Committee”) consisting of representatives of both
Parties is hereby established under the Joint Committee.
2. The Sub-Committee shall deal with the following issues:
(a) monitor and review of measures taken and implementation of
commitments;
29
(b) exchange of information and review developments;
(c) prepare and coordinate positions of the Parties;
(d) prepare technical amendments and assist the Joint Committee;
(e) customs practices, including national and international standards, which
facilitate trade in goods between the Parties;
(f) interpretation, application and administration of this Chapter;
(g) tariff classification and customs valuation matters;
(h) other subjects regarding practices and procedures adopted by the Parties,
which may have an impact on the expeditious clearance of goods;
(i) other matters as the Parties may agree;
(j) other matters that are referred to the Sub-Committee by the Joint
Committee; and
(k) make recommendations and report to the Joint Committee as necessary.
3. The Sub-Committee shall be chaired by representatives of the customs
administration of the Parties. Upon mutual agreement, the Parties may invite
representatives from industry, business associations or other relevant organisations to
participate in parts ofthe meetings of the Sub-Committee on a case by case basis.
4. The Sub-Committee shall be co-chaired. The Sub-Committee shall designate a
chairperson. The chairperson shall prepare a provisional agenda for each meeting of the
Sub-Committee in consultation with the other Party and forward it to the other Party
before the meeting.
5. The Sub-Committee shall meet as often as required. It shall be convened by the
Joint Committee, by the chairperson of the Sub-Committee or upon request of a Party.
The meeting shall take place alternately between China and Switzerland, or as mutually
agreed by the Parties.
6. The Sub-Committee shall prepare a report on the results of each meeting, and
the chairperson shall, ifrequested, report at a meeting of the Joint Committee.
30
CHAPTER 5
TRADE REMEDIES
ARTICLE 5.1
Scope
This Chapter applies to trade in goods between the customs territory of China
and the customs territory of Switzerland as defined in Article 2.1.
SECTION I
GENERAL TRADE REMEDIES
ARTICLE 5.2
Anti-Dumping
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of anti-dumping measures
shall be governed by Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994. The Parties agree not to take such
measures in an arbitrary or protectionist manner.
2. As soon as possible following the acceptance of a properly documented
application from an industry in one Party for the initiation of an anti-dumping
investigation in respect of goods from the other Party and before proceeding to initiate
such investigation, that Party shall notify the other Party.
ARTICLE 5.3
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of subsidies and
countervailing measures shall be governed by Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994
and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
2. Before a Party initiates an investigation to determine the existence, degree and
effect of any alleged subsidy in the other Party, as provided for in Article 11 of the
WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the Party considering
initiating an investigation shall notify the other Party and allow for a consultation with a
view to finding a mutually acceptable solution in an amicable manner.
31
SECTION II
BILATERAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES
ARTICLE 5.4
Application of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure
1. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this
Agreement, a product originating in a Party is being imported into the territory of the
other Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic
production, and under such conditions as to cause serious injury or threat thereof to a
domestic industry producing a like or directly competitive product, the importing Party
may apply a bilateral safeguard measure described in paragraph 2 during the transition
period.
2. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, a Party may, only to the extent as may
be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury, or threat thereof, and to facilitate
adjustment:
(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty on the product
provided for under this Agreement; or
(b) increase the rate of customs duty on the product to a level not exceeding
the lesser of:
(i) the MFN applied rate of customs duty in effect at the time the
measure is taken; or
(ii) the MFN applied rate of customs duty in effect on the day
immediately preceding the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
3. No Party may apply, with respect to the same product, at the same time:
(a) a bilateral safeguard measure; and
(b) a measure under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO
Agreement on Safeguards.
ARTICLE 5.5
Standardsfor a Bilateral Safeguard Measure
1. Bilateral safeguard measures shall only be taken during the transition period,
which shall be a period of five years beginning on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement. In the case of a product where the liberalisation process as set out in Annex
I lasts five or more years, the transition period shall be extended to the date on which
such a product reaches zero tariff according to the Schedule in that Annex plus three
years.
32
2. Bilateral safeguard measures shall in principle be limited to a period of two
years; they may be extended for another year. Regardless of its duration, a bilateral
safeguard measure shall terminate no later than at the end of the transition period for the
product concerned.
3. A Party shall not apply a bilateral safeguard measure again on a product which
has been subject to such a measure for a period of time equal to that during which such
a measure had been previously applied, provided that the period of non-application is at
least two years. However, no bilateral safeguard measure may be applied more than
twice on the same product.
4. Upon the termination of the bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of customs
duty shall be the rate which would have been in effect but for the measure.
ARTICLE 5.6
Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements
1. The importing Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure only following an
investigation by its competent authorities in accordance with Article 3 of the WTO
Agreement on Safeguards. To this end, Article 3 of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards
is incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
2. In determining whether increased imports of an originating product of the other
Party have caused serious injury or are threatening to cause serious injury to a domestic
industry, the competent authority of the importing Party shall follow the rules in Article
4 of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards. To this end, Article 4 of the WTO Agreement
on Safeguards is incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 5.7
Provisional Safeguard Measures
1. In critical circumstances, where delay would cause damage which would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional safeguard measure pursuant to a
preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports have
caused or are threatening to cause serious injury.
2. The duration of the provisional safeguard measure shall not exceed 200 days
during which period the pertinent requirements of Article 5.4, Article 5.5, Article 5.6
and Article 5.8 shall be met. Such a provisional safeguard measure shall take the form
of an increase in the rate of customs duty not exceeding the lesser of the rates in Article
5.4, which shall be promptly refunded if the subsequent investigation does not
determine that increased imports have caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a
domestic industry. The duration of any such provisional safeguard measure shall be
counted as a part of the duration of the measure set out in Article 5.5.
33
ARTICLE 5.8
NotUication and Consultation
1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party on:
(a) initiating an investigation;
(b) making a finding of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased
imports; and
(c) taking a decision to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure.
2. The Party making the notification referred to in subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c)
shall provide the other Party with all pertinent information which shall include evidence
of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased imports, a precise description of
the product involved and the proposed measure, as well as the proposed date of
introduction and its expected duration. In the case of an extension of a bilateral
safeguard measure, evidence that the continued application of the measure is necessary
to prevent or remedy serious injury and that the industry is adjusting, shall also be
provided.
3. A Party proposing to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure shall provide
adequate opportunity for prior consultations with the other Party, with a view to, inter
alia, reviewing the information provided under paragraph 2, exchanging views on the
bilateral safeguard measure and reaching an agreement on compensation as set forth in
Article 5.9.
4. Before a Party takes a provisional safeguard measure referred to in Article 5.7, it
shall notify the other Party, and, on request of the other Party, consultations shall be
initiated immediately after taking such a measure.
ARTICLE 5.9
Compensation
1. The Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall, in consultation with the
other Party, provide to the other Party mutually agreed trade liberalising compensation
in the form of substantially equivalent concessions during the period of application of
the bilateral safeguard measure.
2. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement on compensation within 30 days
after the application of the bilateral safeguard measure, the Party against whose product
the bilateral safeguard measure is taken may take compensatory action. In the selection
of the compensatory action, priority must be given to the action which least disturbs the
functioning of this Agreement. The right of compensation referred to in this paragraph
shall not be exercised for the first six months that a bilateral safeguard measure is in
effect under the condition that the bilateral safeguard measure has been taken as a result
of an absolute increase in imports and that such a measure conforms to the provisions of
this Chapter.
34
3. A Party shall notify the other Party at least 30 days before taking compensatory
action under paragraph 2.
4. The Party taking compensatory action shall apply the action only for the
minimum period necessary to achieve the substantially equivalent trade effects and in
any event, only while the bilateral safeguard measure is being applied.
35
CHAPTER 6
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE
ARTICLE 6.1
Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) facilitate bilateral trade and access to respective markets for goods falling
under the scope of this Chapter and furthering the implementation of the
WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (hereinafier referred to
as the “TBT Agreement”);
(b) reduce, wherever possible, unnecessary costs associated with trade
between the Parties;
(c) facilitate information exchange and technical cooperation between the
Parties, and enhance mutual understanding of each Party’s regulatory
system; and
(d) strengthen cooperation between the Parties in the field of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures.
ARTICLE 6.2
Affirmation
Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, with respect to technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures, the TBT Agreement shall
apply between the Parties and is hereby incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mulandis.
ARTICLE 6.3
Scope and Definitions
1. This Chapter applies to all standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures of the Parties, except sanitary and phytosanitary measures
covered by Chapter 7, and purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies
for production or consumption requirements of governmental bodies.
2. The definitions of Annex ito the TBT Agreement shall apply to this Chapter.
36
ARTICLE 6.4
International Standards
For the purpose of applying this Chapter, standards issued, in particular, by the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and Codex
Alimentarius Commission (CAC) shall be considered relevant international standards in
the sense of article 2.4 of the TBT Agreement.
ARTICLE 6.5
Technical Cooperation
With a view to increasing their mutual understanding oftheir respective systems,
enhancing capacity building and facilitating bilateral trade, the Parties shall strengthen
their technical cooperation in the following areas
(a) activities of international standardisation bodies and the WTO
Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade;
(b) communication between each other’s competent authorities, exchange of
information in respect of technical regulations, standards, conformity
assessment procedures and good regulatory practice;
(c) reinforcing the role of international standards as a basis for technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures;
(d) promoting the accreditation of conformity assessment bodies on the basis
of relevant standards and guides of the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC);
(e) encouraging the mutual acceptance of conformity assessment results of
bodies accredited in accordance with paragraph d), which have been
recognised under an appropriate multilateral agreement or arrangement;
and
(f) other areas as agreed upon by the Parties.
ARTICLE 6.6
Measures at the Border
Where a Party detains, at a port of entry, goods exported from the other Party
due to a perceived failure to comply with a technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedures, the reasons for the detention shall be promptly notified to the
importer or his or her representative.
37
ARTICLE 6.7
Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
1. A Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade (hereinafter referred to as the
“TBT Sub-Committee”) is hereby established under the Joint Committee.
2. The functions of the TBT Sub-Committee shall be:
(a) monitoring the implementation of this Chapter;
(b) coordinating technical cooperation activities;
(c) facilitating technical consultations pursuant to Article 6.8
(d) identifying sectors for enhanced cooperation, including giving favourable
consideration to any sector-specific proposal made by either Party;
(e) establishing dialogues between regulators in accordance with the
objectives of this Chapter;
(f) initiating side agreements where appropriate pursuant to Article 6.9;
(g) coordinating the implementation of side agreements pursuant to 6.9;
(h) consulting on any issue prior to meetings of relevant international
organisations, if appropriate;
(i) other functions mutually agreed by the Parties; and
(j) carrying out other tasks assigned to it by the Joint Committee.
3. The TBT Sub-Committee shall be co-chaired and meet once a year, unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties. The TBT Sub-Committee meetings may be conducted
by any agreed method on a case by case basis and may be combined with those of the
Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures established under Article 7.9.
4. The TBT Sub-Committee shall keep up to date a work-programme and keep
track of its activities.
5. The TBT Sub-Committee may establish ad hoc working groups to accomplish
specific tasks.
6. The TBT Sub-Committee shall report on its work to the Joint Committee.
7. The contact points referred to in Article 6.11 shall be responsible for setting the
agenda and organising the meetings. The TBT Sub-Committee shall include
representatives of the authorities of each Party with expertise in the areas to be
discussed.
8. Upon agreement, the Parties may invite representatives from industry, business
associations or other relevant organisations to participate in parts of the meetings of the
TBT Sub-Committee on a case by case basis.
38
ARTICLE 6.8
Technical Consultations
Technical consultations under the auspices of the TBT Sub-Committee shall be
held at the written request of the Party which considers that the other Party has taken a
measure which is likely to create, or has created, an unnecessary obstacle to trade. Such
consultations shall take place within 60 days from the request with the objective of
finding mutually acceptable solutions. Such consultations may be conducted by any
agreed method on a case by case basis. 6
ARTICLE 6.9
Annexes and Side Agreements
1. The Parties have concluded Annex V to this Agreement on Labelling of
Textiles.
2. Pursuant to and in conjunction with this Agreement, the Parties have concluded
side agreements to implement this Chapter. The Parties may conclude further side
agreements in the future.
ARTICLE 6.10
Review Clause
1. The Parties shall no later than two years after the entry into force of this
Agreement, and thereafter upon request, jointly review this Chapter.
2. In this review, the Parties shall consider, among others, entering into
negotiations with regard to providing each other treatment granted to a third party with
whom both Parties have established arrangements concerning standards, technical
regulations or conformity assessment procedures.
ARTICLE 6.11
Contact Points
1. The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of contact points for matters
related to this chapter in order to facilitate communication and the exchange of
information.
2. The Parties shall notify each other of any significant changes in the structures
and responsibilities of the authorities acting as contact points.
6 is understood that technical consultations pursuant to this paragraph shall be without prejudice to the
rights and obligations of the Parties under Chapter 15 or under the WTO Understanding on Rules and
Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes.
39
CHAPTER 7
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
ARTICLE 7.1
Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) facilitate bilateral trade and access to respective markets for goods falling
under the scope of this Chapter and furthering the implementation of the
WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures (hereinafter referred to as the “SPS Agreement”);
(b) facilitate information exchange and technical cooperation between the
Parties, and enhance mutual understanding of each Party’s regulatory
system; and
(c) strengthen cooperation between the Parties in the field of sanitary and
phytosanitary measures.
ARTICLE 7.2
Affirmation
Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the SPS Agreement shall apply
between the Parties and is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 7.3
Scope and Definitions
1. This Chapter applies to sanitary and phytosanitary measures which may, directly
or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.
2. The definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement shall apply to this Chapter.
40
ARTICLE 7.4
Harnwnisation
To harmonise sanitary and phytosanitary measures as broadly as possible, the
Parties shall base their sanitary and phytosanitary measures on international standards,
guidelines and recommendations established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission
(CAC), the World Organisation for Animal Health (OlE), and the relevant international
regional organisations operating within the framework of the International Plant
Protection Convention (IPPC) where they exist or their completion is imminent.
ARTICLE 7.5
Adaptation to Regional Coiiditions
1. The Parties agree that issues related to the adaptation of zones with different
sanitary and phytosanitary status and that affect or may affect trade between them shall
be addressed in accordance with Article 6 of the SPS Agreement.
2. The Parties take note of the Guidelines to further the Practical Implementation of
Article 6 of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
(G/SPS/48) adopted by the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
and of relevant standards developed by OlE and IPPC.
3. In case of an event affecting the sanitary or phytosanitary status of a pest-free or
disease-free area or an area of low pest or disease prevalence, the Parties shall do their
utmost for re-establishing such status based on risk assessments taking into account
relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations.
ARTICLE 7.6
Inspection and C’ertjfication Systems
1. The Parties agree to further enhance their cooperation in the field of assessment
of inspection and certification systems. The importing Party shall take into account the
Codex Alimentarius Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification
Systems standards and guidelines.
2. The assessment tools shall as a rule be audits of all or part of an exporting
Party’s official inspection and certification system, including the ability of the
competent authority to enforce and take action based on adequate legislation. These
audits may also encompass inspections of a representative percentage of the facilities
seeking access to the export market.
3. The need to perform on-site inspections shall be justified.
4. Mutually agreed corrective actions, tirneframes and follow-up verification
procedures shall be clearly established and documented in the assessment report.
41
ARTICLE 7.7
Technical Cooperation
1. With a view to increasing mutual understanding of the respective regulatory
systems, enhancing capacity building and facilitating bilateral trade in agricultural
products and food, and improving their sanitary and phytosanitary systems, the Parties
shall strengthen technical cooperation in the field of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures.
2. The Parties have concluded a side agreement pursuant to Article 7.11 to further
this Article.
ARTICLE 7.8
Measures at the Border
Where a Party detains, at a port of entry, goods exported from the other Party
due to a perceived failure to comply with sanitary or phytosanitary requirements, the
reasons for the detention shall be promptly notified to the importer or his or her
representative.
ARTICLE 7.9
Siib-Con,inittee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. A Sub-Committee on sanitary and phytosanitary measures (hereinafter referred
to as the “SPS Sub-Committee”) is hereby established under the Joint Committee.
2. The functions of the SPS Sub-Committee shall be:
(a) monitoring the implementation of this Chapter;
(b) coordinating technical cooperation activities;
(c) facilitating technical consultations pursuant to Article 7.10;
(d) identifying areas for enhanced cooperation, including giving favourable
consideration to any specific proposal made by either Party;
(e) establishing a dialogue between competent authorities in accordance with
the objectives of this Chapter;
(f) initiating side agreements where appropriate pursuant to Article 7.11;
(g) coordinating the implementation of side agreements pursuant to
Article 7.11;
(h) consulting on any issue prior to meetings of relevant international
organisations, if appropriate;
42
(i) carrying out other functions mutually agreed by the Parties; and
(j) carrying out other tasks assigned to it by the Joint Committee.
3. The SPS Sub-Committee shall be co-chaired and meet once a year, unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties. The SPS Sub-Committee meetings may be conducted
by any agreed method on a case by case basis and may be combined with those of the
TBT Sub-Committee established under Article 6.7.
4. The SPS Sub-Committee shall keep up to date a work programme and keep track
of its activities.
5. The SPS Sub-Committee may establish ad hoc working groups to accomplish
specific tasks.
6. The SPS Sub-Committee shall report on its work to the Joint Committee.
7. The contact points as referred to in Article 7.12 shall be responsible for setting
the agenda and organising the meetings. The SPS Sub-Committee shall include
representatives of the authorities of each Party with expertise in the areas to be
discussed.
8. Upon mutual agreement, the Parties may invite representatives from industry,
business associations or other relevant organisations to participate in parts of the
meetings of the SPS Sub-Committee on a case by case basis.
ARTIcLE 7.10
Technical Consultations
Technical consultations under the auspices of the SPS Sub-Committee shall be
held at the written request of the Party, which considers that the other Party has taken a
measure which is likely to create, or has created, an unnecessary obstacle to trade. Such
consultations shall take place within 60 days, or within 20 days in case of urgent
matters, from the request with the objective of finding mutually acceptable solutions.
Such consultations may be conducted by any agreed method on a case by case basis. 7
ARTIcLE 7.11
Side Agreements
Pursuant to and in conjunction with this Agreement, the Parties have concluded
a side agreement to implement this Chapter. The Parties may conclude further side
agreements in the future.
It is understood that technical consultations pursuant to this paragraph shall be without prejudice to the
rights and obligations of the Parties under Chapter 15 or under the WTO Understanding on Rules and
Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes.
43
ARTICLE 7.12
Contact Points
1. The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of contact points for matters
related to this Chapter in order to facilitate communication and the exchange of
information.
2. The Parties shall notify each other of any significant changes in the structures
and responsibilities of the authorities acting as contact points.
44
CHAPTER 8
TRADE IN SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.1
Scope and Coverage 8
1. This Chapter applies to measures by Parties affecting trade in services and taken by
central, regional or local governments and authorities as well as by non-governmental bodies
in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local governments or authorities.
2. In respect of air transport services, this Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting
air traffic rights or measures affecting services directly related to the exercise of air traffic
rights, except as provided for in paragraph 3 of the Annex on Air Transport Services of the
GATS. The definitions of paragraph 6 of the Annex on Air Transport Services of the GATS
shall apply and are hereby incorporated and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
3. Articles 8.3, 8.4 and 8.5 shall not apply to laws, regulations or requirements governing
the procurement by governmental agencies of services purchased for governmental purposes
and not with a view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the supply of services for
commercial sale.
ARTICLE 8.2
Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter:
(a) “trade in services” is defined as the supply of a service: 9
(i) from the territory of one Party into the territory of the other Party;
(ii) in the territory of one Party to the service consumer of the other Party;
(iii) by a service supplier of one Party, through commercial presence in the
territory of the other Party;
(iv) by a service supplier of one Party, through presence of natural persons
of a Party in the territory of the other Party;
8 The Parties agree that any sector or sub-sector or part thereof that is inscribed explicitly in their Schedules of
specific commitments shall be covered by the provisions of this Chapter, notwithstanding possible
interpretations of the sectoral scope defined by this Article.
It is understood that a service supplied from or in the territory of a non-party is not covered by this definition,
and therefore the rights granted by the provisions of this Chapter to services supplied from or in the territory of a
Party are not granted to such service.
45
(b) “services” includes any services in any sector except services supplied in the
exercise of governmental authority;
(c) “a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” means any
service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in competition
with one or more service suppliers;
(d) “measure” means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;
(e) “supply of a service” includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and
delivery of a service;
(f) “measures by Parties affecting trade in services” include measures in respect
of:
(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;
(ii) the access to and use of in connection with the supply of a service,
services which are required by the Parties to be offered to the public
generally;
(iii) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a Party for
the supply of a service in the territory of the other Party;
(g) “commercial presence” means any type of business or professional
establishment, including through:
(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person; or
(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office;
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;
(h) “sector” of a service means:
(i) with reference to a specific commitment, one or more, or all, subsectors
of that service, as specified in a Party’s Schedule;
(ii) otherwise, the whole of that service sector, including all of its
subsectors;
(i) “service of the other Party” means a service which is supplied:
(i) from or in the territory of that other Party, or in case of maritime
transport, by a vessel registered under the laws of that other Party, or
by a person of that other Party which supplies the service through the
operation of a vessel and/or its use in whole or in a part; or
(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence or
through the presence of natural persons, by a service supplier of that
other Party;
46
(j) “service supplier” means any person that supplies a service;’ 0
(k) “monopoly supplier of a service” means any person, public or private, which in
the relevant market of the territory of a Party is authorised or established
formally or in effect by that Party as the sole supplier ofthat service;
(1) “service consumer” means any person that receives or uses a service;
(m) “person” means either a natural person or a juridical person;
(n) “natural person of a Party” means:
(i) with respect to China, a natural person who resides in the territory of
either Party, and who under Chinese law is a national of China;
(ii) with respect to Switzerland, a natural person who resides in the territory
of either Party, and who under Swiss law is:
(A) a national of Switzerland; or
(B) a permanent resident of Switzerland;
(o) “juridical person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether
privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust,
partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or association;
(p) “juridical person of the other Party” means a juridical person which is either:’
(i) constituted or otherwise organised under the law of the other Party, and
is engaged in substantive business operations in the territory of the
other Party; or
(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence,
owned or controlled by:
(A) natural persons of the other Party; or
(B) juridical persons of the other Party identified under
subparagraph (i);
Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of commercial
presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e. the juridical person) shall,
nonetheless, through such commercial presence be accorded the treatment provided for service suppliers under
this Chapter. Such treatment shall be extended to the commercial presence through which the service is supplied
and need not be extended to any other parts of the service supplier located outside the territory where the service
is supplied.
“it is understood that a juridical person which does not meet all criteria of this definition is considered to be a
juridical person of a non-party, and therefore the rights granted by the provisions of this Chapter to the juridical
persons of a Party are not granted to such juridical person.
47
(q) a juridical person is:
(i) “owned” by persons of a Party if more than 50 per cent of the equity
interest in it is beneficially owned by persons of that Party;
(ii) “controlled” by persons of a Party if such persons have the power to
name a majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions;
(iii) “affiliated” with another person when it controls, or is controlled by,
that other person; or when it and the other person are both controlled by
the same person; and
(r) “direct taxes” comprise all taxes on total income, on total capital or on
elements of income or of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation
of property, taxes on estates, inheritances and gifts, and taxes on the total
amounts of wages or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as taxes on capital
appreciation.
ARTICLE 8.3
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment
1. Without prejudice to measures taken in accordance with Article VII of the OATS, and
except as provided for in its List of MFN Exemptions contained in Aimex VIII, each Party
shall accord immediately and unconditionally, in respect of all measures affecting the supply
of services, to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable
than the treatment it accords to like services and service suppliers of any non-party.
2. Treatment granted under other existing or future agreements concluded by a Party and
notified under Article V or Article V bis of the OATS shall not be subject to paragraph I.
3. If a Party concludes or amends an agreement of the type referred to in paragraph 2, it
shall, upon request from the other Party, endeavour to accord to the other Party treatment no
less favourable than that provided under that agreement. The former Party shall, upon request
from the other Party, afford adequate opportunity to the other Party to negotiate the
incorporation into this Agreement of a treatment no less favourable than that provided under
the former agreement.
4. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be so construed as to prevent the Parties from
conferring or according advantages to adjacent countries in order to facilitate exchanges
limited to contiguous frontier zones of services that are both locally produced and consumed.
48
ARTICLE 8.4
Market Access
1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in subparagraph
(a) of Article 8.2, each Party shall accord services and service suppliers of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions
agreed and specified in its Schedule referred to in Article 8.17.12
2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a
Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis
of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined as:
(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirements
of an economic needs test;
(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or the total quantity of
service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;’ 3
(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are
necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the
form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture
through which a service supplier may supply a service; and
(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.
12 If a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service through the mode of
supply referred to in subparagraph (a)(i) of Article 8.2 and if the cross-border movement of capital is an essential
part of the service itself, that Party is thereby committed to allow such movement of capital. If a Party undertakes
a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service through the mode of supply referred to in
subparagraph (a)(iii) of Article 8.2 it is thereby committed to allow related transfers of capital into its territory.
‘
Subparagraph 2(c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.
49
ARTICLE 8.5
National Treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule, and subject to any conditions and
qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the
other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.’ 4
2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment
to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service
suppliers ofthe Party compared to like services or service suppliers of the other Party.
ARTICLE 8.6
Additional Commitments
Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting trade in
services not subject to scheduling under Articles 8.4 or 8.5, including those regarding
qualifications, standards or licensing matters. Such commitments are inscribed in a Party’s
Schedule as additional commitments.
ARTICLE 8.7
Domestic Regulation
1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall ensure that all
measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable,
objective and impartial manner.
2. Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial, arbitral or
administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of an affected service
supplier of the other Party, for the prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate
remedies for, administrative decisions affecting trade in services. Where such procedures are
not independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned, the Party
shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an objective and impartial review.
3. Each Party shall aim to ensure that measures relating to qualification requirements and
procedures, technical standards, and licensing requirements and procedures are based on
objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability to supply the service,
and are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service. Each Party
Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require either Party to compensate
for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant services or
service suppliers.
50
shall ensure that licensing procedures are not in themselves a restriction on the supply of the
service.
4. In determining whether a Party is in conformity with the obligation under paragraph 3,
account shall be taken of international standards of relevant international organisations’
applied by that Party.
5. In sectors where specific commitments regarding professional services are undertaken,
each Party shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the competence of professionals of
the other Party.
ARTIcLE 8.8
Recognition
1. For the purpose of the fulfilment of its relevant standards or criteria for the
authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, each Party shall give due
consideration to any requests by the other Party to recognise the education or experience
obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted in that other Party. Such
recognition may be based upon an agreement or arrangement with that other Party, or
otherwise be accorded autonomously.
2. Where a Party recognises, by agreement or arrangement, the education or experience
obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of a nonparty, that Party shall afford the other Party adequate opportunity to negotiate its accession to
such an agreement or arrangement, whether existing or future, or to negotiate a comparable
agreement or arrangement with it. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall
afford adequate opportunity for the other Party to demonstrate that the education or
experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of
that other Party should also be recognised.
3. Any such agreement or arrangement or autonomous recognition shall be in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the WTO Agreement, in particular paragraph 3 of Article VII
of the GATS.
ARTIcLE 8.9
Transparency
1. Each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency situations, at the latest by
the time of their entry into force, all relevant measures of general application which pertain to
or affect the operation of this Chapter. International agreements pertaining to or affecting
trade in services to which a Party is a signatory shall also be published.
2. Where publication as referred to in paragraph 1 is not practicable, such information
shall be made otherwise publicly available.
5 The term “relevant international organisations” refers to international bodies whose membership is open to the
relevant bodies of both Parties.
51
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall require either Party to provide confidential information,
the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public
interest, or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises,
public or private.
ARTICLE 8.10
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers
1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its territory does
not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner inconsistent
with that Party’s obligations under Article 8.3 and specific commitments.
2. Where a Party’s monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an affiliated
company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly rights and which is
subject to that Party’s specific commitments, the Party shall ensure that such a supplier does
not abuse its monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner inconsistent with such
commitments.
3. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers,
where a Party, formally or in effect:
(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers; and
(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory.
ARTICLE 8.11
Business Practices
1. The Parties recognise that certain business practices of service suppliers, other than
those falling under Article 8.10, may restrain competition and thereby restrict trade in
services.
2. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, enter into consultations with a view
to eliminating practices referred to in paragraph 1. The Party addressed shall accord full and
sympathetic consideration to such a request and shall cooperate through the supply of publicly
available non-confidential information of relevance to the matter in question. The Party
addressed shall also provide other information available to the requesting Party, subject to its
domestic law and to the conclusion of satisfactory agreement concerning the safeguarding of
its confidentiality by the requesting Party.
52
ARTICLE 8.12
Subsidies
1. A Party which considers that it is adversely affected by a subsidy of the other Party
may request ad hoc consultations with that other Party on such matters. The requested Party
shall enter into such consultations.
2. The Parties shall review any disciplines agreed under Article XV of the GATS with a
view to incorporate them into this Chapter.
ARTICLE 8.13
Payments and Transfers
1. Subject to its specific commitments, and except in the circumstances envisaged in
Article 8.14, a Party shall not apply restrictions on international transfers and payments for
current transactions relating to trade in services.
2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under the
Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), including the use of
exchange actions which are in conformity with the Articles of the Agreement of the IMF,
provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions inconsistently
with its specific commitments regarding such transactions, except under Article 8.14 or at the
request of the IMF.
ARTICLE 8.14
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance ofPayments
Any restriction to safeguard the balance of payments adopted or maintained by a Party
under and in conformity with Article XII of the GATS shall apply under this Chapter.
ARTICLE 8.15
Genera! Exceptions
Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which
would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where
like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in services, nothing in this Chapter
shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by either Party of measures:
(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order;’ 6
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
16 The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is posed to
one of the fundamental interests of society.
53
(c) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter including those relating to:
(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the
effects of a default on services contracts;
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing
and dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality
of individual records and accounts;
(iii) safety;
(d) inconsistent with Article 8.5, provided that the difference in treatment is aimed
at ensuring the equitable or effective 17imposition or collection of direct taxes
in respect of services or service suppliers of the other Party;
(e) inconsistent with Article 8.3, provided that the difference in treatment is the
result of an agreement on the avoidance of double taxation or provisions on the
avoidance of double taxation in any other international agreement or
arrangement by which the Party is bound.
Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of direct taxes include
measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:
(i) apply to non-resident service suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation of nonresidents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or located in the Party’s territory;
(ii) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the Party’s
territory;
(iii) apply to non-residents or residents in, order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes,
including compliance measures;
(iv) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of the other Party in order to
ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources in the
Party’s territory;
(v) distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from other service
suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax base between them; or
(vi) determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of resident
persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same person, in order to
safeguard the Party’s tax base.
Tax terms or concepts in subparagraph (d) of this Article and in this footnote are determined according to tax
definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the domestic law of the Party
taking the measure.
54
ARTICLE 8.16
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed:
(a) to require either Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests; or
(b) to prevent either Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for
the protection of its essential security interests:
(i) relating to the supply of services as carried out directly or indirectly for
the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;
(ii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from
which they are derived;
(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
(c) to prevent either Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
ARTICLE 8.17
Schedules ofSpecic Commitments
1. Each Party shall set out in a schedule the specific commitments it undertakes under
Articles 8.4, 8.5 and 8.6. With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken,
each Schedule shall specify:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments referred to in Article 8.6; and
(d) where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such commitments;
and the date of entry into force ofsuch commitments.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 8.4 and 8.5 shall be dealt with as provided
for in paragraph 2 of Article XX of the GATS.
3. The Parties’ Schedules of specific commitments are set out in Annex VII.
55
ARTICLE 8.18
Modficatioii ofSchedules
1. A Party may modify or withdraw any commitment in its Schedule of specific
commitments, at any time after three years have elapsed from the date on which that
commitment entered into force provided that:
(a) it notifies the other Party of its intention to modify or withdraw a commitment
no later than three months before the intended date of implementation of the
modification or withdrawal; and
(b) upon notification of a Party’s intent to make such modification, the Parties
shall consult and attempt to reach agreement on the appropriate compensatory
adjustment.
2. In achieving a compensatory adjustment, the Parties shall endeavour to maintain a
general level of mutually advantageous commitment that is not less favourable to trade than
provided for in the Schedules of specific commitments prior to such negotiations.
3. If agreement under paragraph 1(b) is not reached between the modifying Party and the
affected Party within three months, the affected Party may refer the matter to arbitration by an
arbitration panel established following the same procedures as provided for in paragraphs 3 to
10 of Article 15.4. Such an arbitration panel shall present its finding as to the ways to ensure
that the general level of mutually advantageous commitments under this Chapter is
maintained. Articles 15.6 and 15.7 shall apply to the proceedings of such an arbitration panel,
mutatis mutandis.
4. The modifying Party may not modify or withdraw its commitment until it has made
the necessary adjustments in conformity with the findings of the arbitration in relation to the
question of whether paragraph 1(b) is satisfied under paragraph 3. The modification,
including compensatory adjustments, which are agreed upon by the Parties, or which are in
conformity with the outcome of the arbitration, shall be incoiporated into Annex VII in
accordance with the procedures set out in Article 16.3.
ARTICLE 8.19
Review
With the objective of further liberalising trade in services between them, in particular
eliminating substantially all remaining discrimination, the Parties shall review at least every
two years, or more frequently if so agreed, their Schedules of specific commitments and their
Lists of MFN Exemptions, taking into account in particular any autonomous liberalisation and
on-going work under the auspices of the WTO. The first such review shall take place no later
than two years after the entry into force of this Agreement.
56
ARTICLE 8.20
Sub-Committee on Trade in Services
A Sub-Committee on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred to in this Article as the
“Sub-Committee”) is hereby established under the Joint Committee of this Agreement.
2. The functions of the Sub-Committee shall be:
(a) to monitor the implementation of this Chapter;
(b) to propose agreed solutions in case a problem arises in relation to the
implementation of this Chapter;
(c) to request and provide information about each Party’s laws and regulations
related to trade in services;
(d) to exchange information on the existing possibilities for each other’s service
suppliers to access each Party’s market;
(e) to examine opportunities and the benefits for the Parties to improve and
facilitate market access for each other’s service suppliers;
(f) to propose and discuss suggestions to improve the functioning of this Chapter;
and
(g) to execute other tasks assigned by the Joint Committee.
3. The Sub-Committee shall consider the establishment of working groups as appropriate.
4. The Sub-Committee shall be co-chaired, and meet once every two years, unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties. The Sub-Committee meetings may be conducted by any
agreed method.
5. The Sub-Committee shall include representatives of the authorities of each Party with
expertise in the sectors or areas to be discussed.
6. The Sub-Committee shall report on its work to the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 8.21
Annexes
The following Annexes form an integral part of this Chapter:
- Annex VI “Trade in Services” (TISA);
- Annex VII “Schedules of Specific Commitments”; and
- Annex VIII “Lists of MFN Exemptions”.
57
CHAPTER 9
INVESTMENT PROMOTION
ARTICLE 9.1
Investment Promotion
The Parties recognise the importance of promoting cross-border investment and
technology flows as a means for achieving economic growth and development. Cooperation
in this respect may include:
(a) identifying investment opportunities;
(b) exchange of information on measures to promote investment abroad;
(c) exchange of information on investment regulations;
(d) assistance of investors to understand the investment regulations and the
investment environment in both Parties; and
(e) the furthering of a legal environment conducive to increased investment flows.
ARTICLE 9.2
Review Clause
1. Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall provide information on measures
affecting investment.
2. With the objective of progressive facilitation of investment conditions, the Parties
affirm their commitment to review the investment legal framework, the investment
environment and the flow of investment between them, no later than two years after the entry
into force of this Agreement.
3. If, after the entry into force of this Agreement, a Party concludes an agreement with
any third country or group of countries that contains provisions providing for a better
treatment with respect to establishment in non-services sectors than the treatment granted to
the other Party, that Party shall, upon request by the other Party, enter into negotiation with a
view to provide equivalent treatment on a mutual basis.
58
CHAPTER 10
COMPETITION
ARTICLE 10
Competition
1. Anticompetitive practices, such as agreements between undertakings that may prevent
or restrict competition, abuse of a dominant market position and concentrations of
undertakings which may have the effect of prevention or restriction of competition may cause
adverse effects on the bilateral trade, and thereby hinder the functioning of this Agreement.
The Parties undertake to apply their respective competition laws in that regard.
2. This Chapter applies to all undertakings of the Parties. Such application shall not
hinder undertakings with special and exclusive rights authorised by laws and regulations from
exercising those rights.
3. Nothing in this Chapter creates any legally binding obligations for the undertakings or
intervenes with the independence of the competition authorities in enforcing their respective
competition laws.
4. Cooperation between the competition authorities of the Parties may have a significant
effect on the enforcement of competition laws in matters affecting trade between the Parties.
The competition authorities of the Parties shall cooperate with regard to anticompetitive
practices.
5. If a Party considers that a given practice continues to affect trade in the sense of
paragraph 1, it may request consultations in the Joint Committee with a view to facilitating a
resolution of the matter.
6. Chapter 15 shall not apply to this Chapter.
59
CHAPTER 11
PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
SECTION I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 11.1
Intellectual Property Rights
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective, transparent and non
discriminatory protection of intellectual property rights, and provide for measures for the
enforcement of such rights against infringement thereof, counterfeiting and piracy, in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the international agreements acceded to by
both Parties.
2. The Parties shall accord to each others’ nationals treatment no less favourable than
that accorded to their own nationals with regard to the protection of intellectual property.
Exemptions from this obligation must be in accordance with the substantive provisions of
Articles 3 and 5 of the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (hereinafter referred to as the “TRIPS Agreement”).
3. The Parties shall grant to each others’ nationals treatment no less favourable than that
accorded to nationals of any other State with regard to protection of intellectual property.
Exemptions from this obligation must be in accordance with the substantive provisions of the
TRIPS Agreement, in particular Articles 4 and 5 thereof.
4. The Parties recognise the importance of protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights in order to incentivise research, development and creative activity which will
promote economic and social development, as well as the dissemination of knowledge and
technology. The Parties recognise that the protection and enforcement of intellectual property
rights should strike a balance between the legitimate interest of the right owners and the
public at large.
5. The Parties may take appropriate measures provided that they are consistent with the
provisions of this Agreement and their international obligations to prevent the abuse of
intellectual property rights by right holders or the resort to practices which unreasonably
restrain trade or adversely affect technology transfer.
6. The Parties agree, upon request of any Party and subject to their agreement in the Joint
Committee, to review the provisions on the protection of intellectual property rights contained
in this Chapter, with a view to keep provisions up to date with international intellectual
property developments in a balanced manner and to ensure their good functioning under this
Agreement in practice.
60
ARTICLE 11.2
Definition ofIntellectual Property
For the purposes of this Agreement, “intellectual property” comprises in particular
copyright, as well as related rights, trademarks for goods and services, geographical
indications 18, industrial designs, patents, plant varieties, layout-designs (topographies) of
integrated circuits, as well as undisclosed information. 19
ARTICLE 11.3
International Conventions
1. The Parties reaffirm their commitments established in existing international
agreements in the field of intellectual property rights, to which both are Parties, including the
following:
(a) the TRIPS Agreement;
(b) the Paris Convention of 20 March 1883 for the Protection of Industrial
Property, as revised by the Stockholm Act of 1967 (hereinafter referred to as
“the Paris Convention”);
(c) the Berne Convention of 9 September 1886 for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works, as revised by the Paris Act of 1971 (hereinafter referred to as
the “Berne Convention”);
(d) the Patent Cooperation Treaty of 19 June 1970, as revised by the Washington
Act of 2001;
(e) the Budapest Treaty of 28 April 1977 on the International Recognition of the
Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure;
(f) the Nice Agreement of 15 June 1957 Concerning the International
Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of
Marks as revised by the Geneva Act of 1979;
(g) the Protocol of 27 June 1989 relating to the Madrid Agreement concerning the
International Registration of Marks;
(h) the WIPO Performances and Phonogram Treaty of 20 December 1996
(hereinafter referred to as the “WPPT”);
(i) the WIPO Copyright Treaty of 20 December 1996; and
8 For the sake of clarification, appellations of origin of Switzerland may be protected as geographical
indications in China.
19 For Switzerland, indications of source are part of the definition of intellectual property.
61
(j) the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants 1978
(hereinafter referred to as the “1978 UPOV Convention”).
2. Each Party shall make all reasonable efforts to ratify or accede to the Beijing Treaty
on Audiovisual Performances.
ARTICLE 11.4
Notification and Exchange ofInformation
Under the established structure of the bilateral dialogue on intellectual property rights
and the annual Intellectual Property Working Group meeting between China and Switzerland,
each Party shall, upon request of the other Party, and in addition to the already existing forms
of cooperation:
(a) exchange information relating to intellectual property policies in their
respective administrations;
(b) inform the other Party of changes to, and developments in the implementation
of their national intellectual property systems;
(c) exchange information relating to the conventions referred to in this Chapter or
to future international conventions on harmonisation, administration and
enforcement of intellectual property rights and on activities in international
organisations, such as the WTO and WIPO, as well as on relations of the
Parties with third countries on matters concerning intellectual property; and
(d) consider intellectual property right issues and questions of interest to private
stakeholders.
ARTICLE 11.5
Intellectual Property and Public Health
1. The Parties recognise the principles established in the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health adopted on 14 November 2001 by the Ministerial Conference of
the WTO and confirm that the provisions of this Chapter are without prejudice to this
Declaration.
2. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to contribute to the international efforts to the
implementation of the Decision of the WTO General Council of 30 August 2003 on the
Implementation of Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, as well as the Protocol Amending the TRIPS Agreement, done at Geneva on 6
December 2005.
62
SECTION II
STANDARDS CONCERNING THE AVAILABILITY, SCOPE AND USE OF
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ARTICLE 11.6
Copyright and Related Rights
1. Without prejudice to the obligations set out in the international agreements to which
both Parties are parties, each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, grant
and ensure adequate and effective protection to the authors of works and to performers,
producers of phonograms and videograms and broadcasting organisations for their works,
performances, phonograms, videograms and broadcasts, respectively. It is understood that
computer programmes fall under copyright protection.
2. In addition to the protection provided for in the international agreements to which the
Parties are parties, each Party shall:
(a) grant and ensure protection as provided for in Articles 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10 of the
WPPT, mutatis mulandis, to performers for their audio-visual performances;
and
(b) grant and ensure protection as provided for in Articles 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the
WPPT, mutafis mulandis, to producers of videograms.
3. A radio station or television station shall have the right to prohibit the following acts
performed without its permission:
(a) rebroadcasting its programmes; and
(b) making a sound recording or video recording of its programmes and
reproducing such recording.
4. Each Party may, in its national legislation, provide for the same kinds of limitations or
exceptions with regard to the protection of performers for their audio-visual performances to
the protection of videograms producers, and to broadcasting organisations as it provides for in
its national legislation, in connection with the protection of copyright in literary and artistic
work.
5. Each Party shall ensure that the author has the right, independently of the author’s
economic rights, and even after the transfer of the said rights, to claim authorship of the work
and to object to any modification, distortion, mutilation or other derogatory action in relation
to the said work, which would be prejudicial to his or her honour or reputation.
6. The rights granted to the author in accordance with paragraph 5 shall, after his or her
death, be maintained at least until the expiry of the economic rights, and shall be exercisable
by the persons or institutions authorised by the legislation of the Party in which protection is
claimed.
63
7. The rights granted under paragraphs 5 and 6 shall be granted, mutatis niutandis, to
performers as regards their live aural, visual or audiovisual performances, or performances
fixed in phonograms or audiovisual fixations.
8. The term of protection to be granted to performers under this Agreement shall last, at
least, until the end of a period of 50 years computed from the end of the year in which the
performance took place.
9. The term of protection to be granted to producers of videograms under this Agreement
shall last, at least, until the end of a period of 50 years computed from the end of the year in
which the videogram was published, or failing such publication within 50 years from fixation
of the videogram, 50 years from the end of the year in which the fixation was made.
10. The term of protection to be granted to broadcasting organisations under this
Agreement shall last, at least, until the end of a period of 50 years computed from the end of
the year in which the broadcast took place.
11. A Party may be exempted from its obligations under paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 where the
exemptions as provided for in Articles 7 and 7bis of the Berne Convention may apply.
ARTICLE 11.7
Trademarks
1. The Parties shall grant adequate and effective protection to trademark right holders of
goods and services. Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the
goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings, shall be capable of
constituting a trademark. Such signs, in particular words including combinations of words,
personal names, letters, numerals, figurative elements, shapes of goods, sounds and
combinations of colours, as well as any combination of such signs, shall be eligible for
registration as trademarks. Where signs are not inherently capable of distinguishing the
relevant goods or services, the Parties may make registerability depend on distinctiveness
acquired through use. Parties may require, as a condition of registration, that signs be visually
perceptible.
2. The Parties reaffirm the importance of the principles contained in the WIPO Joint
Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks, adopted by
the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the General
Assembly of the WIPO in 1999, and the WIPO Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions
on the Protection of Marks and other Industrial Property Rights in Signs on the Internet,
adopted by the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the
General Assembly of the WIPO in 2001.
3. The Parties shall grant the owner of a registered trademark the exclusive right to
prevent all third parties not having the owner’s consent from using in the course of trade
identical or similar signs for goods or services which are identical or similar to those in
respect of which the trademark is registered where such use would result in a likelihood of
confusion. In case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a likelihood
of confusion shall be presumed. The rights described above shall not prejudice any existing
prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of the Parties making rights available on the
basis of use.
64
4. The protection according to paragraph 3 shall not be limited to identical or similar
goods or services where the registered trade mark is well known in the respective Party and
provided that use of a trademark which is a reproduction, an imitation or a translation, of the
well-known trademark above in relation to those goods or services would indicate a
connection between those goods or services and the owner of the registered trademark and
provided that the interests of the owner of the registered trademark are likely to be damaged
by such use.
ARTICLE 11.8
Patents
1. The Parties shall, in their national laws, at least ensure adequate and effective patent
protection for inventions in all fields oftechnology, including in the field of biotechnology
and herbal medicine, provided that they are new, involve an inventive step and are capable of
industrial application.
2. For the Parties, this means protection on a level corresponding to the one in paragraph
1 of Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement. In addition to what is provided for in paragraph 2 of
Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement, the Parties may exclude from patentability:
(a) methods for treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy or
for diagnostic methods practised on the human or animal body; this provision
shall not apply to products, in particular substances or compositions, for use in
any of these methods; and
(b) plant or animal varieties or essentially biological processes for the production
of plants or animals; this provision shall not apply to microbiological processes
or the products thereof.
ARTICLE 11.9
Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge
1. The Parties recognise the contribution made by genetic resources and traditional
knowledge to scientific, cultural and economic development.
2. The Parties acknowledge and reaffirm the principles established in the Convention on
Biological Diversity adopted on 5 June 1992 and encourage the effort to enhance a mutually
supportive relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convention on Biological
Diversity, regarding genetic resources and traditional knowledge.
3. Subject to each Party’s international rights and obligations and domestic laws, the
Parties may adopt or maintain measures to promote the conservation of biological diversity
and the equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources and traditional
knowledge.
4. The Parties may require that patent applicants should indicate the source of a genetic
resource and, if so provided by the national law, traditional knowledge, to which the inventor
65
or the patent applicant has had access, insofar as the invention is directly based on this
resource or this knowledge in accordance with domestic laws and regulations;
5. If a patent application does not meet the requirements of paragraph 4, the Parties may
set a time limit by which the applicant must correct the defect. The Parties may refuse the
application or consider it withdrawn if the defect according to this paragraph has not been
corrected within the set time limit.
6. If it is discovered after the granting of a patent that the application failed to disclose
the source or that intentionally false information was submitted, or other relevant laws and
regulations were violated, the Parties may provide for appropriate legal consequences.
ARTICLE 11.10
Plant Variety Protection
1. The Parties shall grant adequate and effective protection to breeders of new plant
varieties at least on a level equivalent to the level provided for by the 1978 UPOV
Convention.
2. At least the following acts in respect of the propagating material of the protected
variety shall require the authorisation of the breeder:
(a) production or reproduction (multiplication) for the purposes of commercial
marketing;
(b) conditioning for the purpose of commercial propagation;
(c) offering for sale;
(d) selling or other marketing; and
(e) importing or exporting.
3. The breeder may make his or her authorisation subject to conditions and limitations.
4. Exceptions:
(a) The breeder’s right shall not extend to:
(i) acts done for experimental purposes; and
(ii) acts done for the purpose of breeding other varieties and acts referred to
in paragraph 2 in respect of such other varieties.
(b) Each Party may, within reasonable limits and subject to the safeguarding of the
legitimate interests of the breeder, restrict the breeder’s right to permit farmers
to use for propagating purposes, on their own holdings, the product of the
harvest which they have obtained by planting, on their own holdings, the
protected variety.
5. The Parties shall apply paragraphs 1 and 2 to at least the generalspecies contained in
List A of Annex IX. If a Party, at its national level, grants protection to any other
generalspecies not mentioned in the Annex, the possibility to protect the relevant
66
species/genera shall automatically be granted to any plant breeder ofthe Parties in accordance
with the principles of national treatment and most favourite nation treatment.
6. Upon a Party’s request, every two years after the entry into force of this Agreement,
the two Parties will:
(a) discuss the inclusion of additional generalspecies, ifthe protection is limited to
certain generalspecies; and
(b) subject to their agreement, amend/expand Annex IX accordingly. Furthermore.
the Parties agree to exchange the information on the protection given in their
respective plant variety protection systems to essentially derived varieties after
a period oftwo years after the entry into force ofthis Agreement with a view to
examine the possibility of a more comprehensive protection regime, also with
regard to essentially derived varieties.
ARTICLE 11.11
Undisclosed Information
1. The Parties shall protect undisclosed information in accordance with Article 39 ofthe
TRIPS Agreement.
2. The Parties shall prevent applicants for marketing approval for pharmaceuticals,
including chemical entities and biologics, and agricultural chemical products from relying on
or referring to, undisclosed test data or other data submitted to the competent authority by the
first applicant for a period, counted from the date of marketing approval, of at least six years
for pharmaceuticals and for agrochemical products.
3. Reliance on or reference to such data may be permitted in order to avoid unnecessary
duplication of tests of agrochemical products involving vertebrate animals, provided that the
first applicant is adequately compensated.
ARTICLE 11.12
Industrial Designs
1. The Parties shall ensure in their national laws adequate and effective protection of
industrial designs by providing a period of protection of at least ten years.
2. The Parties shall provide copyright protection for industrial designs if they may be
considered as works of applied art and fulfil the general condition required for copyright
protection by the respective domestic legislation. The term of protection shall be at least 25
years from the making ofthe work.
67
ARTICLE 11.13
Geographical Indications
1. The Parties shall ensure in their national laws adequate and effective means to protect
geographical indications. 20
2. For the purposes of this Agreement, “geographical indications” are indications which
identify a product as originating in the territory of a Party, or a region or a locality in that
territory, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the product is essentially
attributable to its geographical origin.
3. Without prejudice to Articles 22 and 23 of the TRIPS Agreement, the Parties shall
take all necessary measures, in accordance with this Agreement, to ensure mutual protection
of the geographical indications referred to in paragraph 2 that are used to refer to goods
originating in the territory of the Parties. Each Party shall provide interested parties with the
legal means to prevent the use of such geographical indications for identical or similar goods
not originating in the place indicated by the geographical indication in question.
20 Parties may require an indication to be registered in accordance with respective legislation and regulation on
geographical indication in order to enjoy legal protection as a geographical indication.
68
SECTION III
ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ARTICLE 11.14
Acquisition and Maintenance ofIntellectual Property Rights
Where the acquisition of an intellectual property right is subject to the right being
granted or registered, the Parties shall ensure that the procedures for grant or registration are
of the same level as that provided in the TRIPS Agreement, in particular Article 62.
SECTION IV
ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ARTICLE 11.15
General
The Parties shall provide for enforcement provisions for rights covered by Article 11.2
in their respective national laws which shall be at least of the same level as those provided in
the TRIPS Agreement, in particular Articles 41 to 61.
ARTICLE 11.16
Suspension ofRelease
1. The Parties shall adopt procedures to enable a right holder, who has valid grounds for
suspecting that importation or exportation of goods infringing patents, industrial designs,
trademarks or copyright may take place, to lodge according to domestic laws and regulations
an application in writing with the competent authorities, administrative or judicial, for the
suspension by the customs authorities of the release into free circulation ofsuch goods.
2. The Parties shall enable their competent authorities to act upon their own initiative and
suspend the release of goods according to domestic laws and regulations when they have valid
grounds for suspecting that the importation or exportation of those goods would infringe
patents, industrial designs, trademarks or copyright.
3. The Parties shall authorise their customs authorities to inform the right holder in order
to enable the lodging of an application according to paragraph 1.
4. It is understood that there shall be no obligation to apply procedures set forth in
paragraphs 1 or 2 to the suspension of the release into free circulation of goods put on the
market in another country by or with the consent of the right holder.
5. In the case of the suspension pursuant to paragraphs 1 or 2, the competent authorities
of the Party suspending the release of the products shall notify according to domestic laws and
69
regulations the right holder of the suspension including necessary information available to
enforce his or her rights, such as the name and addresses of the consignor or consignee,
importer or exporter, as applicable, and of the quantity ofthe products in question.
6. Each Party shall ensure that the competent authorities, administrative or judicial, on
request from the right holder, have the authority to decide that the products, the release of
which has been suspended pursuant to paragraphs 1 or 2, shall be held seized until a final
decision is reached in the infringement dispute.
7. Each Party shall provide that if the competent authorities have made a determination
that the suspected goods infringe an intellectual property right, procedures are made available
to enable the right holder to seek recovery of, and indemnify against, costs and expenses that
the right holder may have incurred in connection with the exercise of rights and remedies
provided in this provision.
ARTICLE 11.17
Right ofInspection
1. The competent authorities shall give the applicant for the suspension of goods and
other persons involved in the suspension the opportunity to inspect goods whose release has
been suspended or which have been detained.
2. When examining goods, the competent authorities may take samples and, according to
the rules in force in the Party concerned, hand them over or send them to the right holder, at
his or her request, strictly for the purposes of analysis and of facilitating the subsequent
procedure. Where circumstances allow, samples must be returned on completion of the
technical analysis and, where applicable, before goods are released or their detention is lifted.
Any analysis of these samples shall be carried out under the sole responsibility of the right
holder.
3. The declarant, holder or owner of the suspected infringing goods may be present at the
inspection.
ARTICLE 11.18
Liability Declaration, Security or Equivalent Assurance
The competent authorities shall have the authority to require an applicant to declare to
accept liability where applicable towards the persons involved or, in justified cases, to provide
a security or equivalent assurance, sufficient to protect the defendant and the competent
authorities and to prevent abuse. Such security or equivalent assurance shall not unreasonably
deter recourse to these procedures.
70
ARTICLE 11.19
Enforcement — Civil Remedies
Each Party shall provide that:
(a) in civil judicial proceedings, its judicial authorities shall have the authority to
order the infringer who knowingly or with reasonable grounds to know,
engaged in infringing activity of intellectual property rights to pay the right
holder damages adequate to compensate for the actual injury the right holder
has suffered as a result of the infringement;
(b) in determining the amount of damages for intellectual property rights
infringement, its judicial authorities shall consider, inter alia, the actual
damage, or establishing a fair licence fee; and
(c) the competent judicial authorities in an infringement dispute may order, at the
request of the right holder, that appropriate measures be taken with regard to
goods that they have found to be infringing an intellectual property right and,
in appropriate cases, with regard to materials and implements predominantly
used in the creation or manufacture of those goods. Such measures shall
include definitive removal from the channels of commerce or destruction. In
considering a request for corrective measures, the need for proportionality
between the seriousness of the infringement and the remedies ordered as well
as the interests of third parties shall be taken into account.
ARTICLE 11.20
Provisional Measures and Injunctions
Each Party shall ensure that its judicial authorities have the authority to order prompt
and effective provisional measures:
(a) to prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right from occurring,
and in particular to prevent the entry into channels of commerce in their
jurisdiction of goods, including imported goods immediately after customs
clearance; and
(b) to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement.
2. The judicial authorities shall have the authority to adopt provisional measures inaudita
altera pane where appropriate, in particular where any delay is likely to cause irreparable
harm to the right holder, or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.
On request for provisional measures, the judicial authorities shall act expeditiously and make
a decision without undue delay.
71
3. Each Party shall ensure that, in civil judicial proceedings concerning the enforcement
of intellectual property rights, its judicial authorities have the authority to order a party to
desist from an infringement, inter alia, to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in
their jurisdiction of imported goods that involve the infringement of an intellectual property
right, immediately after customs clearance of such goods.
ARTICLE 11.21
Enforcement — C’riminal Remedies
Each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in
cases of wilful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale.
SECTION V
INDICATIONS OF SOURCE AND COUNTRY NAMES
ARTICLE 11.22
Indications ofSource and Country Names
1. The Parties shall ensure in their national laws adequate and effective means to protect
indications of source, country names and flags, with regard to all goods and services.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement, “indications of source” are direct or indirect
references to the geographical origin of goods or services.
3. With regard to the use of indications of source for goods or services, the Parties shall
provide in their national laws for adequate and effective means to prevent the use of such
indications for goods or services not originating in the place indicated by the designation in
question.
4. The Parties shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent any incorrect
or misleading use or registration of country names of a Party as trademarks, company names
or names of associations.
5. The Parties shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent that armorial
bearings, flags and other State emblems of a Party are used or registered as trademarks, or as
company names or names of associations, in noncompliance with the conditions laid down in
the laws and regulations of that Party. This protection shall also apply to signs that may be
confused with armorial bearings, flags and other State emblems of the Parties.
72
CHAPTER 12
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
ARTICLE 12.1
Context and Objectives
1. The Parties recall the Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment of 1972, the
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992, Agenda 21 on Environment and
Development of 1992, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation on Sustainable Development
of 2002 and the Rio+20 Outcome Document “The Future We Want” of 2012.
2. The Parties recognise that economic development, social development and
environmental protection are interdependent and mutually supportive components of
sustainable development. They underline the benefit of cooperation on environmental issues
as part of a global approach to sustainable development.
3. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to promote economic development in such a
way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable development and to ensure that this
objective is integrated and reflected in the Parties’ bilateral economic relationship.
ARTICLE 12.2
II’Iultilateral Environmental Agreements and Environmental Principles
1. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to the effective implementation in their laws
and practices of multilateral environmental agreements to which they are a party, as well
as of the environmental principles and obligations reflected namely in the international
instruments referred to in Article 12.1. They shall strive to further improve the level of
environmental protection by all means, including by effective implementation of their
environmental laws and regulations.
2. The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by
weakening or reducing the protections afforded in domestic environmental laws, regulations,
policies and practices. The Parties agree that environmental standards shall not be used for
protectionist trade purposes.
3. The Parties recognise the importance, when preparing and implementing measures
related to the environment, of taking account of scientific, technical and other information,
and relevant international guidelines.
ARTICLE 12.3
Promotion ofthe Dissemination of Goods and Services Favouring the Environment
1. The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote investment and dissemination of
goods, services, and technologies beneficial to the environment.
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1, the Parties agree to exchange views and will consider
73
cooperation in this area.
3. The Parties shall encourage cooperation between enterprises in relation to goods,
services and technologies that are beneficial to the environment.
ARTICLE 12.4
Cooperation in International Fora
The Parties shall strive to strengthen their cooperation on environmental issues of
mutual interest in relevant bilateral, regional and multilateral fora in which they participate.
ARTICLE 12.5
Bilateral Cooperation
1. The Parties reaffirm the importance of cooperating on environmental policies as
means to contribute to the implementation of this Chapter and further improve the levels of
environmental protection in line with the national environmental policy objectives and
according to the obligations set out in multilateral environmental agreements to which they
are a party.
2. In pursuit of this objective, the Parties shall build on agreements or arrangements in
the field of environment already in place between them and consider the development of
further cooperative activities in areas of common interest.
3. Environmental cooperation between the Parties shall also focus on exchange of
information and expertise, capacity building and training, seminars and workshops,
internships and scholarships, as well as monitoring international developments in this area, etc.
Such activities should also address the issue of technology cooperation and transfer,
especially regarding environmentally friendly technologies.
ARTICLE 12.6
Resources and FinancialArrangements
Recalling as decided in the Rio+20 Outcome Document the need for significant
mobilisation of resources from a variety of sources and the effective use of financing, in order
to give strong support to developing countries in their efforts to promote sustainable
development, the necessary resources for the implementation of environmental cooperation
shall be made available by the competent institutions and organisations as well as by the
private sector of both Parties, subject to mutual agreement of the Parties, according to terms
and conditions agreed on a project-by-project basis and taking into account the different levels
of social and economic development of the Parties.
74
ARTICLE 12.7
Implementation and Consultations
1. With a view to facilitating the implementation of this Chapter and related
communications, the following contact points are designated:
(a) for China: the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM); and
(b) for Switzerland: the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO).
2. A Party may through the contact points referred to in paragraph 1 request
consultations within the Joint Committee regarding any matter arising under this Chapter. The
Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter.
3. Chapter 15 shall not apply to this Chapter. If a Party considers that a measure of the
other Party does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter, it may have recourse
exclusively to bilateral consultations and dialogue in the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 12.8
Review
The Parties shall periodically review in the Joint Committee progress achieved in
pursuing the objectives set out in this Chapter, considering relevant international
developments.
75
CHAPTER 13
ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION
ARTICLE 13.1
Scope and Objectives
1. The Parties agree to promote economic and technical cooperation with the aim to
enhance the mutual benefits of this Agreement, in accordance with their national strategies
and their policy objectives and taking into account the different levels of social and economic
development of the Parties.
2. The cooperation under this Chapter shall pursue the following objectives:
(a) facilitate the implementation of this Agreement with a view to further the well
being of the peoples of the Parties; and
(b) create and enhance sustainable trade and investment opportunities by
facilitating trade and investment between the Parties and by strengthening
competitiveness and innovation capacities, with a view to promote sustainable
economic growth and development.
ARTICLE 13.2
Methods and Means
1 The Parties shall cooperate with the objective of identifying and employing effective
methods and means for the implementation of this Chapter. To this end they shall coordinate
efforts with relevant international organisations and develop, where applicable, synergies with
other forms of bilateral cooperation already existing between the Parties.
2. The Parties will use, among others, the following instruments for the implementation
of this Chapter:
(a) exchange of information and expertise, capacity building and training;
(b) joint identification, development and implementation of projects of
cooperation, including seminars, workshops, internships and scholarships; and
(c) technical and administrative cooperation.
3. The Parties may initiate and implement projects and activities with the participation of
national and international experts, institutions and organisations, as appropriate.
76
ARTICLE 13.3
Areas ofCooperation
Cooperation, as specified in the Work Programme referred to in Article 13.7, may
cover any field jointly identified by the Parties that may serve the Parties to benefit from
increased trade and investment. Cooperation may include but is not limited to the following
areas:
(a) sustainable development;
(b) industrial cooperation;
(c) cooperation in the area of services sectors;
(d) cooperation on agriculture;
(e) quality supervision, inspection and quarantine; and
(f) innovation, protection, enforcement, management and use of intellectual
property rights.
ARTIcLE 13.4
Goverijinent Procurement
1. The Parties agree on the importance of cooperation to enhance the mutual
understanding of their respective government procurement laws, regulations and agreements.
The Parties will accordingly cooperate, consult and exchange information on such matters.
2. The Parties shall publish, or otherwise make publicly available, their laws, regulations
and administrative rulings of general application as well as their respective international
agreements that may affect their procurement markets.
3. Each Party hereby designates the following governmental authority as its enquiry
point to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter regarding government
procurement:
(a) for China: the Ministry of Finance; and
(b) for Switzerland: the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs.
4. The Parties agree to commence negotiations on government procurement as soon as
possible following the completion of negotiations on the accession of China to the WTO
Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA) with a view to concluding, on a reciprocal
basis, an agreement on government procurement between the Parties.
77
ARTICLE 13.5
Cooperation on Labour and Employnient
The Parties shall enhance their cooperation on labour and employment according to
the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Human Resources and Social
Security of the People’s Republic of China and the Federal Department of Economic Affairs
of the Swiss Confederation regarding Cooperation on Labour and Employment Issues signed
in Bern on 15 June 2011 and the Agreement on Labour and Employment Cooperation
between the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security of The People’s Republic of
China and the Federal Department of Economic Affairs, Education and Research of the Swiss
Confederation signed in Beijing on 6 July 2013.
ARTICLE 13.6
Resources and FinancialArrangements
Recalling the need for significant mobilisation of resources from a variety of sources
and the effective use of financing, the necessary resources for the implementation of
cooperation shall be made available by the competent institutions and organisations as well as
by the private sector of both Parties, subject to mutual agreement of the Parties, according to
terms and conditions agreed on a projectby-project basis and taking into account the different
levels of social and economic development of the Parties.
ARTICLE 13.7
Work Programme
In order to further specify the methods and contents of economic and technical
cooperation under this Chapter, the Parties shall sign at ministerial level a Work Programme
in parallel to the conclusion of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 13.8
Implementation and Monitoring
1. The contact points designated in Article 14.2 are responsible for managing and
developing the cooperation under this Chapter and the Work Programme. To this effect, they
cooperate and coordinate with other relevant national and international entities as appropriate.
2. The contact points shall report to the Joint Committee on the implementation of this
Chapter and the Work Programme. They may make recommendations as appropriate.
3. The Joint Committee shall periodically review the implementation of this Chapter and
the Work Programme. It may discuss any issue related to this Chapter and the Work
Programme, make recommendations or take decisions by mutual agreement.
4. Chapter 15 shall not apply to this Chapter. Any difference or dispute between the
Parties concerning the interpretation and/or implementation of any of the provisions of this
78
Chapter and of the Work Programme shall be settled through consultations between the
Parties. Consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee.
79
CHAPTER 14
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 14.1
The Joint Conunittee
1. The Parties hereby establish the Joint China-Switzerland Committee (hereinafter
referred to as the “Joint Committee”) comprising representatives of both Parties. The Parties
shall be represented by senior officials delegated by them for this purpose.
2. The Joint Committee shall:
(a) supervise and review the implementation of this Agreement;
(b) keep under review the possibility of further removal of barriers to trade and
other restrictive measures concerning trade between China and Switzerland;
(c) oversee the further elaboration of this Agreement;
(d) supervise the work of all sub-committees and working groups established
under this Agreement;
(e) endeavour to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or
application of this Agreement; and
(0 consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working groups
as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. Except where specifically
provided for in this Agreement, the sub-committees and working groups shall work under a
mandate established by the Joint Committee.
4. The Joint Committee shall take decisions as provided for in this Agreement, or make
recommendations.
5. The Joint Committee shall meet within one year of the entry into force of this
Agreement. Thereafter, it shall meet whenever necessary but normally once every two years.
The meetings shall be chaired jointly. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules of
procedure.
6. Each Party may request at any time, through a notice in writing to the other Party, that
a special meeting of the Joint Committee be held. Such a meeting shall take place within 30
days of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
7. The Joint Committee shall, in accordance with Article 16.3 consider proposals for any
amendments to this Agreement submitted by a Party and recommend to the Parties
amendments for adoption.
80
ARTICLE 14.2
Contact Points
For the purpose of facilitating communication between the Parties on any matter
covered by this Agreement, the following contact points are designated:
(a) for China: the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM); and
(b) for Switzerland: the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO).
81
CHAPTER 15
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
ARTICLE 15.1
Scope and Coverage
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, wherever a Party considers that a
measure of the other Party is inconsistent with the rights and obligations of this Agreement,
the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall apply.
2. Disputes regarding the same matter arising under both this Agreement and the WTO
Agreement may be settled in either forum at the discretion of the complaining Party. The
forum thus selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO
Agreement are deemed to be initiated by a Party’s request for the establishment of a panel
under Article 6 of the WTO Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the
Settlement of Disputes, whereas dispute settlement proceedings under this Agreement are
deemed to be initiated upon a request for arbitration pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 15.4.
ARTICLE 15.2
Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation
1. Good offices, conciliation and mediation are procedures that are undertaken
voluntarily if the Parties so agree. They may begin and be terminated at any time. They may
continue while procedures of an arbitration panel established in accordance with this Chapter
are in progress.
2. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation shall be confidential
and without prejudice to the Parties’ rights in any other proceedings.
ARTICLE 15.3
Consultations
1. A Party may request in writing consultations with the other Party if it considers that a
measure is inconsistent with the rights and obligations of this Agreement. The request for
consultations shall set out the reasons for the request, including identification of the measure
at issue and a brief summary of the legal basis for the complaint. The other Party shall reply to
the request within ten days after the date of its receipt.
2. Consultations shall commence within 30 days from the date of receipt of the request
for consultations. Consultations on urgent matters shall commence within 15 days from the
receipt of the request for consultations. If the Party to which the request is made does not
reply within ten days or does not enter into consultations within 30 days from the date of
receipt of the request for consultations, or within 15 days for urgent matters, the Party making
82
the request is entitled to request the establishment of an arbitration panel in accordance with
Article 15.4.
3. The complaining Party shall provide sufficient information to facilitate finding a
solution during the consultations. Each Party shall treat any confidential or proprietary
information exchanged in the course of consultations in the same manner as the Party
providing the information.
4. The consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the
Parties in any further proceedings.
ARTICLE 15.4
Establishment ofArbitration Panel
1. If the consultations referred to in Article 15.3 fail to resolve a matter within 60 days, or
30 days in relation to urgent matters, after the date of the receipt of the request for
consultations by the Party complained against, it may be referred to an arbitration panel by
means of a written request from the complaining Party to the other Party.
2. The request for arbitration shall identify the specific measure at issue and provide a
brief summary of the legal basis of the complaint.
3. The arbitration panel shall comprise three members.
4. Within 15 days after receipt of the request for arbitration in accordance with
paragraph 1, both Parties shall designate one member of the arbitration panel respectively.
5. The Parties shall designate by common agreement the third panelist within 30 days
after the receipt of the request for arbitration in accordance with paragraph 1. The panelist
thus designated shall chair the arbitration panel.
6. If any member of the arbitration panel has not been designated within 30 days after the
receipt of the written request for arbitration in accordance with paragraph 1, at the request of
any Party to the dispute, the Director General of the WTO is expected to designate a member
within a further 30 days. In the event that the Director General of the WTO is a national of
any Party or unable to perform this task, the Deputy Director General of the WTO who is not
a national of any Party shall be requested to perform such task. Ifthe Deputy Director General
of the WTO is unable to perform this task as well, the President of the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) shall be requested to perform this task. In the event that the President of the ICJ
is a national of either Party, the Vice President of the ICJ who is not a national of a Party shall
be requested to perform this task.
7. The Chair of the arbitration panel shall not be a national of any of the Parties, nor have
his or her usual place of residence in the territory of any of the Parties, nor be employed by
any of the Parties, nor have dealt with the matter in any capacity.
8. All panelists shall:
(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade or the resolution of
disputes arising under international trade agreements and, if possible, have
expertise in the matter covered by the dispute;
83
(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound judgment;
(c) be independent of and not be affiliated with or take instructions from any Party;
and
(d) comply with a code of conduct in conformity with the relevant rules
established in the document WT/DSB/RC/l of the WTO.
9. If a panelist appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable to act, a successor
panelist shall be appointed within 15 days in accordance with the selection procedure as
prescribed for the appointment of the original panelist and the successor shall have all the
powers and duties of the original panelist. The work of the arbitration panel shall be
suspended during the appointment of the successor panelist.
10. Unless the Parties otherwise agree within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
request for arbitration in accordance with paragraph 1, its terms of reference shall be:
“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter
referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel pursuant to
Article 15.4 and to make findings of law and fact together with the reasons therefor,
for the resolution ofthe dispute.”
ARTICLE 15.5
Functions ofArbitration Panel
1. The function of an arbitration panel is to make an objective assessment of the dispute
before it, in light of the request for its establishment, including an examination of the facts of
the case and the applicability of and conformity with this Agreement. It shall interpret the
relevant provisions of this Agreement in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of
public international law.
2. The arbitration panel, in their findings and recommendations, cannot add to or
diminish the rights and obligations provided in this Agreement.
ARTICLE 15.6
Procedures ofthe Arbitration Panel
1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitration panel proceedings shall be
conducted in accordance with the Rules of Procedure set out in Annex X.
2. The arbitration panel shall, apart from the rules set out in this Article, regulate its own
procedures in relation to the rights of the Parties to be heard and its deliberations in
consultation with the Parties.
3. The arbitration panel shall strive to take its decisions by consensus. If it is unable to
reach consensus, it may take its decisions by majority vote. Panelists may furnish separate
opinions on matters not unanimously agreed. The arbitration panel may not disclose which
members are associated with majority or minority opinions.
84
ARTICLE 15.7
Panel Reports
1. The arbitration panel shall draft its reports in line with the relevant provisions of this
Chapter and based on the request for its establishment, the relevant provisions of this
Agreement, as well as the submissions and arguments of the Parties.
2. The arbitration panel should, as a general rule, submit an initial report containing its
findings and conclusions to the Parties no later than 90 days after the last panelist is selected.
In urgent matters the arbitration panel should submit the initial report no later than 60 days
from the date the last panelist is selected. Each Party may submit written comments to the
arbitration panel on its initial report within 14 days of receipt of the report.
3. In exceptional cases, if the arbitration panel considers it cannot release its initial report
within 90 days, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay together with
an estimate of the period within which it will release its report. Any delay shall not exceed a
further period of 30 days unless the Parties otherwise agree.
4. The arbitration panel shall present to the Parties a final report within 30 days, or 20
days in relation to urgent matters, after the submission of the initial report.
5. The final report, as well as any report under Articles 15.9 and 15.10, shall be
communicated to the Parties. The reports shall be available to the public, unless the Parties
decide otherwise, subject to the protection of confidential information.
6. The ruling of the arbitration panel on the consistency of the measure specified in the
terms of reference with this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “the ruling”) shall be final
and binding upon the Parties.
ARTICLE 15.8
Suspension or Termination ofArbitration Panel Proceedings
1. Where the Parties agree, an arbitration panel may suspend its work at any time for a
period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement. If the work of an arbitration
panel has been suspended for more than 12 months, the terms of reference for establishment
of the arbitration panel shall lapse unless the Parties agree otherwise.
2. A complaining Party may withdraw its complaint at any time before the final report
has been issued. Such withdrawal is without prejudice to its right to introduce a new
complaint regarding the same issue at a later point in time. The right of the complaining Party
to withdraw its complaint and introduce a new complaint shall not be abused.
3. The Parties may agree at any time before the release of the final report to terminate the
proceedings of an arbitration panel established under this Agreement by jointly notifying the
Chairperson of that arbitration panel.
4. An arbitration panel may, at any stage of the proceedings prior to release of the final
report, propose that the Parties seek to settle the dispute amicably.
85
ARTICLE 15.9
Implementation ofFinal Report
1. The Party complained against shall promptly comply with the ruling in the final
report. If it is impracticable to comply immediately, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on a
reasonable period of time to do so.
2. In the absence of an agreement referred to in paragraph 1 within 45 days from the date
of the issuance of the final report, either Party may request the arbitration panel to determine
the length of the reasonable period of time, in light of the particular circumstances of the case.
The ruling of the arbitration panel should be given within 30 days from the receipt of that
request.
3. The Party complained against shall, promptly or within the reasonable period of time
as agreed or determined pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2, notify the other Party of the measure
adopted in order to comply with the ruling in the final report, as well as provide a detailed
description of how the measure ensures compliance sufficient to allow the other Party to
assess the measure.
4. In case of disagreement as to the existence or consistency of a measure taken to
comply with the ruling in the final report in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, such
disagreement shall be decided by the same arbitration panel upon the request of either Party
before compensation can be sought or suspension of benefits can be applied in accordance
with Article 15.10. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall normally be rendered within 60
days.
5. When the arbitration panel considers that it cannot provide its report within the
timeframe referred to in paragraph 2 and 4, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons
for the delay together with an estimate of the period within which it will submit its report.
Any delay shall not exceed a further period of 15 days.
ARTICLE 15.10
Compensation, Suspension ofConcessions and Obligations
1. If the arbitration panel has found in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 15.9 that
the Party complained against failed to bring the measure found to be inconsistent with this
Agreement into compliance with the ruling of the arbitration panel within the reasonable
period of time established, or if the Party complained against notifies the complaining Party
that it will not implement the ruling, that Party shall, if so requested by the complaining Party,
enter into consultations with a view to agreeing on a mutually acceptable compensation. If no
such agreement has been reached within 20 days from the receipt of the request, the
complaining Party shall be entitled to suspend the application of benefits granted under this
Agreement but only equivalent to those affected by the measure that the arbitration panel has
found to be inconsistent with this Agreement. The complaining Party shall notify the Party
complained against 30 days before suspending concessions and obligations.
86
2. In considering what concessions and obligations to suspend, the complaining Party
shall first seek to suspend concessions and obligations in the same sector or sectors as that
affected by the measure that the arbitration panel has found to be inconsistent with this
Agreement. If the complaining Party considers it is not practicable or effective to suspend
concessions and obligations in the same sector or sectors, it may suspend concessions and
obligations in other sectors. In such a case, the complaining Party shall include in its
notification announcing the suspension of concessions or obligations the reasons for its
decision.
3. In its notification announcing the suspension of concessions or obligations, the
complaining Party shall indicate the concessions or obligations which it intends to suspend,
the grounds for such suspension and when suspension will commence. Within 15 days from
the receipt of that notification, the Party complained against may request the arbitration panel
to rule on whether the concessions or obligations which the complaining Party intends to
suspend are equivalent to those affected by the measure found to be inconsistent with this
Agreement, and whether the proposed suspension is in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2.
The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be given within 60 days from the receipt of that
request. Concessions or obligations shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has
issued its ruling.
4. Compensation and suspension of benefits shall be temporary measures and shall only
be applied by the complaining Party until the measure found to be inconsistent with this
Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with this
Agreement, or until the Parties have resolved the dispute otherwise. To this end, if the Party
complained against considers that it has eliminated the non-conformity that the arbitration
panel has found, it may provide written notice to the complaining Party with a description of
how non-conformity has been removed.
ARTICLE 15.11
Other Provisions
1. Whenever possible, the arbitration panel referred to in Articles 15.9 and 15.10 shall
comprise the same panelists who issued the final report. If a member of the arbitration panel is
unavailable, the appointment of a replacement panelist shall be conducted in accordance with
the selection procedure for the original panelist.
2. For the purposes of calculating time periods, such period shall begin to run on the day
following the day when a written communication is received. If the last day of such period is
an official holiday, the period shall be extended until the first work day which follows.
Official holidays or non-work days occurring during the running of the period of time shall be
included in calculating the period.
3. Any time period mentioned in this Chapter may be modified by mutual agreement of
the Parties.
87
CHAPTER 16
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTIcLE 16.1
FuUilment of Obligations
The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their
obligations under this Agreement.
ARTIcLE 16.2
Annexes and Appendices
The Annexes to this Agreement, including their Appendices, constitute an integral part
of this Agreement.
ARTIcLE 16.3
Amendments
1. Each Party may submit proposals for amendments to this Agreement to the Joint
Committee for consideration and approval.
2. Amendments to this Agreement shall, after approval by the Joint Committee, be
submitted to the Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval in accordance with their
respective legal requirements.
3. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, amendments shall enter into force on the first
day of the third month following the date of notification of the latter Party that the respective
legal requirements have been fulfilled.
ARTIcLE 16.4
Termination
Each Party may terminate this Agreement by notification through diplomatic channel
to the other Party. This Agreement shall expire six months afier the date of such notification.
88
ARTIcLE 16.5
Entry into Force
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the third month following the
month in which the Governments of the Parties exchange diplomatic notes informing each
other that their respective legal procedures necessary for the entry into force of this
Agreement have been completed.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorised by their respective
Governments, have signed this Agreement.
Done at Beijing, this 6th day of July 2013, in two originals each in the English, Chinese and
French language, each text being equally authentic. In case of divergence between the
language versions, the English text shall prevail.
For the Swiss Confederation For the People’s Republic of China
89