CHILE-PERU FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

 

Agreementof Free Trade
between the Government of the Republic of Peru and the Government of the
Republic of Chile, which modifies and replaces ACE No. 38,
its annexes, appendices, protocols and other instruments that
have been signed under its protection

 

 

PERU – CHILE FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

 

 

PERU – CHILE FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

 

PREAMBLE

The Government of the Republic of Peru and the Government of the Republic of Chile, hereinafter "the Parties", considering:

The will to strengthen the special bonds of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between their peoples;

The development of their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakech Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization and the 1980 Montevideo Treaty , as well as other bilateral and multilateral integration and cooperation instruments to which they are a Party;

The need to strengthen the integration process of Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty , through the conclusion of the broadest possible bilateral and multilateral agreements;

The active participation of Chile and Peru in the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), as well as in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum (APEC);

Peru's participation in the Cartagena Agreement and the commitments derived from it for this country;

The different efforts to revitalize integration in the American continent, which show the need for economic-commercial complementation aimed at cementing an open regionalism, which is efficiently inserted in a globalized world and with regionalization initiatives in other latitudes;

The need to achieve a better balance in their business relationships;

The coincidences of the economic and commercial opening of both countries, both in tariff matters and in the elimination of non-tariff restrictions and in the basic orientations of their economic policies;

The advantages of offering economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade in goods and services, as well as for the flow of investments;

The significance that adequate cooperation in the productive areas of goods and services has for the economic development of both Parties;

The convenience of achieving a more active participation of the economic agents of both countries;

The creation of new employment opportunities, the improvement of working conditions and living standards in their respective territories;

Undertake all of the above in a manner consistent with the protection and conservation of the environment;

Agree to enter into the following Agreement,

 

Chapter 1

Initial Provisions

Article 1.1: Establishment of a Free Trade Zone

1. The Parties to this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services and the 1980 Montevideo Treaty , establish a free zone trade.

2. For this purpose, they modify and replace ACE No. 38, its annexes, appendices, protocols and other instruments that have been signed under its protection, by the following revised text of the Free Trade Agreement.

Article 1.2: Goals

1. The objectives of this Agreement, developed more specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:

(a) promote, under conditions of equity, the balanced and harmonious development of the Parties;

(b) intensify economic and commercial relations between the Parties, and stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between them;

(c) promote coordinated action in international economic forums, as well as in relation to industrialized countries, tending to improve the access of the merchandise of the Parties to world markets;

(d) remove barriers to trade and facilitate the cross-border movement of goods and services between the Parties;

(e) promote fair competition conditions in the free trade area;

(f) substantially increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

(g) promote investments aimed at intensive use of the markets of the Parties and strengthen their competitive capacity in world exchanges;

(h) establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level, aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement;

(i) create effective procedures for the application and enforcement of this Agreement, for its joint administration, and to prevent and resolve disputes;

(j) avoid distortions in their reciprocal trade; and

(k) promote complementarity and economic cooperation.

2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.

 

Episode 2

General Definitions

Article 2.1: General Application Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement and unless otherwise specified:

ACE No. 38 means the Economic Complementation Agreement No. 38 signed between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru, on June 22, 1998;

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization , dated April 15, 1994;

Agreement on Safeguards means the Agreement on Safeguards , which is part of the Agreement on the WTO;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

GATS stands for the General Agreement on Trade in Services , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

ALADI means the Latin American Integration Association , established by the 1980 Montevideo Treaty;

chapter refers to the first two digits of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or the NALADISA Nomenclature.

Administrative Commission means the one established in accordance with article 15.1 (Administrative Commission);

government procurement means the process by which a government procures the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination thereof, for government purposes and not with a view to commercial sale or resale, or use in the production or supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale;

days means calendar, calendar, or calendar days;

company means any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and whether privately or governmentally owned, including any partnership, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture or other association;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party;

State enterprise means an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through ownership rights;

existing means current as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATT 1994 stands for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 , which is part of the WTO Agreement;

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment existing in its territory of an investor of the other Party on the date of entry into force of this Agreement or established, acquired or expanded thereafter;

measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice;

merchandise means any merchandise, article, good, material, merchandise or product;

goods of a Party means domestic goods as understood in the GATT 1994 or those goods that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating goods of that Party. A good of a Party may include materials from non-Parties

originating good means a good that complies with the provisions of Chapter 4 (Origin Regime);

national means a natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with its Political Constitution or a permanent resident of a Party;

NALADISA identifies the Tariff Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association, based on the Harmonized System for the Designation and Coding of Goods ;

WTO stands for World Trade Organization;

heading refers to the first four digits of the Harmonized System or of the NALADISA Nomenclature;

Party means any State for which this Agreement has entered into force;

person means a natural person or a company;

person of a Party means a national or company of a Party;

Release Schedule means the schedule set forth in Article 3.2 (Release Schedule);

Section means a section of the Harmonized System or of the NALADISA Nomenclature;

Harmonized System (HS) means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System , including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes and Chapter Notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective customs tariff legislation. ;

subheading means the first six digits of the Harmonized System or of the NALADISA Nomenclature;

Treaty of Montevideo 1980 means the Agreement establishing the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI); and

preferential tariff treatment means the tariff reduction established in the Trade Liberation Program applicable to an originating good in accordance with this Agreement.

Article 2.2: Country Specific Definition

Territory means:

(a) with respect to Peru, the continental territory, the islands, the maritime spaces and the airspace under its sovereignty or rights of sovereignty and jurisdiction, in accordance with international law and national law; and

(b) with respect to Chile, the land, maritime and air space under its sovereignty and the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf over which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction, in accordance with international law and its domestic legislation.

 

Chapter 3

Merchandise Trade 1

Article 3.1: National Treatment

Each Party shall grant, in its territory, national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. In this sense, said merchandise will enjoy a treatment no less favorable than that applicable to similar national merchandise, in terms of taxes, rates or other internal charges, as well as laws, regulations and other norms that affect the sale, purchase, distribution and use thereof in the domestic market.

Article 3.2: Release Program 2

1. Neither Party shall maintain or apply new non-tariff restrictions on the importation or exportation of goods from its territory to that of the other Party, whether through quotas, licenses or through other measures, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 50. of the Treaty of Montevideo 1980 and in Articles XX and XXI of the GATT 1994.

2. For the purposes of this Agreement, "restrictions" shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate, or of any other nature, through which one of the Parties prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, their imports.

3. The Parties agree to free their reciprocal trade from taxes according to the following tariff reduction schedule:

a) A total relief from import duties for reciprocal trade as of July 1, 1998, for goods that, in the NALADISA nomenclature, appear with D-0, in Annex 3.2-A.

b) Goods in the NALADISA nomenclature included in Annex 3.2-A, identified with D-5, will be subject to the following tax relief schedule:

Tax relief in 5 years

l) Goods designated in accordance with the NALADISA nomenclature, included in Annex 3.2-A of this Agreement, which have an asterisk (*) in addition to one of the aforementioned codes, will be immediately deducted in favor of Peru, in the In the case of Chile, the tax relief will be the one assigned to the pertinent literal of this article.

m) The goods contained in Annex 3.2-B of this Agreement will be subject to the conditions indicated therein. In said Annex, where appropriate, the preferences and conditions established in the Partial Scope Agreement No.28 are recorded.

4. The deductions provided for in this article will be applied on the CIF value or on the customs value, as appropriate, in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement.

5. If at any time a Party reduces its tariff charges to third countries, for one or several goods included in this Agreement, it shall proceed to adjust the charge applicable to reciprocal trade in accordance with the proportionalities established (referential margin of preference) in the literals indicated in paragraph 3, as appropriate.

6. The Parties will exchange, at the time of signing this Agreement, the tariffs in force and will keep each other informed, through the competent bodies, about subsequent modifications.

7. Used merchandise will not benefit from the Release Program established in this Agreement, even those that have a specific subheading in the NALADISA nomenclature.

8. The Parties, within the framework of the Administrative Commission, may speed up the tariff reduction program for those goods or groups of goods that are mutually agreed upon.

9. For the purposes of this Agreement, "taxes" shall be understood as customs duties and any other charges with equivalent effects, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affect imports. Similar rates and surcharges are not included in this concept when they are equivalent to the cost of the services actually provided.

10. The Parties may not adopt or maintain levies and charges of equivalent effects other than customs duties that affect bilateral trade under this Agreement. However, the liens and charges existing on the date of signing the Agreement and that appear in the Complementary Notes to this Agreement may be maintained, but without increasing their incidence. The aforementioned Notes appear in Annex 3.2-C.

The encumbrances and charges of equivalent effects identified in the aforementioned Complementary Notes will not be subject to the Release Program.

11. In the use of the Price Band System, in force in Chile, or of Variable Specific Duties in force in Peru, related to the importation of merchandise, the Parties undertake, within the scope of this Agreement, not to include new merchandise or to modify the mechanisms or apply them in such a way that means a deterioration of the conditions of access to their respective territories.

The Release Program of this Agreement will not be applied to the Specific Rights derived from the aforementioned mechanisms.

The Parties incorporate in Annex 3.2-D of this Agreement the List of Goods that are currently incorporated into the aforementioned systems.

12. Without prejudice to the provisions of the WTO Agreement, the Parties shall not apply export taxes to reciprocal trade.

Article 3.3: Customs Valuation

The Customs Valuation Agreement will regulate the customs valuation regime applied in trade between the Parties.

Article 3.4: Free trade zone

Goods produced or coming from free zones or companies that enjoy the benefits of free zone users, in accordance with the national legislation of the Parties, shall be excluded from the Liberation Program of this Agreement. Said goods must be duly identified.

 

Chapter 4

Origin Regime

Article 4.1: Area of ​​application

1. This regime establishes the rules of origin applicable to the exchange of goods between the Parties, for the purposes of:

(a) qualification and determination of the originating good;

(b) issuance of certificates of origin; and

(c) verification, control and sanction processes.

2. The Parties shall apply this Origin Regime to the goods subject to the Trade Liberalization Program of the Agreement, without prejudice to the fact that it may be modified by Resolution of the Administrative Commission.

3. To access the Release Program, the goods must prove compliance with the provisions of this Regime. This requirement will proceed only for goods that require preferential treatment.


Article 4.2: Origin Qualification

Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the following shall be considered original:

(a) Goods manufactured entirely in the territory of the Parties when, in their production, materials originating from one or both Parties were used solely and exclusively;

(b) goods obtained from the mineral kingdom extracted in the territory of a Party;

(c) goods of the vegetable kingdom harvested or gathered in the territory of a Party;

(d) goods of the animal kingdom born and bred in the territory of a Party;

(e) goods obtained by hunting, capturing or fishing in the territory of a Party;

(f) Goods obtained from the sea, extracted outside the territory of a Party, by ships flying its flags, chartered or leased by companies established in the territory of any of the Parties, provided that such ships are registered or enrolled in accordance with their respective national legislation;

(g) the goods produced on board factory ships from the goods identified in subparagraph (f), by ships of their flags, chartered or leased by companies established in the territory of any of the Parties, provided that such ships are registered or enrolled in accordance with their respective national legislation;

(h) Goods obtained by a natural or legal person of one of the Parties or by one of the Parties, from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that such natural or legal person or Party has the right to exploit said seabed or subsoil; and

(i) Goods made with non-originating materials, provided that they result from a production or transformation process carried out in the Parties that gives them a new individuality. This individuality is present in the fact that the merchandise is classified in a heading other than the materials, according to the NALADISA nomenclature.

Notwithstanding what is established in the previous paragraph, goods that, despite being classified in headings other than materials, are the result of the operations established in article 4.3 carried out in the Parties, by which they acquire the final form, will not be considered originating. in which they will be marketed, when non-originating materials have been used in such operations. The provisions of this paragraph do not constitute a production or transformation process.

(j) Goods that do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification, because the production or transformation process does not imply a change of heading in the NALADISA nomenclature, provided that the CIF value of the destination port or CIF maritime port of the non-originating materials does not exceed 50% of the FOB export value of the goods.

(k) the goods resulting from assembly or assembly operations carried out within the territory of the Parties, using non-originating materials, whether or not there is a change of item, provided that the CIF value of the destination port or CIF seaport of the non-originating materials does not exceeds 50% of the FOB export value of the goods.

(l) Games or assortments of merchandise, provided that each of the merchandise contained therein complies with the standards established in this Chapter.

(m) Goods that meet the specific requirements, in accordance with article 4.5.


Article 4.3: Minimum Operations

The following operations by themselves do not confer origin:

(a) manipulations intended to ensure the conservation of the goods such as: aeration, ventilation, refrigeration, freezing, addition of substances, removal of damaged parts;

(b) dusting, shaking, shelling, shelling, maceration, drying, thinning, classification, selection, fractioning, washing or cleaning, painting and trimming;

(c) the formation of games or assortments of merchandise;

(d) the packaging, packaging or repackaging;

(e) the division or assembly of packages or packages;

(f) the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs to the goods or their packaging;

(g) mixtures of materials, dilution in water or other substances, dosage, provided that the characteristics of the goods obtained are not essentially different from the characteristics of the materials that have been mixed;

(h) the assembly, assembly or assembly of parts and pieces to constitute a complete good;

(i) the simple sacrifice of animals; and

(j) the accumulation of two or more of these operations.


Article 4.4: Packaging and Packaging

1. The packages, containers, cases, packaging, wrappers and the like, presented containing the respective merchandise, will be considered originating if the main merchandise meets the origin criteria of this Chapter.

2. This provision will not be applicable to containers, packaging, cases, packaging, wrappers and the like, when they are presented separately or give the merchandise it contains its essential character.


Article 4.5: Origin Specific Requirements

1. The Parties may agree to establish Specific Origin Requirements, in those cases in which it is deemed that the general rules are not adequate to qualify the origin of a good or group of goods. The Specific Origin Requirements will prevail over the general criteria.

2. Goods with specific requirements are included in Annex 4.5.


Article 4.6: accumulation

1. For the determination of the origin of the goods, the originating materials of the other Party, incorporated in the production or transformation of said goods, shall be considered as originating in one Party.

2. This criterion will apply to both the General Rules of Origin and the Specific Requirements of Origin.


Article 4.7:Of the Expedition, Transport and Transit of the Goods

1. For the goods to benefit from preferential treatment, they must have been shipped directly from the exporting Party to the importing Party. For this purpose, direct dispatch is considered:

(a) goods transported without passing through the territory of a non-Party country;

(b) Goods in transit, through one or more non-Party countries, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the supervision of the customs authority of the transited country, provided that

(i) the transit is justified by geographical reasons or considerations relating to transportation requirements,

(ii) are not intended for trade, use or employment in the country of transit, and

(iii) they do not undergo, during their transport or storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or handling to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

In the event that the goods are deposited, they may remain stored for a maximum period of 6 months, counted from the entry of the goods to the non-Party country of transit.

2. For the purposes of the provisions of paragraph 1(b), the importer of the goods at the request of the customs authority of the importing Party, must deliver a copy of any customs control document that, to the satisfaction of said customs authority , indicates that the merchandise remained under the customs supervision of the transited country, in the territory of the non-Party country.


Article 4.8: Billing by an Operator of a Non-Party Country

1. When the merchandise object of exchange is invoiced by an operator from a non-Party country, the producer or exporter of the country of origin must indicate in the respective certificate of origin, in the area related to "observations", that the merchandise object of exchange Your declaration will be invoiced from a third country that is not a Party, identifying the name, denomination or business name and address of the operator that will ultimately be the one that invoices the operation to the destination.

2. In the situation referred to in the previous paragraph and, exceptionally, if at the time of issuing the certificate of origin, the number of the commercial invoice issued by an operator from a non-Party country is not known, the mechanism must be used. provided for in article 4.9.11.


Article 4.9: Issuance of Certificates of Origin

1. The certificate of origin is the document that serves to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating, according to the terms and provisions of this Chapter, in order that the good may be benefit from the preferential treatment enshrined in this Agreement.

2. For the declaration and certification of origin of the merchandise, the format found in Annex 4.9 will be used, which will have the character of an affidavit from the final producer or exporter of the merchandise, in which it states full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter relating to the origin and veracity of the data and information contained in the certificate.

3. The request for the certificate of origin must be accompanied by the commercial invoice and an affidavit from the producer with the necessary background documents that demonstrate that the goods meet the requirements, such as:

(a) company or trade name;

(b) legal address;

(c) name of the merchandise to be exported and NALADISA code;

(d) FOB value of the merchandise;

(e) the materials used in the production or transformation process, indicating:

(i) materials of the exporting Party;

(ii) materials of the importing Party;

(iii) non-originating materials indicating:

NALADISA codes, CIF value in United States dollars and Percentage of participation in the FOB value of the merchandise.

4. The aforementioned statements must be submitted sufficiently in advance for each certification request. In the case of goods that were regularly exported, and as long as the process and the component materials were not altered, the declaration will be valid for up to two years from the date of its issuance.

5. When the exporter is not the producer of the merchandise, the producer must provide the declaration of origin to the exporter, so that the exporter can present it to the certifying entity.

6. The issuance of certificates of origin must be in charge of official departments, to be nominated by each Party, which may delegate their issuance to other public or private entities, acting under national jurisdiction.

7. The Parties will maintain the current official distributions and the public or private entities authorized to issue certificates of origin, with the record of the autograph signatures of the officials accredited for this purpose, duly registered with the ALADI General Secretariat.

8. Modifications made to said records will enter into force within 30 days, counted from the date of communication to the ALADI General Secretariat.

9. The certificate of origin must be issued within the 7 days following the presentation of the respective application and will be valid for one year from the date of its issuance. Said certificate must be issued exclusively in the form attached in Annex 4.9, which will not be valid if it is not duly completed in the corresponding fields.

10. The certificates of origin must be issued from the date of issuance of the commercial invoice corresponding to the operation in question.

11. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 10, if a provisional invoice is issued before a final one due to the marketing modalities of a certain merchandise, the certificate of origin issued based on the former will be accepted. Such circumstance and the reason why the final commercial invoice is not available at that time must be entered in the "COMMENTS" box. However, upon importation, the final commercial invoice must be available.


Article 4.10: Background of the Certificate and Deadlines

1. The certifying entities must correlatively number the certificates issued and file a copy for a minimum period of 5 years, from the date of issue. Said file must also include all the background information that served as the basis for the issuance of the certificate.

2. In addition, the aforementioned entities will keep a permanent record of all certificates of origin issued, which must contain at least the number of the certificate, the applicant for it and the date of its issuance.

3. Exporters who request a certification of origin and producers who issue an affidavit of origin in accordance with article 4.9, must keep the necessary documents for a minimum period of 5 years, from the date of issuance of the certificate of origin. to demonstrate the origin of the merchandise, particularly those related to the acquisition and cost of the merchandise and the materials referred to in subparagraphs (d) and (e) of article 4.9.3, respectively, and those related to the production of the merchandise , in the form in which it was exported.

4. Each Party shall provide that an importer requesting preferential tariff treatment maintain in its territory, for a minimum period of 5 years from the date of the respective importation, the documentation that the Party requires in relation to the importation of the merchandise, including a copy of the certificate of origin.


Article 4.11: Request for Preferential Tariff Treatment

Each Party shall require an importer who claims preferential tariff treatment with respect to a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party to:

(a) declare in the import document established by its legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin, that the merchandise qualifies as originating;

(b) have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time of making the declaration referred to in subparagraph (a);

(c) have in their possession the document that proves that the requirements for issuance, transport and transit of the goods established in article 4.7 are met, when applicable; and

(d) provide the documents indicated in subparagraphs (b) and (c) to the customs authorities of the importing Party, when they request it.


Article 4.12: Refund of Customs Duties

1. Each Party shall provide that, in those cases in which preferential tariff treatment has not been requested for a good imported into the territory of the other Party that has qualified as originating, the importer of the good, within a period not exceeding one year from counting from the date of importation, you can request the refund of the tariffs paid in excess for not having granted preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise, provided that the request is accompanied by:

(a) a written statement stating that the good complied with all the provisions of this Chapter at the time of importation;

(b) the certificate of origin; and

(c) any additional documentation related to the importation of the merchandise, as required by the customs authority.

2. In the event that doubts arise regarding compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, a verification process may be initiated, in accordance with the provisions of article 4.13.


Article 4.13: Processes of Control and Verification of the Regime of Origin

1. Notwithstanding the presentation of a certificate of origin under the conditions established in this Chapter and those that may be established by the Administrative Commission, in case there are doubts about the authenticity of the certificate of origin, the veracity of the information contained in said document or compliance with the rules established in this Chapter, the import process of the goods will not stop, and the customs authority of the importing Party may adopt the measures considered necessary in order to guarantee the fiscal interest, through the mechanisms in force in national legislation.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the investigating authority of the importing Party may initiate a verification process in order to verify compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, in accordance with the following provisions.

3. The initiation of the verification of origin shall be immediately notified to the importer and the competent authority of the exporting Party.

4. During the verification process, the investigating authority of the importing Party, with the knowledge of its competent authority, may:

(a) request the necessary information to verify the authenticity of the certificate of origin, the veracity of the information contained in it, as well as the information that demonstrates compliance with the origin qualification criteria declared in the certificate of origin, including the background that accompanied the request for preferential treatment in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. This information will be required from the certifying entity through the competent authority of the exporting Party and must be provided within a period of no more than 45 days, counted from the date of receipt of the request by the competent authority of the exporting Party;

(b) send through the competent authority of the exporting Party a written questionnaire for the exporter or producer, indicating the certificate of origin under verification, which must be answered within a period not exceeding 60 days, counted from the date receipt of the questionnaire;

(c) request, through the competent authority of the exporting Party, verification visits to the producer's facilities, in order to review the information and documentation that justifies the origin of the merchandise, as well as to examine the processes productive and the facilities used in the production of the merchandise that is the subject of the verification. The request for the visit must be answered within a period not exceeding 20 days, counted from the date of receipt of the request.

The certifying entity and the competent authority of the exporting Party may participate as observers in the respective visit, which must be carried out within a period not exceeding 60 days, counted from the date of the request to carry out said visit; and

(d) carry out other procedures, leading to verify the origin of the goods, as agreed by the Parties.

5. Once the stage of the verification process referred to in paragraph 4 has been exhausted, the investigating authority of the importing Party shall inform the competent authority of the exporting Party whether the information is sufficient or insufficient, within a maximum period of 30 days.

6. In the event that the information is insufficient, the competent authority of the exporting Party must complete the information within a maximum and unique additional period of 30 days, counted from the date of receipt of the aforementioned communication.

7. The investigative authority of the importing Party must issue a determination on the origin of the merchandise, stating the reasons that determined the decision, within a period not exceeding 90 days, counted from the date of receipt of the communication of sufficiency. referred to in paragraph 5. The term shall be 120 days if the additional term established in paragraph 6 is granted. This determination shall be communicated to the importer and to the competent authorities of the importing Party and the exporting Party.

8. Once the verification has begun and while said process lasts, the customs authority of the importing Party may preemptively order the suspension of preferential tariff treatment to new operations referring to identical merchandise from the same producer.

9. If as a result of the verification process:

(a) it is concluded that the merchandise qualifies as originating, the merchandise will be entitled to preferential tariff treatment and the rights collected in excess will be refunded or the guarantee presented will be returned, as appropriate; either

(b) it is verified that the certificate contains false information or that the merchandise does not qualify as originating, the importing Party will collect the corresponding taxes or the guarantee presented will be made effective, as appropriate and the sanctions provided for in the current legislation of each Party will be applied. .

10. In the case of paragraph 9(b), the competent authority of the importing Party may suspend the preferential tariff treatment of new imports referring to identical merchandise from the same producer or exporter, until it is demonstrated that the production conditions were modified. in order to comply with the rules of this Chapter.

11. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs, the investigating authority of the importing Party may request from its importer, in its territory, information and background information on the origin of the merchandise requested for clearance or regarding the authenticity of the certificate of origin. .

12. The verification and control process referred to in this article may be carried out before the dispatch of the goods, during the dispatch or later, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

13. Once the verification process has been exhausted, if the conclusion is not satisfactory to the Parties, the Parties will hold bilateral consultations. If the results of these consultations are not satisfactory to the affected Party, it may resort to the Agreement's Dispute Settlement Regime.


Article 4.14: Denial of Preferential Tariff Treatment

Preferential tariff treatment may be denied when:

(a) the goods do not comply with the requirements of this Chapter;

(b) the information or documentation required in accordance with article 4.13.4 was not provided, was provided untimely or if the response was insufficient, once the additional period referred to in article 4.13.6 had expired;

(c) does not comply, refuses or does not respond to the request to carry out the visit, within the established term;

(d) the requirements set forth in article 4.7 are not complied with, despite being originating goods.


Article 4.15: Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its legislation, the confidentiality of the information obtained under this Chapter and shall protect it from any disclosure that could harm the competitive position of the persons who provide it. Likewise, when a Party supplies information to the other, in accordance with this Chapter and designates it as confidential, the other Party will permanently maintain the confidentiality of said information and will not disclose it without the prior consent of the Party that supplied it.

2. The confidential information obtained in accordance with this Chapter may only be made known to the judicial authorities and those responsible for the administration and application of determinations of origin and customs or tax matters, as appropriate.


Article 4.16: Sanctions and Responsibilities

1. When it is verified that the certificate of origin does not comply with the provisions contained in this Chapter or it is detected, in it or in its records or other documents related to the origin of the goods, falsification, adulteration or any other circumstance that gives result in fiscal or economic damage, the Parties may adopt the corresponding sanctions in accordance with their legislation.

2. Each Party will provide that the exporter or producer who provides false information to the entity in charge of issuing the certificate of origin, in the sense that the merchandise qualifies as originating, will be subject to sanctions equivalent to those that would apply to an importer in its territory. that makes false declarations or declarations in relation to an import, with the modifications that the circumstances require.

3. If, before initiating a verification, an importer has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which the declaration is based contains incorrect information, he may present a corrected declaration, pay the corresponding customs duties and taxes and avail himself of the provisions of the legislation of the importing Party regarding the reduction or elimination of sanctions.


Article 4.17: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

Competent Authority means

(a) in the case of Chile, the General Directorate of International Economic Relations; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the National Directorate for Integration and International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism;

Investigative Authority means

(a) in the case of Chile, the Chilean National Customs Service; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the National Directorate for Integration and International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism;

change of chapter means change of tariff classification at the two-digit level of the Harmonized System or NALADISA;

change of heading means change of tariff classification at the four-digit level of the Harmonized System or NALADISA;

change of subheading means change of tariff classification at the six-digit level of the Harmonized System or NALADISA;

material means a good that is used in the production or transformation of another good and includes components, inputs, raw materials or parts and pieces;

non-originating materials means materials imported from non-Party countries and materials purchased locally or imported from the other Party, when they do not comply with the rules of origin of this Chapter;

identical merchandise means “identical merchandise” as defined in the Customs Valuation Agreement;

value corresponds to the value of a merchandise or material, according to the rules of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

CIF value port of destination or CIF maritime port corresponds to the value of the materials, including the expenses of their transfer to the port or place of introduction in the importing country; and

FOB export value corresponds to the value of the goods free on board, regardless of the means of transport, at the port or place of final shipment abroad.

Chapter 5

Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation

Article 5.1: Publication

1. Each Party, in accordance with the provisions of its national legislation, shall publish its customs laws, regulations and administrative procedures on the Internet or on a comparable computer telecommunications network.

2. Each Party shall designate one or more contact points to whom interested persons may address their queries related to customs matters, and shall make available on the Internet information on the procedures for formulating said queries.

3. To the extent possible, each Party shall publish in advance any regulations of general application regarding customs matters that it proposes to adopt and provide an opportunity to comment on such regulations prior to their adoption.


Article 5.2: Clearance of goods

1. The Parties shall adopt and maintain simplified customs procedures to achieve an efficient and rapid customs clearance mechanism.

2. In order to achieve this objective, the Parties undertake that the dispatch of the merchandise is carried out:

(a) to the extent possible, within 48 hours of the arrival of the goods;

(b) at the place of arrival and without necessarily being moved and provisionally deposited in warehouses or other facilities; and

(c) before the presentation of the goods to customs.


Article 5.3: Automation

1. The Parties will work so that the adoption of the use of information technology allows expedited procedures in the dispatch of merchandise. When installing computer applications, the Parties must take into account international norms or standards.

2. The Parties shall adopt or maintain accessible computer systems, so that authorized customs users can transmit their declarations to customs.

3. The Parties will endeavor to implement automated electronic systems that allow the recording of information for the purpose of improving risk analysis evaluation techniques, among others.


Article 5.4: Risk assessment

Each Party shall endeavor to adopt or maintain risk management systems in its verification activities, which allow its customs authority to focus its inspection activities on high-risk merchandise and simplify the clearance and movement of low-risk merchandise, respecting the nature confidentiality of the information obtained through such activities.


Article 5.5: Customs Cooperation

1. Each Party shall endeavor to notify the other Party in advance of any significant changes to its administrative policy related to the implementation of its customs legislation that could significantly affect the operation of this Agreement.

2. The Parties will promote and facilitate cooperation between their respective customs administrations and, particularly, with regard to the simplification of customs processing and procedures, without undermining their control powers.

3. Without prejudice to the provisions of other cooperation agreements, the Parties agree to cooperate in compliance with their laws and regulations regarding:

(a) the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this Agreement relating to the importation of goods, including the provisions related to national treatment and market access for goods, as well as rules and procedures of origin;

(b) the implementation and application of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) the simplification of the requirements and formalities regarding the clearance of merchandise;

(d) the adoption, whenever possible, of measures that allow the reduction, simplification and harmonization of the data contained in the documents required by customs, in particular, the customs documents for the entry and exit of goods;

(e) the provision of technical assistance, including, where appropriate, the organization of seminars and internships;

(f) advice and technical assistance in order to improve risk assessment techniques in the search for mechanisms to prevent and avoid illegal activities, in particular, the illegal traffic of goods from one of the Parties or from non-Party countries;

(g) increase the use of technologies; and

(h) this Chapter and any other customs matters that the Parties may agree upon.

4. The Parties shall promptly and timely exchange information concerning the prevention, investigation, and repression of customs infractions and with respect to matters concerning origin, subject to the rules on confidentiality provided in the legislation of each Party.

5. Each Party shall endeavor to provide the other Party with any other information that may assist in determining whether imports or exports from or to the other Party comply with its applicable import laws and regulations, in particular, those related to the prevention of illegal activities.

6. The Parties may elaborate and execute by mutual agreement, technical cooperation programs and projects that allow the creation and development of a level of interconnection between the customs administrations in aspects previously identified by them.

7. Notwithstanding the Bilateral Agreement on Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters, signed on September 16, 2004 and the provisions of this Chapter, the Parties may sign other agreements on customs matters.


Article 5.6: Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its legislation, the confidentiality of confidential information obtained pursuant to this Chapter and shall protect it from any disclosure that could harm the competitive position of the persons who provide it. Likewise, when a Party supplies information to the other Party in accordance with this Chapter and designates it as confidential, the other Party will permanently maintain the confidentiality of said information, and will not disclose it without the prior consent of the Party that supplied it.

2. The confidential information obtained in accordance with this Chapter may only be made known to the judicial authorities and those responsible for the administration and application of determinations of origin and customs or tax matters, as appropriate.


Article 5.7: Express Delivery Shipments

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain separate and expedited customs procedures for expedited shipments while allowing for proper selection and control by customs. These procedures must allow:

(a) that the information necessary for the clearance of the shipment can be presented and processed by the customs authority of the Party, before the arrival of the shipment;

(b) that a shipper presents a manifest or single document that covers all the merchandise contained in a shipment transported through an express delivery service, if possible through electronic means;

(c) that, to the extent possible, reduce the documentation required for the clearance of the shipment; and

(d) that, under normal circumstances, the dispatch of the shipment is carried out within a period not exceeding six hours from the presentation of all the documentation required by customs for said dispatch.


Article 5.8: Review and Challenge

Each Party shall ensure that, with respect to its administrative acts on customs matters, importers in its territory have access to:

(a) a level of administrative review independent of the official or office that adopted the administrative act subject to review; and

(b) a level of judicial review of the administrative act issued in the final instance of administrative review.


Article 5.9: Sanctions

Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that allow the imposition of civil, administrative and, when applicable, criminal sanctions for non-compliance with its customs laws and regulations, including those that regulate tariff classification, customs valuation, rules of origin and requirements to guarantee preferential tariff treatment. in accordance with this Agreement.


Article 5.10: Advance Rulings

1. Each Party, prior to the importation of a good into its territory, shall issue advance written resolutions at the written request of the importer in its territory, or of the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, in relation to:

(a) tariff classification;

(b) if a good qualifies as an originating good in accordance with Chapter 4 (Regime of Origin); either

(c) any other matters that the Parties agree.

2. Each Party shall issue the advance ruling within 150 days of the request, provided that the applicant has submitted all the information that the Party requires, including, if requested, a sample of the merchandise for which the applicant is requesting. an advance resolution. In issuing an advance ruling, the Party shall take into account the facts and circumstances that the applicant has presented.

3. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings enter into force from the date of their issuance, or another date specified in the ruling, up to a maximum period of 3 years, provided that the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based they have not changed.

4. The Party issuing the ruling may modify or revoke an advance ruling after the Party notifies the applicant when justified by facts or circumstances, such as when the information on which the ruling is based is false or incorrect. .

5. When an importer requests the treatment agreed to a merchandise in accordance with the advance resolution, the customs authority may assess whether the facts or circumstances of the importation are consistent with the facts or circumstances on which the advance resolution was based.

6. Each Party shall make its advance rulings publicly available, subject to the confidentiality conditions of its legislation, in order to promote the consistent application of advance rulings to other goods.

7. If the applicant provides false information or omits relevant circumstances or facts in its request for advance ruling, or fails to act in accordance with the terms and conditions of the ruling, the importing Party may apply appropriate measures, including civil, criminal and administrative, fines or other sanctions.


Article 5.11: Tariff Classification Committee

1. The Tariff Classification Committee will be the body in charge of advising on differences that arise in terms of tariff classification between the Parties.

2. The Committee will be established by the Administrative Commission at the request of the Parties and must act in accordance with the regulations approved by the latter.

3. In order to issue its recommendation, the Committee may consult ALADI or the Directorate of Nomenclature and Trade of the World Customs Organization.

4. The Committee will forward its recommendation to the Administrative Commission within a period of 30 days, unless the Administrative Commission decides otherwise, for its adoption, if it deems it appropriate.


Article 5.12: Implementation

1. For the purposes of implementing the obligations related to:

(a) Publication, articles 5.1.1 and 5.1.2: 2 years;

(b) Dispatch, articles 5.2.(b) and 5.2(c): 1 year;

(c) Express Shipping, Article 5.7(d): 2 years; and

(d) Advance Resolutions, article 5.10(b): 3 years.

2. The terms indicated in paragraph 1(b), (c) and (d) will be counted from the entry into force of the Trade Promotion Agreement signed between Peru and the United States of America, on April 12, 2006.

 

Chapter 6

Regime for the Application of Safeguards 1

Article 6.1: Bilateral Safeguards

1. A Party may apply bilateral safeguard measures, if it is established, by virtue of the procedures set forth in this Regime, that as a result of unforeseen circumstances and particularly as a result of the agreed tariff concessions, imports into its territory of a merchandise originating from the other Party in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production and in such conditions that imports of that merchandise constitute a substantial cause of serious injury or a threat thereof to a branch of domestic production that produces a merchandise similar or directly competitive. The Party into whose territory the good is being imported may, to the minimum extent necessary to remedy or prevent the damage:

(a) suspend the future reduction of any rate of duty established in the Agreement for the good;

(b) partially reduce the margin of preference achieved by the reduction program;

(c) increase the rate of duty for the good, to a level not to exceed the lesser of

(i) the rate of duty applied to the most favored nation at the time the action is taken, or

(ii) the tariff rate applied to the most favored nation on the day immediately prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. The procedure that may lead to the application of a safeguard measure in accordance with paragraph 1, shall be subject to the following conditions:

(a) the Party shall promptly notify the other Party in writing of the initiation of the procedure that could result in the application of a safeguard measure against a good originating in the territory of the other Party, requesting at the same time the implementation of consultations;

(b) any measure of this nature will begin to be applied no later than one year from the date of commencement of the procedure; and

(c) the safeguard measures will have a term of application of up to 2 years, including the term in which provisional measures would have been in force.

If the causes that motivated the measure persist, the safeguards may be extended for 1 year, for which the corresponding justification shall be presented to the other Party, 30 days in advance.

Throughout the extension period, the measure will be less restrictive than the original. The Parties shall hold consultations, prior to the adoption of the extension, to examine the effectiveness of the easing of the extended measure. The Party applying the extension shall provide evidence to support that the industry in question is in the process of adjustment;

(d) a Party that has applied safeguard measures to an originating good of the other Party may not apply them again to the importation of that good, unless a period of non-application equal to the period of validity of the measure has elapsed, and which, in any case, may not be less than 24 months;

(e) at the end of the period of application of the measure, the tariff that will be applied to the merchandise subject to the same, will be the one that would have been in force if the measure had not been applied, according to the Liberation Program established in the Agreement;

(f) the safeguard measures that are applied in accordance with this Chapter will not affect commercial operations in progress.

3. The imposition of a safeguard measure shall not reduce the imports in question below the average of imports made in the last 3 representative years for which statistics are available, unless clear justification is given for the need to fix a different level to prevent or repair serious harm.


Article 6.2: Provisional Safeguards

1. In critical circumstances, in which any delay entails damage that is difficult to repair, the Party that applies a measure in accordance with Article 6.1, may adopt a provisional safeguard measure by virtue of a preliminary but objective determination of the existence of clear evidence that increased imports have caused or threaten to cause serious injury to a domestic industry. Immediately after the provisional safeguard measure has been adopted, notification and justification shall be made, and the affected Party may request consultations in accordance with the provisions of Article 6.1.2(a).

2. The duration of a provisional safeguard measure will not exceed 180 days and will adopt any of the forms provided for in article 6.1.1.

3. Provisional safeguard measures shall not be applied to products whose imports have been subject to measures of this nature during the immediately preceding twenty-four months.

4. In the case of goods included in Annexes 3.2-A and 3.2-B in the 10, 15 and 18 year reduction schedules, a Party may exceptionally apply special provisional measures for a period of 60 days, when the a reduction in export prices of such magnitude in a good originating from the other Party, which makes it possible to objectively demonstrate, within said period, a threat of serious damage to a domestic industry producing a similar good or directly competitive with the Party importer. In order to continue with the application of a provisional measure for up to a maximum period of 180 days, the Parties must accept and comply with the requirements established in this article.

The Party that applies this special safeguard may not invoke it again until 360 days have elapsed since the adoption of the original measure.

5. If in the subsequent investigation it is determined that the grounds invoked for the application of the measure have not caused or threatened to cause serious damage to a branch of national production, the amount received by way of provisional measures will be promptly reimbursed or will release the guarantee guaranteed for said concept, as appropriate.

6. During the period of validity of the provisional measures, the pertinent provisions of articles 6.1, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, and 6.7 will be complied with.


Article 6.3: Global Safeguards

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.

2. Any exception in the application of measures adopted by virtue of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards, which is granted by any of the Parties to a non-Party country will be extended, in the circumstances and conditions that the exception was granted. , automatically to the other Party.

3. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party in writing of the initiation of a procedure that could result in the application of a global safeguard measure. In this sense, none of the Parties may apply a measure provided for in paragraph 1 that imposes restrictions on a good benefited by the Agreement without prior notification, submitted in writing to the Administrative Commission.


Article 6.4: Procedures Related to Safeguard Measures

1. The Parties shall not apply, in their reciprocal trade, safeguard measures of Article 6.1 and 6.3 simultaneously.

2. The Parties may only apply safeguard measures of a tariff nature in their reciprocal trade.

3. Each Party shall establish or maintain equitable, timely, transparent, and effective procedures for the application of safeguard measures, in accordance with the requirements indicated in Article 6.7.

4. For the adoption of safeguard measures, each Party shall entrust the determination of the existence of serious damage or threat thereof to a competent investigating authority.


Article 6.5: Settlement of Disputes in the Area of ​​Safeguard Measures

Neither Party may resort to the Dispute Settlement procedure established in Chapter 16 (Dispute Settlement), before the safeguards have effectively been applied.


Article 6.6: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

threat of serious harm means the clear imminence of serious harm which must be based on facts and not simply on allegations, conjectures or remote possibilities;

competent investigating authority means the "competent investigating authority" of a Party, which shall be notified by the latter to the Administrative Commission;

critical circumstances means circumstances in which a delay may cause damage that is difficult to repair, in the domestic industry;

serious damage means a significant general deterioration of a branch of national production;

absolute increase means a significant increase in imports above trend during a recent representative base period;

increase in relation to national production means an increase in the share of preferential imports with respect to national production; and

branch of national production means the group of producers of the similar or directly competitive merchandise that operates in the territory of one of the Parties.


Article 6.7: Administration of Procedures Related to Safeguard Measures

Beginning of the Procedure

1. The procedures for the adoption of safeguard measures may be initiated by request of an entity or entities that prove to be representative, in terms such that they constitute a significant proportion of national production, of the industry that manufactures a similar merchandise or directly competitive with the imported merchandise.

2. A Party may initiate the procedure ex officio by requesting that the competent investigating authority carry it out.

Application Content

3. When the investigation is carried out at the request of a representative entity of a branch of national production, the petitioner will provide the following information in said request, to the extent that such information is of a public nature and can be obtained from government sources or other and, in the event that it is not available, it will provide the best estimates that it can make on said information as well as the bases that support those estimates:

(a) description of the merchandise: the name and description of the imported merchandise in question, the tariff subheading in which it is classified and the current tariff treatment, as well as the name and description of the similar or directly competitive national merchandise;

(b) representativeness

(i) the names and addresses of the entities submitting the request, as well as the location of the establishments where the national merchandise in question is produced,

(ii) the percentage of the national production of the similar or directly competitive merchandise that such entities represent and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of an industry, and

(iii) the names and location of other national establishments where the similar or directly competitive merchandise is produced;

(c) import figures: import data for not less than 3 and not more than 5 most recent years;

(d) figures on national production: the data on the total national production of the similar or directly competitive merchandise, corresponding to the period indicated in subparagraph (c);

(e) data demonstrating the damage: the quantitative and objective indicators that denote the nature and extent of the damage caused to the industry in question, such as those that demonstrate changes in the levels of sales, prices, production, productivity, use of installed capacity, market share, profits or losses, and employment;

(f) cause of the damage: the enumeration and description of the presumed causes of the damage or threat thereof, and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports of that merchandise, in absolute terms or relative to national production , is the cause of serious damage or threat thereof, supported by pertinent information; and

(g) criteria for inclusion: quantitative and objective information indicating the share of imports from the territory of the other Party, as well as the applicant's considerations on the degree to which such imports significantly contribute to the serious injury or threat of the same.

Notice Requirement

4. When initiating a procedure for the adoption of safeguard measures, the competent investigating authority shall publish the notification of its initiation in the Official Gazette of the Party. The notification will contain the following information: the applicant's name; the indication of the imported merchandise subject to the procedure and its tariff subheading; the nature and terms in which the resolution would be issued; the deadlines for the presentation of reports, declarations and other documents before the competent investigative authority; the place where the application and other documents submitted during the procedure can be inspected; and the name, address, and telephone number of the office where more information can be obtained.

5. When a proceeding for the adoption of safeguard measures is initiated by a request submitted by an entity that claims to be representative of a domestic industry, the competent investigating authority shall not publish the notification required in paragraph 4 without first carefully evaluating if the application meets the requirements set forth in paragraph 3, including that of representativeness.

Confidential information

6. Once the applications have been submitted, they will be public knowledge. The competent investigating authority shall not disclose in its report any information that has been provided to it in confidence or that it has undertaken to keep confidential during the proceedings.

The competent investigating authority shall establish or maintain procedures for the handling of information that is provided to it as confidential and that which is protected as such by national legislation, that is provided during the procedure, and will require the interested parties to provide such information. by providing non-confidential written summaries thereof.

Non-confidential summaries must allow a reasonable understanding of the information supplied in confidence. If the interested parties point out the impossibility of summarizing this information, they will explain the reasons that prevent it.

Proof of Damage and Causal Relationship

7. To carry out the procedure, the competent investigating authority will collect all the pertinent information to issue the corresponding resolution. It will assess the relevant factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that affect the situation of that branch of national production, including the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the merchandise in question in absolute and relative terms, as appropriate; the proportion of the domestic market covered by imports; and changes in the levels of sales, production, productivity, utilization of installed capacity, profits or losses, and employment. In order to issue its decision, the competent investigating authority may, in addition,

8. The competent investigating authority will not issue an affirmative decision on the existence of damage unless its investigation demonstrates, based on objective evidence, the existence of a clear causal relationship between the increase in imports of the merchandise in question and the damage. serious or threat thereof. Except as provided in Article 2.4, when other factors, apart from the increase in imports, cause, at the same time, damage to a branch of national production, this damage will not be attributed to the aforementioned increase.

Deliberation and Report

9. Pursuant to the legislation and practices of each Party, the competent investigating authority shall make available to any interested party and to the general public a report containing the background information and non-confidential grounds that were taken into consideration to reach the results of the investigation. the investigation and all reasoned conclusions relating to the relevant issues of fact and law. Likewise, a summary of said report, together with the Resolution that provides for the application of the adopted measure, will be published in a timely manner in the Official Gazette of the Party that applies the measure.

Chapter 7

Antidumping and Countervailing Duties

Article 7.1

1. The Parties condemn all unfair trade practices and undertake to eliminate measures that may cause distortions in bilateral trade.

2. In this regard, they agree not to grant new subsidies to exports that affect trade between the Parties and, no later than December 31, 2002, will not apply to reciprocal trade covered by the Liberalization Program of this Agreement. , programs or incentives that constitute export subsidies. Those products that after 12.31.2002 enjoy export subsidies will not benefit from the Liberation Program.


Article 7.2

1. In the event of reciprocal trade distortions arising from the application of export subsidies or appealable subsidies in accordance with the WTO and other unfair trade practices, the affected country may apply the measures provided for in its national legislation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an exchange of information will simultaneously take place through the competent national bodies referred to in Annex 15.1.1.

2. The Parties shall apply their rules and procedures in these matters, in accordance with the provisions of GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement.

 

Chapter 8

Competition Policy

Article 8.1: Goals

1. Recognizing that conduct subject to this Chapter has the potential to restrict trade, the Parties consider that outlawing such anti-competitive conduct, implementing free competition policies, and exercising cooperation will help ensure the benefits of this Agreement.
2. In this sense, the Parties undertake to apply their respective laws on free competition in a manner compatible with this Chapter, in order to prevent the benefits of the liberalization process of trade in goods, services and investments from being seen reduced or canceled due to anti-competitive practices. To this end, the Parties agree to establish cooperation and coordination between their competition authorities by virtue of the provisions of this Chapter.

3. In order to prevent distortions or restrictions of competition that may affect trade in goods or services between them, the Parties shall pay special attention to anti-competitive agreements, concerted practices and abusive behavior resulting from individual dominant positions or joint.

4. The Parties agree to cooperate and coordinate their actions for the application of their laws on free competition. This cooperation will include notification, consultation, information exchange and technical assistance.


Article 8.2: Legislation and Competition Authorities

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain national legislation on free competition, which promotes economic efficiency and general welfare, which proscribes anti-competitive business practices, whether carried out by public or private companies, and shall adopt appropriate actions with respect to such practices.
2. Each Party shall maintain a national authority or authorities responsible for enforcing its free competition laws. The enforcement policy of the national authorities of the Parties shall not discriminate against persons, on the basis of their nationality, in their proceedings.

3. The Parties recognize the value of transparency in free competition policies.

4. Each Party shall guarantee the application of due process in investigations that concern its legislation on free competition.

5. Each Party will maintain the autonomy to develop and apply its free competition legislation.

6. If there is any exclusion, exception or authorization from the coverage of national free competition rules, each Party shall ensure that these are not carried out in a discriminatory manner, as well as that they do not generate anti-competitive effects, directly or indirectly, in the territory of the other Party.

7. In the event of export cartels, the Parties must ensure that they are covered by their respective free competition laws, when they are developing anti-competitive business practices that generate effects in the territory of the other Party.


Article 8.3: Anti-Competitive Business Practices with Cross-Border Effects

1. The Parties shall have the power to prosecute those anti-competitive business practices that are generated in their territory, the effects of which are manifested in the territory of the other Party.
2. When a Party detects indications of anticompetitive business practices generated in the territory of the other Party that produce effects in its territory, it may request the other Party to initiate an investigation.

3. The requested Party shall carry out the investigation in accordance with the procedures set forth in its free competition legislation.


Article 8.4: Cooperation

1. The Parties agree to cooperate in the area of ​​free competition policy. The Parties recognize the importance of cooperation and coordination between their respective authorities to achieve the effective application of their free competition laws in the free trade area.

2. In order to achieve effective cooperation, the Parties, through their free competition authorities, will enter into cooperation agreements or conventions.

3. In order to ensure the application and implementation of the provisions of this Chapter, particularly with regard to the development of cooperation mechanisms between the respective free competition authorities, the Parties shall establish a Working Group made up of representatives of each Party.

4. The Working Group will make a report on the status of its work to the Administrative Commission no later than 3 years after the entry into force of this Agreement, and may make any recommendations it deems appropriate for the concretion of future actions. in the matter.


Article 8.5: Coordination between Free Competition Authorities

1. In those cases that involve anti-competitive acts originating in the territory of a Party that, in whole or in part, produce or may produce effects in the territory of the other Party, the free competition authorities of the Parties may carry out their activities. of application of their laws in close coordination. This coordination shall not prevent the Parties from making autonomous decisions.

2. "Enforcement activity" shall mean any antitrust enforcement measure through investigations or proceedings carried out by the antitrust authority of a Party, which may result in the imposition of sanctions or the adoption of corrective measures.


Article 8.6: Notifications

1. Each free competition authority shall notify the free competition authority of the other Party of any enforcement activity of its laws that may affect important interests of the other Party, specifically when said activity:

(a) refers to anti-competitive acts originating in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) refers to anti-competitive acts that produce or may produce effects in the territory of the other Party.

2. As long as it is not contrary to the free competition legislation of the Parties or affects any ongoing investigation, the notification will be made at an early stage of the procedure. The free competition authority of the Party that carries out the enforcement activity of its legislation may take into consideration the observations received from the other Party in its decision-making.

3. The notifications provided for in paragraph 1 must be sufficiently detailed to allow an evaluation in light of the interests of the other Party, and must include, among others, the identification of the entities or localities involved, the specification of the goods and particular markets concerned, and any indication of practices that could restrict trade between the Parties.


Article 8.7: Queries

1. For the purpose of promoting understanding between the Parties, or to address specific matters that may arise in accordance with this Chapter, each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, initiate consultations regarding the request that the other Party may make. .

2. In its request, the Party shall indicate, if relevant, how this matter affects bilateral trade. The aforementioned Party must give the greatest consideration to the concerns of the other Party, without prejudice to its total autonomy to develop and apply its free competition legislation.


Article 8.8: Information Sharing and Confidentiality

1. In order to facilitate the effective application of their free competition laws, the competent authorities of the Parties shall exchange information about any ongoing investigation into anti-competitive business practices that could affect trade between the Parties, including the preliminary phase of the same.

2. The information exchanged will only be used as a means of proof for the effective application of the free competition legislation of the Parties and respecting the purpose for which it was compiled by the sending authority.

3. The Parties may exchange confidential information. In any case, they will not disclose said information without the consent of the Party that provided it.

4. In particular, when so provided by the legislation of a Party, confidential information may be provided to their respective courts of justice, provided that the latter maintain its confidentiality.

5. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 14 (Transparency), the Parties agree to exchange information regarding the sanctions and corrective measures applied in cases in which anti-competitive acts originate, produce or may produce effects in the territory of the other part. To this end, they will provide a summary of the case and the text of the resolution as soon as possible.


Article 8.9: Technical assistance

The Parties may provide mutual technical assistance in order to take advantage of their experiences and strengthen the application of their legislation and free competition policy.


Article 8.10: Public Companies and Companies Holders of Special or Exclusive Rights, Including Designated Monopolies

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from designating or maintaining public or private monopolies under its laws. In any case, the effects of its economic activity in the territory of the other Party shall be subject without limitations to the scope of its competition legislation.

2. With respect to public enterprises and enterprises that have been granted special or exclusive rights, including designated monopolies as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no trade-distorting measures shall be adopted or maintained. goods or services between the Parties that are contrary to the interests of the other Party.

3. Likewise, the Parties shall ensure that said companies are subject to the rules of free competition to the extent that the application of such rules does not hinder the achievement, in fact or in law, of objectives of high public interest or of express national convenience that have been expressly assigned to them.

4. The action of public companies will be carried out on an equal footing with private agents that may participate in economic activity.

5. Public enterprises and enterprises holding special or exclusive rights, including designated monopolies, shall grant non-discriminatory treatment to covered investments, to the goods of the other Party, and to service providers of the other Party.

6. This article is not applicable to public procurement.


Article 8.12: Dispute Resolution

Neither Party may resort to the dispute resolution procedure under Chapter 16 (Dispute Resolution), with respect to any matter derived from this Chapter.


Article 8.13: Final Provisions

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in such a way as to modify rights or obligations under any other Chapter of the Agreement.

 

Chapter 9

Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

Article 9.1: Goals

1. The purpose of this Chapter is to facilitate trade in animals, products and by-products of animal origin, plants and products and by-products of plant origin between the Parties, while protecting human, animal and plant life and health.

2. The Parties undertake to prevent their sanitary and phytosanitary standards from constituting barriers to trade.


Article 9.2: General disposition

1. The Parties shall be governed by the provisions of the SPS Agreement and the Decisions adopted by the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures , regarding the adoption and application of all sanitary and phytosanitary measures that directly or indirectly affect trade. of animals and products and by-products of animal origin, plants and products and by-products of plant origin between the Parties.

1. They will also be governed by the provisions of the Cooperation and Coordination Agreement on Agricultural Health signed between the National Agrarian Health Service (SENASA) of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Peru and the Agricultural and Livestock Service (SAG) of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile. In the event of any inconsistency or inconsistency between Annex 9.2.2 and the provisions of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency or inconsistency.

3. The definitions of Annex A of the SPS Agreement shall apply to this Chapter, as well as those established in the glossaries of harmonized terms of the international organizations of reference: the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), the International Plant Protection Convention ( IPPC), and the Codex Alimentarius (Codex).

4. The animal health and food safety regulations referred to in this Chapter are also understood to refer to hydrobiological resources, including products and by-products.


Article 9.3: Rights and obligations

1. The Parties shall use international standards, guidelines and recommendations as the basis for the adoption or application of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

2. The Parties may establish or maintain sanitary and phytosanitary measures that offer a higher level of protection than would be achieved by a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that there are scientific grounds.


Article 9.4: Equivalence

A Party will accept as equivalent the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the other Party, provided that the latter demonstrates that it achieves, at least, the appropriate level of protection of the other Party. For such purposes, the Parties may request the evaluation of the systems and structures of the Competent Authority.


Article 9.5: Recognition of Free Zones or Low Prevalence of Pests or Diseases

1. For the recognition of free or low prevalence areas of pests or diseases, the procedure shall be in accordance with Article 6 of the SPS Agreement and the international standards of reference.

2. The respective recognition periods and procedures shall be agreed between the competent authorities in sanitary and phytosanitary matters of each Party. The importing Party will decide on the request for recognition of the status of a free zone or zone with low prevalence of pests or diseases, taking into account the agreed deadlines and recognition procedures.

3. Each Party will resolve, within the agreed deadlines and in the most expeditious manner, the requests for recognition of areas free or of low prevalence of pests or diseases of the other Party, which have been determined as such by the competent international organizations.


Article 9.6: Risk Assessment and Appropriate Level of Protection

1. The Parties undertake that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures are based on an evaluation appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks to the life and health of people, animals and plants, taking into account the guidelines prepared by the organizations competent international

2. When establishing their appropriate level of protection, the Parties shall take into account the risk assessment techniques developed by the competent international organizations, as well as the objective of minimizing the negative effects on trade and shall avoid making arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions in the levels it deems appropriate in different situations, if such distinctions result in discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade.


Article 9.7: Agreements between Competent Authorities

1. In order to prevent animal and plant health and food safety regulations from becoming obstacles to trade, the competent authorities in sanitary and phytosanitary matters of the Parties may sign cooperation and coordination agreements to facilitate the exchange of goods. without presenting a health risk for both countries.

2. These agreements may establish the necessary mechanisms and instruments to achieve transparency, fluidity and deadlines in the procedures for determining equivalence, recognition of free areas or areas with low prevalence of pests or diseases, granting of authorizations and certifications, among others.


Article 9.8: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, with the objective of addressing issues related to the implementation of this Chapter.

2. The Committee will be made up of representatives of the competent authorities in sanitary and phytosanitary and trade matters, indicated in Annex 9.10.

3. The Committee shall meet no later than 1 year after the entry into force of this Agreement, and at least once a year or as agreed by the Parties. The Committee will meet in person, by teleconference or videoconference, or through other means. In its first session, the Committee will establish its rules of procedure and a work program, which will be updated according to the matters of interest proposed by the Parties.

4. The functions of the Committee will be:

(a) enhance bilateral understanding on specific implementation issues relating to the SPS Agreement;

(b) serve as a forum to monitor the commitments established in the work programs, evaluate progress regarding the treatment of sanitary and phytosanitary issues that may arise between the competent authorities of the Parties;

(c) serve as a forum for technical consultations, when a Party so notifies the Committee, which will facilitate said consultations;

(d) establish working groups or ad hoc technical groups , when required;

(e) consult on issues, positions and agendas of the meetings of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO, those that take place within the framework of the Codex Alimentarius , the International Plant Protection Convention , the World Health Organization Animal , in addition to other international forums of which both Parties are members;

(f) promote and monitor technical cooperation programs on sanitary and phytosanitary matters among the competent authorities;

(g) modify, when pertinent, Annex 9.10 referring to the competent authorities and contact points; and

(h) other functions that the Parties mutually agree.


Article 9.9: Queries and Dispute Resolution

1. In the event that a Party considers that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure affects its trade with the other Party, it may request technical consultations from the competent coordinating authority of the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Committee of the other Party. Said consultations will be carried out within 45 days of receiving the request, unless the Parties agree to another term, and may be carried out via teleconference, videoconference, or any other means, mutually agreed upon by the Parties.

2. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with paragraph 1, such consultations shall replace those provided for in Article 16.4 (Consultations).


Article 9.10: Competent Authorities

The competent authorities of the Parties are those mentioned in this Chapter, in the manner provided in Annex 9.10.

 

Chapter 10

Technical Barriers to Trade

 

General disposition


Article 10.1:

1. This Chapter applies to the standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures 1 of the Parties, both at the national and local levels, which may directly or indirectly affect reciprocal trade in goods.

2. The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to sanitary and phytosanitary measures, which will be governed by Chapter 9 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures).

3. This Chapter shall not apply to public procurement specifications established by government institutions.


Article 10.2:

The Parties will use as a basis for the preparation, adoption and application of their standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, the international guidelines and recommendations in the terms established in the TBT Agreement, as well as the provisions established in this Chapter.


Article 10.3:

1. The Parties shall ensure that standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures are not prepared, adopted or applied that have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to reciprocal trade.

2. Each Party shall adopt the necessary measures to guarantee compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, both at the national and local levels, as well as the measures that are within their reach with respect to duly recognized non-governmental organizations in their territory.


Trade Facilitation


Article 10.4:

1. The Parties will intensify their joint work in the field of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures with a view to facilitating access to their respective markets. In particular, the Parties will seek to identify bilateral initiatives that are appropriate for particular issues or sectors.

2. Such initiatives may include cooperation on regulatory matters, such as convergence or equivalence of regulations and technical standards, alignment with international standards, reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity, recognition and acceptance of results of conformity assessment procedures, and the use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies, as well as cooperation through mutual recognition.


Article 10.5:

1. The Parties shall establish the necessary mechanisms and instruments to achieve transparency, fluidity and deadlines in the procedures for granting authorizations, certifications and registrations or sanitary registries.

2. The Parties undertake to issue the respective sanitary inscriptions or records or other procedures concerning this area for marketing, import or export, within the terms established in Annex 10.5, in order to guarantee access and trade of the goods affected by these regulations.

3. Non-observance of the longer of the deadlines established by the Parties, the same ones that are contained in Annex 10.5, will be considered non-compliance.

4. In the event that the deadlines in Annex 10.5 are subject to modification for duly justified reasons, these must be communicated through the authorities designated for the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade. The Parties will try not to extend the indicated deadlines.


Technical Regulations


Article 10.6:

1. Technical regulations shall not be more trade restrictive than necessary to achieve a legitimate objective, taking into account the risks that failure to achieve them would create. Such legitimate objectives are among others: the imperatives of national security, the prevention of practices that may mislead; the protection of human health or safety, of animal or plant life or health, or of the environment. When evaluating these risks, the relevant elements to take into consideration are, among others: the available scientific and technical information, the related processing technology or the final uses to which the goods are put.

2. With regard to technical regulations, each Party shall grant the goods of the other Party national treatment and treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar goods originating from any non-Party country.

3. The adopted technical regulations will not be maintained if the circumstances that gave rise to their adoption no longer exist, or if the determined objectives can be met in a less restrictive manner.


Article 10.7:

As long as it is certain that the technical regulations adequately fulfill the legitimate objectives, each Party will accept as equivalent the technical regulations of the other Party, even if they differ from its own. In order to reach a mutually satisfactory understanding in this regard, the Parties may carry out prior consultations.


Conformity Assessment


Article 10.8:

1. Acknowledging the existence of differences in the conformity assessment procedures in their respective territories, the Parties will make the conformity assessment procedures compatible to the greatest degree possible, in accordance with international standards in this area and with the provisions of this Chapter. conformity assessment.

2. The Parties recognize that there is a wide range of mechanisms that facilitate the acceptance of conformity assessment results, including:

(a) the importing Party's reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity;

(b) voluntary agreements between the conformity assessment bodies of the territory of each Party;

(c) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures with respect to specific regulations, carried out by bodies located in the territory of the other Party;

(d) accreditation procedures to qualify conformity assessment bodies;

(e) the government designation of conformity assessment bodies; and

(f) the recognition by a Party of the results of conformity assessments carried out in the territory of the other Party.

3. The Parties will intensify their exchange of information on the range of mechanisms that facilitate the acceptance of conformity assessment results.

4. In the event that a Party does not accept the results of the conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, it shall, at the request of the other Party, explain its reasons for corrective actions to be taken if necessary. necessary.

5. Each Party shall accredit, approve, authorize, or otherwise recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party, on terms no less favorable than those granted to conformity assessment bodies in its territory. . If a Party accredits, approves, authorizes, or otherwise recognizes a body that assesses conformity with a particular regulation or technical standard in its territory and refuses to accredit, approves, authorize, or otherwise recognize a body that assesses the compliance with that regulation or technical standard in the territory of the other Party must, upon request, explain the reasons for its rejection so that corrective actions can be taken if necessary.

6. If a Party rejects a request by the other Party to enter into or conclude negotiations to reach an agreement that facilitates the recognition in its territory of the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out by bodies in the territory of the other Party, she shall, upon request, explain the reasons for her decision.

7. The Parties shall seek to ensure that the conformity assessment procedures applied between them facilitate trade, ensuring that they are not more restrictive than necessary to provide the importing Party with confidence that the goods comply with the applicable technical regulations, taking into account Consideration of the risks that the nonconformity would create.

8. In order to enhance confidence in the sustained mutual reliability of conformity assessment results, the Parties may consult, as appropriate, to reach a mutually satisfactory understanding on issues such as the technical competence of the conformity assessment bodies involved.


Article 10.9:

The Parties agree to adopt, for trade purposes, the International System of Units.


Article 10.10: Transparency

1. The Parties shall transmit electronically, through the contact point established for each Party under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, the draft technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that they intend to adopt, at the same time that the Party notifies to the other members of the WTO, in accordance with the TBT Agreement.

2. Each Party will grant a period of at least 60 days from the transmission of the notification mentioned in paragraph 1, so that the interested parties can present and formulate observations and queries regarding such measures, so that the Party notifying party can absolve them and take them into account. To the extent possible, the notifying Party will give favorable consideration to the requests of the other Party to extend the period established for comments.

3. In the event that urgent problems related to legitimate objectives arise or threaten to arise for one of the Parties and it adopts a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure, it must notify the other Party electronically, through the aforementioned contact point. , at the same time as the other members of the WTO are notified.

4. The Parties shall notify, to the extent possible, including those technical regulations that are consistent with the technical content of the relevant international standards.

5. Each Party shall publish, in print or electronically, or otherwise make available to the public, its responses to significant comments at the same time as the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure is published.

6. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, provide information about the objectives and reasons for a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that the Party has adopted or proposes to adopt.

7. Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one Information Center in its territory capable of responding to all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing relevant documentation in relation to all regarding this Chapter.

8. Regarding the exchange of information, in accordance with Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, the Parties must apply the recommendations indicated in the Decisions and Recommendations Document adopted by the Committee since January 1, 1995 , G/TBT/1/Rev .8, May 23, 2002, Section IV, points 3 and 4 (Information Exchange Procedure) issued by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade .

9. Except for paragraphs 7 and 8, each Party shall implement this Article as soon as possible and in no case later than 2 years from the entry into force of this Agreement.


Article 10.11: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade made up of representatives designated by each Party, in accordance with Annex 10.11.

2. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) promptly address matters that a Party proposes regarding the preparation, adoption, application, or enforcement of standards, technical regulations, or conformity assessment procedures;

(c) increase cooperation for the development and improvement of standards, technical regulations, or conformity assessment procedures;

(d) as appropriate, facilitate sectoral cooperation between governmental and non-governmental entities on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures in the territories of the Parties, as well as facilitate the process of mutual recognition agreements and the equivalence of technical regulations;

(e) exchange information about the work carried out in non-governmental, regional, multilateral forums and cooperation programs involved in activities related to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(f) at the request of a Party, answer questions about any matter that arises under this Chapter;

(g) take any other action that the Parties consider will help them in the implementation of this Chapter and the TBT Agreement, as well as in the facilitation of trade in goods;

(h) review this Chapter in light of what has happened within the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade and prepare recommendations to modify this Chapter if necessary;

(i) if deemed appropriate, report to the Administrative Commission on the implementation of this Chapter; and

(j) establish, if necessary, for particular matters or sectors, working groups to deal with specific matters related to this Chapter and the TBT Agreement.

2. The Parties shall make all efforts to reach a mutually satisfactory solution, regarding the consultations referred to in paragraph 1(f), within a period of 30 days.

3. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with paragraph 1(f), such consultations shall replace those provided for in Article 16.4 (Consultations).

4. Upon request, a Party shall favorably consider any sector-specific proposal that the other Party makes to deepen cooperation under this Chapter.

5. The Committee will meet at least once a year, or more frequently at the request of one of the Parties, through videoconference, teleconference or other agreed means.


Article 10.12: Technical Cooperation

1. At the request of a Party, the other Party may provide cooperation and technical assistance under mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen its standardization systems, technical regulations and conformity assessment.

2. Each Party shall encourage standardization and conformity assessment bodies in its territory to cooperate with those of the other Party in its territory, as appropriate, in the development of their activities, such as through membership in international organizations. standardization and conformity assessment.


Article 10.13: Exchange of Information

Any information or explanation that is provided at the request of a Party in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter must be delivered in print or electronically within a period of 30 days, which may be extended with the prior justification of the reporting Party.


Article 10.14: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter, the terms contained in Annex 1 of the OTC Agreement shall apply, in addition to the following:

international standard means a standard adopted by an international standardization body, and made available to the public;

International Standards Bodies refer to Standards Bodies open to the participation of the relevant bodies of at least all members of the TBT Agreement, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Codex Commission Alimentarius , the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML), or any other body designated by the Parties.

 

Chapter 11

Investment

Section A– Investment


Article 11.1: Scope of Application 1

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) investors of the other Party;

(b) the covered investments; and

(c) with respect to Articles 11.6 and 11.13, to all investments in the territory of the Party.

2. The requirement of a Party that a service provider of the other Party post a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for providing a service in its territory, does not make this Chapter applicable to the cross-border provision of that service. This Chapter applies to the measures adopted or maintained by the Party with respect to the bond or financial guarantee, when said bond or financial guarantee constitutes a covered investment.

3. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

4. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) the measures that a Party adopts or maintains regarding investors of the other Party and the investments of said investors, in financial institutions in the territory of the Party;

(b) any act or fact that took place, or any situation originated, before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except as provided in Annex 11-E 2 ; and

(c) public procurement.

5. The obligations of a Party under this Section shall apply to a state enterprise, designated monopoly or other person, when they execute any regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority that has been delegated by that Party, such as the authority to expropriate , grant licenses, be they import or export, approve commercial transactions or impose quotas, rights or other charges.


Article 11.2: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant to the investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or otherwise. disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investments in its territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, and sale or other form of disposition of the investments in its territory.


Article 11.3: Most Favored Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that granted, in similar circumstances, to investors of any non-Party country, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall grant covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to investments in its territory of investors from any non-Party country, with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct , operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments.


Article 11.4: Minimum Treatment Level 3

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes that the minimum level of treatment for aliens under customary international law is the minimum level of treatment to be accorded to covered investments. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that required by that level and do not create additional substantive rights. The obligation in paragraph 1 to grant:

(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil or administrative proceedings, in accordance with the principle of due process incorporated in the main legal systems of the world; and

(b) “full protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of police protection that is required by customary international law.

3. The determination that another provision of this Agreement, or of another international agreement, has been violated does not establish that this article has been violated.


Article 11.5: Treatment in case of Dispute

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 11.8.4, each Party shall grant investors of the other Party, and covered investments, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to the measures it adopts or maintains in relation to losses suffered by investments. in its territory due to armed conflicts or civil strife.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party who, in any of the situations referred to therein, suffers a loss in the territory of the other Party resulting from:

(a) the requisition of its covered investment or part of it by the forces or authorities of the latter Party; either

(b) the destruction of your covered investment or part of it by the forces or authorities of the latter Party, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,

this last Party will grant the investor restitution or compensation, which in any of these cases, will be prompt, adequate, and effective and, with respect to compensation, will be in accordance with article 11.10.2 to 11.10.4.

3. Paragraph 1 does not apply to existing measures relating to subsidies or donations that would be inconsistent with Article 11.2, except for Article 11.8.4.


Article 11.6: Performance Requirements

Mandatory Performance Requirements

1. No Party may impose or enforce any of the following requirements or enforce any obligation or commitment 4 , in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation or sale or any other form of disposition of an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or of a non-Party country, for:

(a) export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(c) acquire, use or give preference to goods produced in its territory, or acquire goods from persons in its territory;

(d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment;

(e) restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or supplies, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings generated in foreign currency;

(f) transfer to a person in its territory technology, a productive process or other knowledge of its property; either

(g) act as the exclusive supplier from the territory of the Party of the goods it produces or services it supplies for a specific regional market or to the world market.

Benefits Subject to Performance Requirements

2. Neither Party may condition the receipt of an advantage or the continued receipt thereof, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale or any other form of disposition of an investment in its territory. by an investor from a Party or from a non-Party country, upon compliance with any of the following requirements:

(a) achieve a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(b) acquire, use or grant preference to goods produced in its territory, or to acquire goods from persons in its territory;

(c) relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; either

(d) restrict the sales in its territory of the merchandise or services that said investment produces or supplies, relating in any way such sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings they generate in foreign currency.

Exceptions and Exclusions

3.

(a) Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed as preventing a Party from conditioning the receipt of, or continued receipt of, an advantage in connection with an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or by a non-Party country, upon compliance with a requirement that it locate production, provide services, train or employ workers, build or expand particular facilities, or carry out research and development, in its territory.

(b) Paragraph 1(f) does not apply:

(i) when a Party authorizes the use of an intellectual property right in accordance with Article 31 5 of the TRIPS Agreement, or to measures that require the disclosure of proprietary information that is within the scope of application, and are compatible with Article 39 of said Agreement; either

(ii) when the requirement is imposed or the obligation or commitment is enforced by a judicial or administrative court or a competition authority, to remedy a practice that has been determined after a judicial or administrative proceeding as anti-competitive under the law jurisdiction of Part 6 .

(c) Nothing in paragraphs 1(b), (c) and (f) and paragraphs 2(a) and (b) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including measures of an environmental nature:

(i) necessary to ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

(ii) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

(iii) related to the preservation of living or non-renewable natural resources,

provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustified manner, and provided that such measures do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment.

(d) Paragraphs 1(a), (b) and (c), and paragraphs 2(a) and (b) shall not apply to requirements for qualification of goods or services with respect to promotional programs to which exports and foreign aid.

(e) Paragraphs 2(a) and (b) shall not apply to requirements imposed by an importing Party with respect to the contents of the goods, necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.

4. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to any commitment, obligation or requirement other than those stated in those paragraphs.

5. This article does not exclude the application of any commitment, obligation or requirement between private parties, when a Party did not impose or demand the commitment, obligation or requirement.


Article 11.7: Senior Executives and Boards

1. No Party may require that an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment appoint individuals of any nationality, in particular to senior management positions.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of a board of directors or of any committee of such a board of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment be of a particular nationality or resident in the territory of the Party. Party, provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control over his or her investment.


Article 11.8: Non-Conforming Measures 7

1. Articles 11.2, 11.3, 11.6 and 11.7 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by:

(i) the national or regional government or authorities of a Party, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I; and

(ii) a local level government of a Party;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that such modification does not diminish the conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with articles 11.2, 11.3, 11.6 and 11.7.

2. Articles 11.2, 11.3, 11.6 and 11.7 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. Neither Party may require, pursuant to any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and included in its Schedule in Annex II, an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an existing investment at the time the measure takes effect.

4. Articles 11.2, 11.3 and 11.7 do not apply to subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance.


Article 11.9: Transfers 8

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers related to a covered investment to be made freely and without delay to and from its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) capital contributions;

(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administrative expenses, technical assistance and other charges;

(c) the product of the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the covered investment;

(d) payments made pursuant to a contract to which the covered investment or investor is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

(e) payments made in accordance with article 11.5.1 and 11.5.2 and with article 11.10; and

(f) payments arising from the application of Section B.

2. Each Party shall permit transfers of in-kind earnings related to a covered investment to be made as authorized or specified in a written agreement 9 between the Party and a covered investment or an investor of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall permit transfers related to a covered investment to be made in a freely usable currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of the transfer.

4. Neither Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits, profits or other amounts derived from, or attributable to, investments carried out in the territory of the other Party, nor shall it penalize them in case they do not make the transference.

5. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 3, a Party may prevent a transfer through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

(b) issuance, trade or operations of securities, futures or derivatives;

(c) criminal offences;

(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities; and

(e) guarantee compliance with resolutions or awards rendered in judicial, administrative or arbitration proceedings.

6. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may restrict transfers of in-kind earnings in circumstances where it could otherwise restrict such transfers as provided in this Agreement, including as provided in paragraph 5.


Article 11.10: Expropriation and Compensation 10

1. No Party shall expropriate or nationalize a covered investment, whether directly or indirectly through measures tantamount to expropriation or nationalization (“expropriation”) unless it is:

(a) for public utility or public purpose 11 ;

(b) in a non-discriminatory manner;

(c) by prompt, adequate and effective payment of compensation, in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4; and

(d) in accordance with the principle of due process and article 11.4.1 to 11.4.3.

2. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c) shall:

(a) be paid promptly;

(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out (“date of expropriation”);

(c) not reflect any change in value because the intention to expropriate was known in advance of the expropriation date; and

(d) be fully liquidable and freely transferable.

3. If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c) shall not be less than the fair market value on the date of expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency, accumulated from the date of expropriation to the date of payment.

4. If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely usable, the compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c), converted to the currency of payment at the exchange rate prevailing in the market on the date of the payment, shall not be less than:

(a) the fair market value on the date of expropriation, converted into a freely usable currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of payment, plus

(b) interest, at a commercially reasonable rate for that freely usable currency, accrued from the date of expropriation to the date of payment.

5. This article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of said rights to the extent that said issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is compatible with the Agreement on TRIPS.


Article 11.11: Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 11.2 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities associated with a covered investment, such as the requirement that investors be residents of the Party or that the covered investments are constituted in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do not significantly undermine the protection granted by a Party to an investor of the other Party or to investments covered in accordance with this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 11.2 and 11.3, a Party may require an investor of the other Party or of a covered investment to provide information regarding that investment, exclusively for informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect confidential information from any disclosure that could adversely affect the competitive situation of the investor or of the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing a Party from obtaining or disclosing information regarding the fair and good faith application of its domestic law.


Article 11.12: Denial of Benefits

Subject to Article 16.4 (Consultations), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of such investor, if an investor of a non-Party owns or controls the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party other part; either

(b) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of such investor, if an investor of the denying Party owns or controls the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of The other part.


Article 11.13: Investment and Environment

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure, otherwise consistent with this Chapter, that it deems appropriate to ensure that investment activities in its territory are carried out taking into account environmental concerns.


Article 11.14: Implementation

The Parties shall consult annually, or as otherwise agreed, to review the implementation of this Chapter and consider investment matters of mutual interest, including consideration of the development of procedures that may contribute to greater transparency of the measures referred to. Article 11.8.1(c).

 

Section b– Settlement of Investor-State Disputes

Article 11.15: Consultations and Negotiation

In the event of an investment dispute, the claimant and respondent must first attempt to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may include the use of non-binding third-party procedures.

Article 11.16: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot be resolved through consultation and negotiation:

(a) the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section alleging

(i) that the defendant has breached an obligation under Section A, and

(ii) that the claimant has suffered loss or damage by reason of, or as a result of, such breach; and

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the claimant, may, in accordance with this Section, submit to arbitration a claim alleging

(i) that the defendant has breached an obligation under Section A, and

(ii) that the business has suffered loss or damage by virtue of, or as a result of, such breach.

2. For greater certainty, no claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section alleging a violation of any provision of this Agreement that is not an obligation of Section A.

3. At least 90 days before a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section, the claimant shall give the respondent a written notice of its intention to submit the claim to arbitration (“notice of intent”). The notification will specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and, in the event that the claim is brought on behalf of a company, the name, address and place of incorporation of the company;

(b) for each claim, the provision of this Agreement alleged to have been violated and any other applicable provision;

(c) the issues of fact and law on which each claim is based; and

(d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

4. As long as 6 months have elapsed since the events giving rise to the claim, the plaintiff may submit the claim referred to in paragraph 1:

(a) in accordance with the ICSID Convention, provided that both the non-disputing Party and the respondent are parties thereto;

(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the non-disputing Party or the respondent, but not both, are parties to the ICSID Convention;

(c) in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; either

(d) if the disputing parties agree, to any other arbitration institution or in accordance with any other arbitration rules.

5. A claim shall be considered submitted to arbitration under this Section, when the claimant's notice or request for arbitration (“notice of arbitration”):

(a) referred to in paragraph 1) of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention, is received by the Secretary General;

(b) referred to in Article 2 of Annex C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, is received by the Secretary-General;

(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together with the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, is received by the respondent; either

(d) referred to by any other arbitral institution or any other arbitral rules chosen under paragraph 4(d), is received by the respondent.

A claim raised by the claimant for the first time, after the notice of arbitration has been filed, shall be deemed to have been submitted to arbitration under this Section, on the date of its receipt in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.

6. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 4, and in effect on the date of the claim or claims that have been submitted to arbitration under this Section, shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by this Agreement. .

7. The claimant shall deliver in the notice of arbitration referred to in paragraph 5:

(a) the name of the arbitrator you have appointed; either

(b) the claimant's written consent to the Secretary General's appointment of the claimant's arbitrator.


Article 11.17: Consent of each of the Parties to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to submit a claim to arbitration, in accordance with this Section and in accordance with this Agreement.

2. The consent referred to in paragraph 1 and the submission of the claim to arbitration in accordance with this Section, will comply with the requirements indicated in:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the parties to the dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention which requires a "written agreement"; and

(c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention which requires an “agreement”.


Article 11.18: Conditions and Limitations to the Consent of the Parties

1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration, in accordance with this Section, if more than 3 years have elapsed from the date on which the claimant knew or should have known of the alleged violation, in accordance with the provisions of article 11.16. 1 and knowing that the claimant (for claims brought under Article 11.16.1(a)), or the company (for claims brought under Article 11.16.1(b)), suffered loss or damage.

2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration, in accordance with the procedures provided in this Agreement; and

(b) the notice of arbitration referred to in Article 11.16.5 is attached,

(i) the claimant's written waiver of claims submitted to arbitration under Article 11.16.1(a),

(ii) the claimant's and company's written waivers of claims submitted to arbitration under Article 11.16.1(b),

of any right to initiate before any judicial or administrative court in accordance with the law of any of the Parties, or other dispute resolution procedures, any action regarding the facts that are alleged to have given rise to the claimed violation.

3. No claim may be submitted to arbitration if the claimant (in the case of claims submitted under Article 11.16.1(a)) or the claimant or the company (in the case of claims submitted under Article 11.16.1 (b)) have previously submitted the same alleged breach to an administrative or judicial tribunal of the Party complained against, or to any other binding dispute resolution procedure. For greater certainty, if an investor chooses to bring a claim of the type described above before a judicial or administrative tribunal of the Party complained against, that choice will be final and the investor may not subsequently submit the claim to arbitration in accordance with this Section.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims brought under Article 11.16.1(a)) and the claimant or company (for claims brought under Article 11.16.1(b)) ) may initiate or continue an action in which the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declaratory or extraordinary nature is requested and that does not imply the payment of monetary damages before a judicial or administrative court of the defendant, provided that the action is filed with the sole in order to preserve the rights and interests of the claimant or the company during the period of waiting for arbitration.


Article 11.19: Selection of Arbitrators

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the Tribunal will be made up of three arbitrators, one arbitrator designated by each of the disputing parties and the third, who will be the presiding arbitrator, will be appointed by agreement of the disputing parties.

2. The Secretary General shall appoint the arbitrators in the arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this Section.

3. When a Tribunal is not established within 75 days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, in accordance with this Section, the Secretary General, at the request of a disputing party, shall, at his discretion, appoint , to the arbitrator or arbitrators who have not yet been appointed.

4. For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator on grounds other than nationality:

(a) the respondent accepts the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

(b) the claimant referred to in Article 11.16.1(a) may submit a claim under this Section to arbitration, or pursue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only at condition that the claimant consents in writing to the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal; and

(c) the claimant referred to in Article 11.16.1(b) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or pursue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only at condition that the plaintiff and the company express their consent in writing on the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal.


Article 11.20: Conduct of Arbitration

1. The disputing parties may agree on the legal place where any arbitration is to be held in accordance with the arbitration rules applicable in accordance with Article 11.16.4(b), 11.16.4(c) or 11.16.4(d). In the absence of agreement between the disputing parties, the Tribunal will determine said place in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place is in the territory of a State that is party to the New York Convention.

2. The non-disputing Party may make oral or written submissions to the Tribunal regarding the interpretation of this Agreement.

3. The Tribunal shall be empowered to accept and consider amicus curiae briefs that come from a person or entity that is not a disputing party (“the holder of the brief”). Said reports must be made in Spanish and must identify the owner of the report and any Party or other government, person or organization, other than the owner of the report, that has provided or will provide any financial or other type of assistance in the preparation of the report.

4. Without prejudice to the Tribunal's power to hear other objections as preliminary questions, such as an objection that the dispute is not within the Tribunal's jurisdiction, a Tribunal shall hear and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that , as a matter of law, the claim submitted is not a claim in respect of which an award favorable to the claimant can be rendered in accordance with article 11.26.

(a) Such objection shall be filed with the Court as soon as possible after the constitution of the Court, and in no event later than the date the Court sets for the respondent to file its answer to the complaint, or in the case of a modification of the notice of arbitration referred to in article 11.16.5, the date that the Tribunal sets for the respondent to submit its response to the modification.

(b) At the time such objection is received, the Court will suspend any proceeding on the merits of the dispute, establish a schedule for the consideration of the objection that will be compatible with any schedule that has been established for the consideration of any other matter preliminary, and will issue a decision or award on said objection, exposing the grounds thereof.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the Tribunal will assume as true the allegations of fact advanced by the claimant in support of any claim appearing in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereto), and , in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The Tribunal may also consider any other relevant fact that is not the subject of dispute.

(d) Respondent does not waive any jurisdictional objection or substantive argument simply because it has or has not raised an objection under this paragraph or makes use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5 .

5. In the event that the respondent so requests, within 45 days of the constitution of the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall decide, on an expedited basis, an objection pursuant to paragraph 4 or any other objection to the effect that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The Tribunal will suspend any action on the merits of the litigation, and will issue, no later than 150 days after the date of the request, a decision or award on said objection, exposing the bases thereof. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the Tribunal may take an additional 30 days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing has been requested, the Court may, showing extraordinary cause,

6. When the Tribunal decides a respondent's objection under paragraph 4 or 5, it may, if warranted, award the successful disputing party reasonable fees and costs incurred in raising the objection or opposing is. In determining whether such award is justified, the Tribunal will consider whether the claimant's claim or respondent's objection was frivolous, and will give the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

7. The defendant shall not declare as a defense, counterclaim or compensatory right or for any other reason that, in accordance with an insurance or guarantee contract, that the plaintiff has received or will receive compensation or other compensation for all or part of the damages alleged.

8. The Tribunal may order a provisional measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or in order to ensure the full exercise of the Tribunal's jurisdiction, including an order to preserve evidence in its possession or under the control of the Tribunal. control of a disputing party or to protect the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The Court may not order the seizure or prevent the application of a measure that is considered a violation mentioned in article 11.16.

9.

(a) At the request of any of the disputing parties, the Tribunal, before issuing the award on liability, shall communicate its proposed award to the disputing parties and to the non-disputing Party. Within 60 days of the communication of said award proposal, only the disputing parties may submit written comments to the Tribunal in relation to any aspect of their award proposal. The Tribunal will consider said comments and issue its award no later than 45 days after the expiration of the 60-day term to submit comments.

(b) Subparagraph (a) shall not apply to any arbitration in which an appeal is available under paragraph 10 or Exhibit 11-G.

10. If a separate multilateral treaty establishing an appellate body for the purpose of reviewing awards rendered by tribunals constituted pursuant to international trade or investment treaties to hear investment disputes is brought into force between the Parties, the Parties they will study the possibility of reaching an agreement that such appellate body would have for the review of the awards rendered in accordance with article 10.26 in arbitrations that have been initiated after the appellate body was established.


Article 11.21: Transparency of Arbitration Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent shall, upon receipt of the following documents, promptly deliver them to the non-disputing Party and make them publicly available:

(a) the notification of intent referred to in article 11.16.3;

(b) the notice of arbitration referred to in article 11.16.5;

(c) pleadings, statements of claim and other documents submitted to the Tribunal by a disputing party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Article 11.20.2 and 11.20.3 and Article 11.25;

(d) the minutes or transcripts of the Tribunal hearings, when available; and

(e) the orders, judgments and awards of the Tribunal.

2. The Tribunal will hold hearings open to the public and will determine, in consultation with the disputing parties, the pertinent logistical arrangements. However, any disputing party that intends to use information classified as protected information in a hearing must notify the Court. The Court will make appropriate arrangements to protect the information from disclosure.

3. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent to make available protected information or to provide or allow access to information that it may withhold in accordance with article 17.2 (Essential Security) or article 19.5 (Disclosure of Information) .

4. Protected information shall, if such information is submitted to the Court, be protected from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) subject to subparagraph (d), neither the disputing parties nor the Tribunal shall disclose to the non-disputing Party or to the public any protected information where the disputing party providing the information clearly designates it so in accordance with subparagraph (b). );

(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes protected information shall clearly designate it at the time it is submitted to the Tribunal;

(c) a disputing party shall, at the same time that it files a document that contains information claimed to be protected information, file a redacted version of the document that does not contain the information. Only the redacted version will be provided to the non-disputing Party and will be made public in accordance with paragraph 1; and

(d) the Court will decide on any objection in relation to the designation of information alleged as protected information. If the Tribunal determines that such information was not properly designated, the disputing party that submitted the information may:

(i) remove all or part of the presentation containing such information, or

(ii) agree to resubmit complete and redacted documents with corrected designations in accordance with the Court's determination and subparagraph (c).

In any event, the other disputing party shall, where necessary, resubmit complete and redacted documents, which either omit the information withdrawn pursuant to subparagraph (d)(i) by the disputing party that first submitted the information, or redesignate the information consistent with the designation made pursuant to subparagraph (d)(ii) of the disputing party that first submitted the information.

5. Nothing in this Section authorizes the defendant to deny public access to information that, according to its legislation, must be disclosed.


Article 11.22: Applicable Law

1. Subject to paragraph 2, where a claim is brought under Article 11.16.1(a)(i) or Article 11.16.1(b)(ii), the Tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and with the applicable norms of international law.

2. A decision of the Administrative Commission declaring the interpretation of a provision of this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of article 15.1 (Administrative Commission) shall be binding on the Tribunal established pursuant to this Section and any award must be consistent with that decision.


Article 11.23: Interpretation of Annexes I and II

1. When the defendant presents as a defense that the measure alleged to be in violation is within the scope of application of a non-conforming measure listed in Annex I or Annex II, at the request of the defendant, the Court will request the Administrative Commission for a interpretation on the matter. Within the term of 60 days following the delivery of the request, the Administrative Commission will present in writing to the Tribunal any decision in which its interpretation is declared.

2. The decision rendered by the Administrative Commission in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be binding on the Tribunal and any award rendered by that Tribunal shall be consistent with that decision. If the Administrative Commission does not issue said decision within the term of 60 days, the Tribunal will decide on the matter.


Article 11.24: Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the Tribunal, at the request of a disputing party or on its own initiative, unless the disputing parties do not accept it, may appoint one or more experts to report in writing any question of fact relating to environmental, health, safety or other scientific matters that has been raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.


Article 11.25: Accumulation of Procedures

1. In cases where two or more separate claims have been submitted to arbitration under Article 11.16.1, and the claims raise a common issue of fact or law and arise out of the same facts or circumstances, any disputing party may seek to obtain a consolidation order, subject to the agreement of all disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought or under the terms of paragraphs 2 through 10.

2. The disputing party that seeks to obtain a consolidation order in accordance with this article shall deliver, in writing, to the Secretary General and all the disputing parties in respect of which the consolidation order is sought and shall specify in the request the following:

(a) the name and address of all disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

3. Unless the Secretary General determines, within 30 days of receipt of a request under paragraph 2, that the request is manifestly unfounded, a Tribunal shall be established under this article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought agree otherwise, the Tribunal established pursuant to this article shall consist of three arbitrators:

(a) an arbitrator appointed by agreement of the claimants;

(b) an arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the presiding arbitrator appointed by the Secretary General, who shall not be a national of either Party.

5. If, within 60 days of the receipt by the Secretary General of the request made pursuant to paragraph 2, the respondent or claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator pursuant to paragraph 4, the Secretary General, at request of any disputing party in respect of which the consolidation order is sought, will appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators that have not yet been appointed. If the respondent fails to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of the respondent, and in the event that the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of the non-disputing Party.

6. In the event that the Tribunal established pursuant to this Article has found that two or more claims have been submitted to arbitration pursuant to Article 11.16.1, which raise a common issue of fact or law, and which arise out of the same facts or circumstances, the Tribunal may, in the interest of achieving a fair and efficient resolution of the claims and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction and hear and determine jointly, over all or part of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction and hear and determine one or more claims, the determination of which it considers would contribute to the resolution of the others; either

(c) instruct the Tribunal established pursuant to article 11.19 to assume jurisdiction and jointly hear and determine all or part of the claims, provided that:

(i) that Tribunal, at the request of any claimant not previously a disputing party before that Tribunal, be reinstated with its original members, unless the arbitrator is appointed by the claimants pursuant to paragraphs 4(a) and 5, and

(ii) that Tribunal decides whether to repeat any previous hearing.

7. In the case where the Tribunal has been established pursuant to this article, the claimant who has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to article 11.16.1, and whose name is not mentioned in a request made pursuant to paragraph 2, may make a written request to the Court for such claimant to be included in any order made pursuant to paragraph 6, specifying in the request:

(a) the name and address of the claimant;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

The claimant shall deliver a copy of his request to the Secretary General.

8. The Tribunal established pursuant to this article shall direct the proceedings in accordance with the provisions of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

9. The Tribunal established pursuant to Article 11.19 shall not have jurisdiction to resolve a claim, or part thereof, for which the Tribunal established or instructed pursuant to this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

10. At the request of a disputing party, the Tribunal established under this Article may, pending its decision under paragraph 6, order that the proceedings of the Tribunal established under Article 11.19 be adjourned, unless the latter Tribunal has suspended its proceedings.


Article 11.26: Awards

1. When the Tribunal renders a final award unfavorable to the defendant, the Tribunal may grant, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and applicable interest; and

(b) restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the defendant may pay pecuniary damages, plus any applicable interest in lieu of restitution.

The Court may award costs and fees in accordance with this Section and the applicable arbitration rules.

2. Subject to paragraph 1, where a claim under Article 11.16.1(b) is submitted to arbitration:

(a) the award that provides for the restitution of the property, will provide that the restitution be granted to the company;

(b) the award that awards pecuniary damages and applicable interest, will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company; and

(c) the award will provide that it is rendered without prejudice to any right that any person may have to redress under applicable domestic law.

3. A Court may not order a party to pay damages that are punitive in nature.

4. The award rendered by a Court will be binding only for the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.

5. Subject to paragraph 6 and the review procedure applicable to an interim award, the disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.

6. The disputing party may not request the enforcement of the final award until:

(a) in the case of a final award rendered in accordance with the ICSID Convention

(i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested its review or annulment, or

(ii) the review or annulment procedures have been completed; and

(b) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or the rules selected pursuant to Article 11.16.4(d)

(i) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has commenced a proceeding to review, revoke or annul it, or

(ii) a court has dismissed or admitted a request for review, revocation or annulment of the award and this decision cannot be appealed.

7. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.

8. When the respondent breaches or does not comply with a final award, upon delivery of a request by the non-disputing Party, an arbitral tribunal shall be established in accordance with article 16.6 (Establishment of an Arbitral Tribunal). The requesting Party may invoke such procedures to:

(a) a determination that a breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement; and

(b) in accordance with the procedures established in article 16.11 (Preliminary Report), a decision in the sense that the defendant abides by or complies with the final award.

9. A disputing party may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention, or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the proceedings contemplated in paragraph 8 have been initiated.

10. For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration under this Section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or transaction.


Article 11.27: Documents delivery

The delivery of the notice and other documents to a Party shall be made at the place designated by it in Annex 11-H.

Section C- Definitions


Article 11.28: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

written agreement means a written agreement, signed and put into effect by a Party and an investor of the other Party or its representative, which establishes an exchange of rights and obligations with pecuniary value. No unilateral act of a judicial or administrative authority, such as a decree, order or judicial sentence, nor a transaction document, will be considered as a written agreement;

Center means the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) established by the ICSID Convention;

New York Convention means the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards , done at New York on June 10, 1958;

Inter-American Convention means the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration , held in Panama on January 30, 1975;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States , concluded at Washington on March 18, 1965;

respondent means the Party that is a party to a dispute relating to an investment;

claimant means the investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute with the other Party;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party, and a branch located in the territory of a Party, carrying on business in that territory;

existing means current as of the date of signing this Agreement;

protected information means confidential business information or information that is proprietary or otherwise protected from disclosure under the law of a Party;

financial institution means any financial intermediary or other enterprise that is authorized to do business and that is regulated or supervised as a financial institution in accordance with the law of the Party in whose territory it is located;

investment means any asset owned or controlled by an investor, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including characteristics such as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of profit or profit, or the assumption risky. Forms an investment can take include:

(a) a company;

(b) shares, capital and other forms of participation in the patrimony of a company;

(c) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments and loans of a company 12 , 13

(d) futures, options and other derivatives;

(e) contractual rights arising from turnkey, construction, management, production, concession, revenue sharing and other contracts;

(f) intellectual property rights;

(g) rights granted in accordance with national legislation, such as concessions, licences, authorizations, permits 14 ; and

(h) other property rights, tangible or intangible, movable or immovable, and related property rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges;

but investment does not mean an order or sentence entered in an administrative or judicial process;

non-Party investor means, with respect to a Party, an investor who intends to make, 15 is making, or has made an investment in the territory of that Party, who is not an investor of either Party;

investor of a Party means a Party or a State enterprise thereof, or a national or enterprise of such Party, which intends to make , 16 is making or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party; considering, however, that a natural person who has dual nationality shall be considered exclusively a national of the State of his dominant and effective nationality;

freely usable currency means the “freely usable currency” as determined in accordance with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund ;

Designated monopoly means an entity, including one controlled directly or indirectly, through ownership interests, by the national government of a Party, a consortium or a government agency, that in any relevant market in the territory of a Party is designated or has been designated as the exclusive supplier or purchaser of a good or service, but does not include an entity that has been granted an intellectual property right solely by virtue of such grant 17 ;

disputing party means either the plaintiff or the defendant;

non-disputing party means the Party that is not a party to an investment dispute;

disputing parties means the plaintiff and the defendant;

Negotiated restructuring means, for the purposes of Annex 11-B, the restructuring or rescheduling of a debt instrument that has been carried out through:

(a) a modification of such debt instrument, as provided for in the terms of said instrument; either

(b) a general debt exchange or other similar process in which the creditors representing not less than 75% of the outstanding debt capital under such instrument have consented to said general debt exchange or other similar process.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Additional Facility Rules for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes ;

Secretary General means the Secretary General of ICSID; and

Tribunal means a court of arbitration established under Articles 11.19 or 11.25.

Chapter 12

Cross-Border Trade in Services


Article 12.1: Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect cross-border trade in services supplied by service providers of the other Party. Such measures include measures affecting:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and supply of a service;

(b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

(c) access to and use of distribution and transportation systems, or telecommunications networks and services related to the provision of a service;

(d) the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; and

(e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) governments or authorities at the national, regional or local level; and

(b) non-governmental institutions exercising powers delegated to them by governments or authorities at the national, regional or local level.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to financial services, as defined in Article 12.13;

(b) air services 1 , including scheduled and non-scheduled national and international air transport services, as well as related support services for air services, except:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services while the aircraft is out of service;

(ii) the sale and marketing of air transportation services; and

(iii) the services of computerized reservation systems (SRI)

(c) public contracts; either

(d) subsidies or grants provided by a State Party or enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance, except as provided in Article 12.2.

4. Articles 12.5, 12.8 and 12.9 shall apply to measures by a Party that affect the supply of a service in its territory by a covered investment 2 .

5. This Chapter does not impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor does it confer any rights on that national with respect to such access or employment.

6. This Chapter does not apply to services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority. A service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service that is not supplied on commercial terms or in competition with one or more service providers.


Article 12.2: Subsidies

1. The Parties shall exchange information on all subsidies or grants that distort cross-border trade in services, such as government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance. The first exchange will take place within 1 year from the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. If the results of the negotiations related to GATS Article XV.1 (or the results of any similar negotiations, conducted in another multilateral forum in which both Parties participate) enter into force for the Parties, this Article shall be amended. , prior consultation between them, so that said results are incorporated into this Agreement. The Parties will coordinate such negotiations, as appropriate.


Article 12.3: National Treatment

Each Party shall grant to the service providers 3 of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its service providers.


Article 12.4: Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall grant service providers 4 of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to service providers of a non-Party.


Article 12.5: Non-Discriminatory Quantitative Restrictions

No Party may, on the basis of a regional subdivision or its entire territory, adopt or maintain measures that:

(a) impose limitations:

(i) the number of service providers 5 , either in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies or exclusive service providers or through the requirement of an economic needs test;

(ii) to the full value of assets or service transactions in the form of numerical quotas or by requiring an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of service operations or the total amount of service production, expressed in designated numerical units, in the form of quotas or through the requirement of an economic needs test 6 ;

(iv) the total number of natural persons that can be employed in a certain service sector or that a service provider can employ and that are necessary for the supply of a specific service and are directly related to it, in the form of numerical quotas or by requiring an economic needs test; either

(b) restrict or prescribe the specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service provider may supply a service.


Article 12.6: Local presence

Neither Party may require a service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other form of business, or to reside in its territory, as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.


Article 12.7: Non-conforming Measures

1. Articles 12.3, 12.4, 12.5 and 12.6 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by:

(i) the national or regional government or authorities of a Party, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii) a local level government of a Party;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that such modification does not diminish the conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with articles 12.3, 12.4, 12.5 and 12.6.

2. Articles 12.3, 12.4, 12.5 and 12.6 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. The Parties will meet 6 months after the entry into force of this Agreement to negotiate additional commitments regarding non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions, on a mutually advantageous basis in order to maintain a general balance of rights and obligations.


Article 12.8: Transparency in the Development and Application of Regulations 7

1. In addition to Chapter 14 (Transparency), each Party shall establish or maintain adequate mechanisms to respond to queries from interested persons regarding its regulations regarding the matters covered by this Chapter.

2. The implementation of the obligation to establish appropriate mechanisms for small administrative bodies may need to take into account budgetary and resource limitations.


Article 12.9: National Regulation

1. When a Party requires authorization for the supply of a service, the competent authorities of that Party, within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application that is considered complete under its laws and regulations, shall inform the applicant about the decision on your application. At the request of such an applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information regarding the status of the application. This obligation shall not apply to authorization requirements that fall within the scope of article 12.7.2.

2. In order to ensure that measures relating to qualification and licensing requirements and procedures do not constitute unnecessary obstacles to trade in services, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that the measures it adopts or maintains:

(a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence, quality of service and the ability to supply the service;

(b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

(c) do not in themselves constitute a restriction on the supply of the service, in the case of licensing procedures.

3. In order to ensure that measures relating to technical standards do not constitute unnecessary obstacles to trade in services, each Party shall endeavor to ensure, as appropriate for each specific sector, that the measures it adopts or maintains:

(a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence, quality of service and the ability to supply the service;

(b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

(c) do not in themselves constitute a restriction on the supply of the service, in the case of licensing procedures.

4. If the results of the negotiations related to GATS Article VI.4 (or the results of any similar negotiations, conducted in another multilateral forum in which both Parties participate) enter into force for the Parties, this Article shall be amended. , prior consultation between them, so that said results are incorporated into this Agreement. The Parties agree to coordinate such negotiations as appropriate.


Article 12.10: Mutual Recognition

1. For the purposes of compliance, in whole or in part, with its standards or criteria for the authorization, certification, or licensing of service providers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, a Party may recognize education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certificates issued in a particular country. That recognition, which may be effected through harmonization or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or convention with the country in question, or may be granted autonomously.

2. When a Party recognizes, autonomously or through an agreement or agreement, the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the territory of a non-Party country, nothing in Article 12.4 shall be interpreted in the sense of requiring that the Party grant such recognition to the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. A Party that is a party to an existing or future agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party, if the other Party is interested, to negotiate its accession to such agreement or agreement or to negotiate other comparable ones with it. When a Party grants recognition autonomously, it shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunities to demonstrate that education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained or requirements fulfilled in the territory of that other Party should be recognized. .

4. No Party shall grant recognition in a way that constitutes a means of discrimination between countries in the application of its standards or criteria for the authorization or certification of service providers or the granting of licenses to them, or a disguised restriction on trade of services.

5. Annex 12.10.5 applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party in connection with the granting of licenses or certificates for professional service providers, as set out in the provisions of that Annex.

6. The Parties will meet 6 months after the entry into force of this Agreement to negotiate, on a mutually convenient basis, a chapter on mutual recognition of educational certificates and degrees.


Article 12.11: Implementation

The Parties shall consult annually, or as otherwise agreed, to review the implementation of this Chapter and to consider other trade in services matters of mutual interest. Among other matters, the Parties shall consult with a view to determining the feasibility of removing any remaining citizenship or permanent residence requirement for the granting of licenses or certificates to each Party's service providers. Such consultations shall also include consideration of the development of procedures that could contribute to increasing the transparency of the measures described in Articles 12.7.1(c) and 12.7.2.


Article 12.12: Denial of Benefits

Subject to Article 16.4 (Consultations), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) the service providers of the other Party if the service provider is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) service providers of the other Party if the service provider is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of the denying Party and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party.


Article 12.13: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services means the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party (mode 1);

(b) in the territory of a Party, by a person of that Party, to a person of the other Party (mode 2); either

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party (mode 4);

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a covered investment, as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application) or by an investor of the other Party;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party, and a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying on business in that territory;

existing means current as of the date of signing this Agreement;

service provider of a Party means a person of the Party who intends to supply or supplies a service 8 ;

financial service means any service of a financial nature. Financial services include all insurance and insurance-related services, and all banking and other financial services (with the exception of insurance), as well as all accessory or auxiliary services to a service of a financial nature. Financial services include the following activities:

Insurance and insurance-related services

(a) direct insurance (including coinsurance):

(i) life insurance;

(ii) insurance other than life;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) insurance intermediation activities, for example those of insurance brokers and agents;

(d) services auxiliary to insurance, for example those of consultants, actuaries, risk assessment and compensation of claims.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

(e) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

(f) loans of all types, including personal loans, mortgage loans, factoring and financing of commercial transactions;

(g) financial leasing services;

(h) all payment and money transfer services, including credit, payment and similar cards, traveler's checks and bank drafts;

(i) guarantees and commitments;

(j) trading for own account or for the account of clients, whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, of the following:

(i) money market instruments (including checks, bills and certificates of deposit);

(ii) currencies;

(iii) derivative products, including futures and options;

(iv) currency and money market instruments, for example, swaps and forward interest rate agreements;

(v) transferable securities;

(vi) other negotiable financial instruments and assets, metal included;

(k) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including subscription and placement as agents (publicly or privately), and the provision of services related to those issues;

(l) exchange brokerage;

(m) asset management, for example, cash or portfolio management, collective investment management in all its forms, pension fund management, depository and custody services, and trust services;

(n) payment and clearing services in respect of financial assets, including securities, derivative products and other negotiable instruments;

(o) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, by providers of other financial services;

(p) advisory and intermediation services and other auxiliary financial services with respect to any of the activities indicated in subparagraphs (e) to (o), including credit reports and analysis, studies and advice on investments and securities portfolios, and advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy;

professional services means services that require specialized higher education 9 or equivalent training or experience for their provision and the exercise of which is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services rendered by persons who practice a trade or to crew members of merchant ships and aircraft .

 

Chapter 13

Temporary Entry for Business Persons


Article 13.1: General principles

1. In addition to the provisions of article 1.2 (Objectives), this Chapter reflects the preferential commercial relationship that exists between the Parties, the mutual objective of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the provisions of Annex 13.3, according to the principle of reciprocity and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for temporary entry. Likewise, it reflects the need to guarantee the security of the borders and to protect the national labor force and permanent employment in their respective territories.

2. This Chapter does not apply to measures related to nationality, citizenship, permanent residence or permanent employment.


Article 13.2: General Obligations

1. Each Party shall apply its measures relating to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with Article 13.1.1 and, in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or impairment in trade in goods or services, or to the performance of investment activities in accordance with this Agreement.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the Parties from applying measures to regulate the temporary entry of natural persons or their temporary stay in their territories, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of their borders and ensure the orderly movement of natural persons across them, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that unduly delays or impairs trade in goods or services, or the conduct of investment activities in accordance with this Agreement. The mere fact of requiring a visa for natural persons will not be considered as an undue impairment or impediment in the trade of goods or services, or investment activities in accordance with this Agreement.


Article 13.3: Temporary Entry Authorization

1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with this Chapter, including the provisions contained in Annex 13.3-A and Annex 13.3-B, and who, additionally, are qualified to enter in accordance with the applicable measures related to public health and safety, as well as those relating to national security.

2. Each Party shall limit the value of the fees for processing applications for temporary entry by business persons, in a manner consistent with Article 13.2.1.


Article 13.4: Information delivery

1. In addition to Article 14.2 (Advertising), each Party shall:

(a) provide the other Party with the materials that allow it to learn about the measures related to this Chapter; and

(b) no later than 3 months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its own territory and in that of the other Party, a consolidated document with material that explain the requirements for temporary entry, including references to applicable laws and regulations, in accordance with the rules of this Chapter, so that business persons of the other Party can be aware of them.

2. Each Party shall compile, maintain and make available to the other Party, upon request, in accordance with its respective national legislation, the information related to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this Chapter, to business persons of the another Party to whom migration documentation has been issued, in order to include specific information referring to each occupation, profession or activity.


Article 13.5: Temporary Entry Committee

1. The Parties establish a Temporary Entry Committee, made up of representatives of each Party, which will include migration officials.

2. The Committee shall:

(a) establish a calendar for its meetings that will be held at least once a year;

(b) establish the procedures for the exchange of information on the measures that affect the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with this Chapter;

(c) consider the development of measures to facilitate the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the provisions of Annex 13.3 on the basis of the principle of reciprocity;

(d) consider the implementation and administration of this Chapter; and

(e) consider the development of common criteria and interpretations for the implementation of this Chapter.


Article 13.6: Dispute Resolution

1. A Party may not initiate proceedings in accordance with Article 16.5 (Intervention of the Administrative Commission) with respect to a refusal of temporary entry authorization in accordance with this Chapter, nor with respect to a particular case that arises pursuant to Article 13.2, unless:

(a) the matter concerns a recurring practice; and

(b) the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him with respect to that particular matter.

2. The remedies referred to in paragraph 1(b) shall be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution within a period of 1 year from the start of an administrative procedure, and the resolution has been delayed for reasons that are not attributable to the affected business person.


Article 13.7: Relationship with other Chapters

1. Except as provided in this Chapter and in Chapters 1 (Initial Provisions), 2 (General Definitions), 15 (Administration of the Agreement), 16 (Dispute Resolution), 19 (General Provisions) and 20 (Final Provisions), and Articles 14.1 (Points of Contact), 14.2 (Publicity), 14.3 (Notification and Provision of Information) and 14.4 (Administrative Procedures), nothing in this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or commitments with respect to other Chapters of this Agreement.

Article 13.8: Transparency in the Development and Application of Regulations 1

1. In addition to Chapter 14 (Transparency), each Party shall maintain or establish adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from interested persons regarding regulations regarding the temporary entry of business persons.

2. Each Party shall, within a reasonable period not exceeding 45 days, after considering that the application for temporary entry is complete in accordance with domestic laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision taken regarding his application. At the request of the applicant, the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information regarding the status of the application.


Article 13.9: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

temporary entry means the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;

migratory measure means any law, regulation or procedure that affects the entry and stay of foreigners;

national has the same meaning as the term “natural person having the nationality of a Party”, as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General Application);

business person means a national of a Party who is engaged in trade in goods or supply of services, or in investment activities in the other Party;

professional means a national of a Party who carries out a specialized occupation that requires:

(a) the theoretical and practical application of a body of specialized knowledge; and

(b) obtaining a post-secondary degree, which requires four years of study, or the equivalent of said degree, as a minimum to enter the occupation; and

technician: means a national of a Party who carries out a specialized occupation that requires:

(a) the theoretical and practical application of a body of specialized knowledge; and

(b) Obtaining a post-secondary or technical degree that requires two years of study, or the equivalent of said degree, as a minimum to enter the occupation.

 

Chapter 14

Transparency


Article 14.1: Contact points

1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. At the request of the other Party, the contact point will indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter, and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.


Article 14.2: Advertising

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement, are promptly published or made available in such a way as to allow interested persons and the other part have knowledge of them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party:

(a) publish in advance any measure referred to in paragraph 1 that it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures.


Article 14.3: Notification and Provision of Information

1. Each Party shall notify the other Party, to the extent possible, of any current or proposed measures that the Party considers could materially affect the operation of this Agreement, or otherwise materially affect the interests of the other Party in accordance with this Agreement.

2. A Party, at the request of the other Party, shall provide information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any current or proposed measure, whether or not the other Party has been previously notified of that measure.

3. Any notification or supply of information referred to in this article will be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.


Article 14.4: Administrative Procedures

In order to administer in a compatible, impartial and reasonable manner all the measures of general application that affect the aspects covered by this Agreement, each Party will guarantee that, in its administrative procedures in which the measures mentioned in article 14.2 are applied with respect to persons particular goods or services of the other Party in specific cases:

(a) whenever possible, persons of the other Party who are directly affected by a proceeding receive, in accordance with national law, reasonable notice of the commencement of the proceeding, including a description of its nature, a statement of the legal basis under at which the procedure is initiated and a general description of all the issues in dispute;

(b) when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest permit, such persons are given a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their positions, prior to any final administrative action; and

(c) its procedures conform to the domestic law of that Party.


Article 14.5: Review and Challenge

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of prompt review and, where warranted, correction of final administrative actions related to matters covered by this Agreement. These courts will be impartial and will not be linked to the agency or authority in charge of the administrative application of the law, and will not have a substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, before such courts or in such proceedings, the parties have the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a decision based on evidence and submissions or, in cases where required by your national law, on the file compiled by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to challenge or subsequent review as provided by its national law, that such resolutions are enforced by, and govern the practice of, the agency or authority with respect to the administrative action that is the subject of the decision.


Article 14.6: Definition

For the purposes of this Chapter:

administrative resolution of general application means an administrative resolution or interpretation that applies to all persons and events that are generally within its scope and that establishes a standard of conduct, but does not include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative proceeding that applies to particular persons, goods, or services of the other Party, in a specific case; either

(b) a resolution that decides with respect to a particular act or practice.

 

Chapter 15

Agreement Administration


Article 15.1: Administrative Commission

1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission, made up of the representatives referred to in Annex 15.1.1, or by the persons they designate.

2. The Administrative Commission will have the following functions:

(a) ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Agreement;

(b) supervise the implementation of the Agreement and evaluate the results achieved in its application;

(c) try to resolve disputes that may arise in relation to the interpretation or application of this Agreement;

(d) supervise the work of all committees and working groups established pursuant to this Agreement and recommend appropriate action;

(e) determine the amount of remuneration and expenses to be paid to the arbitrators;

(f) take cognizance of the reports of the Joint Committee for Labor and Immigration Cooperation, established in the Memorandum of Understanding on Labor and Immigration Cooperation between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru;

(g) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this Agreement;

(h) monitor public price practices and policies in specific sectors, in order to detect those cases that could cause significant distortions in bilateral trade;

(i) monitor the export promotion mechanisms applied in the Parties, in order to detect possible distortions to competition, derived from their application and promote their harmonization, as trade liberalization progresses reciprocal; and

(j) establish mechanisms and instances that ensure the active participation of the representatives of the business sectors.

3. The Administrative Commission may:

(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to committees and working groups;

(b) advance in the application of the objectives of this Agreement, through the approval of any modification, in accordance with Annex 15.1.3:

(i) the tariff reduction program in accordance with the provisions of article 3.2. (Release Program);

(ii) the regime of origin;

(iii) review, modify and update the Complementary Notes of this Agreement, in the sense of contributing to the Liberalization of Trade.

(c) request the advice of non-governmental persons or groups;

(d) approve and modify the Model Rules of Procedure mentioned in Article 16.9 (Model Rules of Procedure); and

(e) if agreed by the Parties, take any other action in the exercise of their functions.

4. The Administrative Commission will establish its rules and procedures. All the decisions of the Administrative Commission will be adopted by mutual agreement.

5. The Administrative Commission will meet at least once a year in a regular meeting. The ordinary meetings of the Administrative Commission will be successively chaired by each Party.


Article 15.2: Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement

Each Party must designate a Coordinator, who will work jointly in the preparations for the meetings of the Administrative Commission and will give the appropriate follow-up to the decisions of the Administrative Commission.

 

Chapter 16

Dispute Resolution


Article 16.1: General layout

The Parties will at all times seek to reach an agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement, and will make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution on any matter that could affect its operation.


Article 16.2: Area of ​​application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute resolution provisions of this Chapter shall apply:

(a) to the prevention or settlement of disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement and the Protocols and instruments signed within its framework;

(b) where a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of the other Party is or could be inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement, or that another Party is otherwise in breach of its obligations under this Agreement Agreement; either

(c) when a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of another Party, which does not contravene the provisions of this Agreement, nullifies or impairs the benefits that it could reasonably have expected to receive under Chapter 3 (Trade in Goods); Chapter 4 (Origin Regime); Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation); Chapter 10 (Technical Barriers to Trade); and Chapter 12 (Cross-Border Trade in Services).


Article 16.3: Forum Option

1. Disputes that arise with respect to the same matter, by virtue of the provisions of this Agreement, the WTO Agreement, and any other trade agreement to which both Parties are parties, may be submitted to the mechanisms of settlement of disputes in any of these forums, at the choice of the complaining Party.

2. Once the complaining Party has initiated a dispute settlement procedure under Article 16.6, under the WTO Agreement or another trade agreement to which both Parties are party 1 , the selected forum will be exclusive of the others .


Article 16.4: Queries

1. Either Party may request in writing consultations with the other Party regarding any existing or proposed measure that it considers inconsistent with this Agreement.

2. Any request to hold consultations must indicate the reasons for the same, including the identification of the existing or projected measure and indicating the legal grounds of the claim.

3. The Party to whom the request for consultations was addressed must respond in writing within a period of 7 days from the date of receipt.

4. The Parties shall hold consultations within 30 days after the date of receipt of the request or within 15 days after the date of receipt of the request in urgent cases, including those involving merchandise. perishable agricultural

5. During the consultations, the Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to the matter under consultation. For such purposes, the Parties shall:

(a) provide sufficient information to allow a full examination of how the existing or proposed measure could affect the operation and application of this Agreement; and

(b) treat any information that has been exchanged in the consultation process as confidential.

6. With a view to obtaining a mutually agreed solution to the matter, the Party that requested the consultations may make representations or proposals to the other Party, who shall give due consideration to said representations or proposals made.


Article 16.5: Intervention of the Administrative Commission

1. A Party may request in writing a meeting of the Administrative Commission, if the Parties fail to resolve a matter under Article 16.4 within:

(a) 40 days after receipt of a request for consultations;

(b) 15 days after receipt of a request for consultations on matters relating to urgent cases, including those involving perishable agricultural goods; either

(c) any other term that may be agreed.

2. A Party may also request in writing a meeting of the Administrative Commission when consultations have been carried out in accordance with Chapter 9 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 10 (Technical Barriers to Trade), which replace the consultations established in article 16.4.

3. The requesting Party shall indicate in the request the measure or other matter that is the subject of the complaint and shall deliver the request to the other Party.

4. Unless it decides otherwise, the Administrative Commission will meet within the 10 days following the delivery of the application and will try to resolve the controversy without delay. The Administrative Commission may:

(a) convene the technical advisers or create the working groups or groups of experts that it deems necessary;

(b) resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other dispute resolution procedures; either

(c) make recommendations,

that can help the Parties to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute.


Article 16.6: Establishment of an Arbitral Tribunal

1. If the Parties fail to resolve the matter within:

(a) the following 25 days from the date of the meeting of the Administrative Commission called in accordance with article 16.5;

(b) the 50 days following the date of receipt of the request for consultations, when the Administrative Commission has not met in accordance with article 16.5.4;

(c) the 30 days following the date of receipt of the request for consultations regarding urgent cases, including those that affect perishable agricultural merchandise, when the Administrative Commission has not met in accordance with article 16.5.4; either

(d) any other period that the Parties agree,

either Party may request the establishment of an arbitral tribunal.

2. The request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal must be made in writing and identify in it:

(a) the specific measure submitted to you;

(b) the legal basis of the request including the provisions of this Agreement that are eventually being violated and any other relevant provision; and,

(c) the factual grounds for the request.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitral tribunal must be constituted and perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, an arbitral tribunal may not be constituted to review a proposed measure.


Article 16.7: Composition of Arbitral Tribunals

1. The arbitral tribunals will be made up of three members.

2. In the written notification pursuant to Article 16.6, the complaining Party shall designate a member of that arbitral tribunal.

3. Within 15 days of receiving the request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal, the Party complained against shall designate another member of the arbitral tribunal.

4. The Parties must agree on the appointment of the third arbitrator within 15 days following the appointment of the second arbitrator. The member thus elected shall act as president of the arbitral tribunal.

5. If it has not been possible to compose the arbitral tribunal within 30 days following the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal, the necessary appointments will be made, at the request of either Party, by the Secretary General from ALADI within the following 30 days.

6. The President of the arbitral tribunal may not be a national of any of the Parties, nor have his permanent residence in the territories of any of them, nor may he be an employee of any of the Parties or have had any participation in the case at any time. quality.

7. All referees must:

(a) have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;

(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of their objectivity, reliability and good judgment;

(c) be independent, not related to any of the Parties and not receive instructions from them; and

(d) comply with the Rules of Conduct for the Application of the Understanding Regarding Rules and Procedures Governing WTO Dispute Settlement (document WT/DSB/RC/1).

8. Those individuals who have participated in the procedures indicated in article 16.5 cannot be arbitrators in a dispute.

9. If any of the arbitrators appointed in accordance with this article resigns or is unable to serve as such, a replacement arbitrator will be appointed within a period of 15 days after the event occurred, according to the election procedure used to select the original arbitrator. , and the replacement shall have all the authority and obligations of the original arbitrator. If it has not been possible to appoint him within said period, the appointment will be made, at the request of any of the Parties, by the Secretary General of ALADI within the following 30 days.

10. The date of constitution of the arbitral tribunal will be the date on which its President is appointed.


Article 16.8: Functions of Arbitral Tribunals

1. The function of an arbitral tribunal is to make an objective assessment of the dispute submitted to it, including an objective assessment of the facts of the case and its applicability and conformity with this Agreement, as well as formulating other conclusions necessary for the solution of the dispute submitted to him.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall establish, in consultation with the Parties, its own procedures in relation to the rights of the Parties to be heard and their deliberations, as well as those matters included in article 16.9.


Article 16.9: Model Rules of Procedure

1. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the procedures of the arbitral tribunal will be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure, which will be established by the Administrative Commission upon the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within 20 days from the date of sending the request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal, the terms of reference of the arbitral tribunal shall be:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement, the matter indicated in the request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal in accordance with the provisions of Article 16.6 and formulate the conclusions, determinations and decisions in accordance with the provisions of Article 16.11. 3 and submit the reports referred to in articles 16.11 and 16.12".

3. When the complaining Party wishes the arbitral tribunal to rule on the nullification and impairment caused or formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse commercial effects that the breach of the obligations of this Agreement has generated for that Party, the terms of reference shall indicate it.

4. At the request of a Party or on its own initiative, the arbitral tribunal may request scientific information and technical advice from experts, as it deems appropriate. Any information obtained in this way shall be provided to the Parties to the dispute for their comments.

5. The arbitral tribunal will adopt its decisions by consensus. If the arbitral tribunal is unable to reach consensus, it will adopt its decisions by a majority of its members.

6. The expenses associated with the process, including the expenses of the members of the arbitral tribunal, must be borne in equal parts by the Parties, unless the arbitral tribunal determines otherwise based on the particular circumstances of the case.


Article 16.10: Suspension or Termination of the Procedure

1. The Parties may agree that the arbitral tribunal suspend its work at any time for a period not to exceed 12 months following the date of such agreement. If the work of the arbitral tribunal has been suspended for more than 12 months, the establishment of the arbitral tribunal will be without effect, unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the procedure as a result of a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the claiming party may, at any time, withdraw the request for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal, and the latter must immediately finish its work.


Article 16.11: Preliminary report

1. The report of the arbitral tribunal shall be drawn up without the presence of the Parties and shall be based on the relevant provisions of this Agreement and on the submissions and arguments of the Parties.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within 90 days of its constitution, or 60 days for urgent cases, including those involving perishable agricultural goods, the arbitral tribunal shall present a preliminary report to the Parties.

3. The preliminary report must contain:

(a) findings of fact;

(b) the determination of the arbitral tribunal as to whether a Party is in breach of its obligations under this Agreement or whether that Party's action causes nullification or impairment within the meaning of Article 16.2(c) or any other determination requested in the terms of reference; and

(c) the decision of the arbitral tribunal.

4. In exceptional cases, when the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot issue its preliminary report within a period of 90 days, or within a period of 60 days in urgent cases, it will inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the decision. delay and will include an estimate of the period in which it will issue its report. In no event may the period of delay exceed an additional period of 30 days, except as otherwise provided by the Parties.

5. The arbitrators may formulate dissenting opinions on issues for which there is no decision by consensus.

6. No arbitral tribunal may, either in its preliminary report or in its final report, disclose which arbitrators voted with the majority or with the minority.

7. A Party may submit to the arbitral tribunal written observations on the preliminary report, including the request referred to in Article 16.13.3, within 15 days of the submission of such report, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

8. After examining the written observations on the preliminary report, the arbitral tribunal shall respond to such observations and may reconsider its report and carry out any further examination it deems appropriate.


Article 16.12: Final report

1. The arbitral tribunal shall submit to the Parties a final report including dissenting opinions, if any, within 30 days of the submission of the preliminary report, unless the Parties agree otherwise. The Parties will publicly disclose the final report within the following 15 days, subject to the protection of confidential information.

2. If in its final report the arbitral tribunal determines that the Party complained against has not complied with the obligations contained in this Agreement, or that a measure of that Party causes nullification or impairment within the meaning of Article 16.2(c), the decision shall be , whenever possible, remove the breach or nullify or impair.


Article 16.13: Implementation of the Final Report

1. The final report of the arbitral tribunal will be final and binding for the Parties, and will not be subject to appeal.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they shall immediately implement the decision of the arbitral tribunal contained in the final report.

3. If the defendant Party cannot immediately comply with the decision of the arbitral tribunal, it must do so within a reasonable period of time. Said reasonable period of time will be agreed by the Parties in a period not exceeding 20 days from the notification of the Final Report and, in the absence of an agreement, will be set by the arbitral tribunal at the request of any of them, taking into consideration the observations referred to in article 16.11.7 within a period of 30 days following the date on which the request was made. Said determination shall be made in consultation with the Parties.


Article 16.14: Divergence on Compliance

1. In the event of disagreement regarding the implementation of measures intended to comply with the decision or the compatibility of said measures with this Agreement adopted within the reasonable period of time, this difference will be resolved in accordance with the dispute settlement procedure of this Chapter, with intervention, whenever possible, of the arbitral tribunal that initially heard the matter, not requiring in any case to exhaust the consultation and intervention stages of the Administrative Commission.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall distribute its report to the Parties within 60 days from the date the matter was submitted to it. When the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot issue its report within that term, it will inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay and will include an estimate of the term in which it will issue its report, which shall not exceed an additional period of 30 days.


Article 16.15: Compensation and Suspension of Benefits

1. Yes:

(a) the reasonable period of time has expired and the Party complained against does not notify that it has complied; either

(b) the arbitral tribunal, pursuant to Article 16.14, concludes that there are no measures taken to comply with the decision or such measures are inconsistent with this Agreement,

the complaining Party may suspend, with respect to the Party complained against, concessions or other obligations derived from this Agreement, equivalent to the level of nullification or impairment. The notification will specify the level of suspension and must be submitted at least 30 days in advance from the entry into force of the measures.

2. Without prejudice to what is mentioned in paragraph 1, the complaining Party may, at any time after delivery of the final report of the arbitral tribunal, require the defendant Party to enter into negotiations with a view to finding mutually acceptable compensation. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, said negotiation will not suspend the procedures already started, especially those mentioned in articles 16.14, 16.15.6 and 16.16, nor will it prevent the complaining Party from making use of the right established in paragraph 1.

3. The compensation and the suspension of concessions or other obligations are temporary measures and in no case preferable to the full implementation of the decision of the arbitral tribunal to bring the measure into conformity with this Agreement. The compensation and suspension of benefits will only be applied until the measure declared inconsistent with this Agreement has been removed, or until the Parties have reached a mutually satisfactory solution.

4. If the complaining Party decides to suspend benefits, it will do so in the same sector or sectors affected by the measure that the arbitral tribunal determined to be inconsistent with this Agreement or that causes nullification or impairment in accordance with Article 16.2(c), and only if this is not possible or ineffective, it will do so in another sector or area covered by the Agreement. The communication by virtue of which said decision is announced must indicate the reasons on which it is based.

5. At the written request of the defendant Party, within 30 days of the communication indicated in paragraph 1, the arbitral tribunal that has initially heard the matter shall determine if the level of concessions or other obligations that the complaining Party wishes to suspend is not equivalent to the level of nullification and impairment caused by the disputed measure, in accordance with paragraph 1, or if the procedures and principles of paragraph 4 have been followed.

6. The arbitral tribunal shall distribute its report to the Parties within 30 days from the date the matter is submitted in accordance with paragraph 5. The decision of the arbitral tribunal, which shall be made publicly available, shall be final and mandatory and the Parties shall not seek a second arbitration.


Article 16.16: Compliance Review

1. If the defendant Party considers that it has eliminated the non-conformity or the annulment or impairment found by the arbitral tribunal, it must notify the other Party of the compliance measure adopted. In case of well-founded disagreement as to the compatibility of said measure with this Agreement, the Party complained against may submit said matter to the procedure established in Article 16.14.

2. The complaining Party shall restore, without delay, the concessions or other obligations that it has suspended in accordance with Article 16.15, if it does not express its disagreement with the compliance measure adopted by the Party complained against within 15 days from the receipt of the notification in accordance with paragraph 1, or if you disagree without substantiating it, or if the court decides that the Party complained against has removed the disagreement.


Article 16.17: Other provisions

Any term indicated in this Chapter may be modified by common agreement between the Parties.


Article 16.18: Law of Individuals

Neither Party may grant right of action in its domestic law against the other Party on the grounds that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this Agreement.

 

Chapter 17

exceptions


Article 17.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapters 3 to 10 (Trade in Goods, Origin Regime, Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation, Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, and Technical Barriers to Trade), Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes shall be incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis . The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX(b) of the GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect human and animal life and health or to preserve plants, and that Article XX (g) of the GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources.

2. For the purposes of Chapter 12 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), GATS Article XIV (including its footnotes) is incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in GATS Article XIV(b) include environmental measures necessary to protect human and animal life and health or to preserve plants.


Article 17.2: Essential Safety

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; either

(b) prevent a Party from applying any measure it considers necessary for the fulfillment of its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations with respect to the maintenance and restoration of international peace and security, or to protect its essential interests in security matter.


Article 17.3: Taxation

1. Except as provided in this article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party arising from any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any of these agreements, the agreement will control to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax agreement signed between the Parties, the competent authorities in accordance with said agreement, will have the exclusive responsibility of determining if there is any incompatibility between this Agreement and that agreement.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 3.1 (National Treatment), and those other provisions of this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same degree as Article III of the GATT 1994; and

(b) Article 3.2.12 (Liberation Program – Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 12.3 (National Treatment) shall apply to tax measures on income, capital gains, or on the taxable capital of companies referring to the acquisition or consumption of specific services, except that nothing in the provisions of this literal will prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt of an advantage or that it continues to be received regarding the acquisition or consumption of specific services, to the requirement of supplying the service in its territory; and

(b) Articles 11.2 (National Treatment) and 11.3 (Most Favored Nation Treatment), Articles 12.3 (National Treatment) and 12.4 (Most Favored Nation Treatment) shall apply to all tax measures, except those on income , capital gains, or on the taxable capital of companies, taxes on wealth, inheritance, donations, and transfers with skipping generations ( generation-skipping transfers ),

none of the articles cited in subparagraphs (a) and (b), apply:

(c) to any most-favored-nation obligation in respect of benefits granted by a Party under a tax treaty;

(d) to any non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure;

(e) to the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure;

(f) to an amendment to a non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure, as long as that amendment does not reduce, at the time of effecting it, its degree of conformity with any of those articles;

(g) to the adoption or imposition of a tax measure aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective application or collection of taxes (as permitted under GATS Article XIV(d));

(h) to a provision that conditions the obtaining of an advantage or the continued obtaining of the same, in relation to contributions to, or income from, plans or pension funds, provided that the Party maintains permanent jurisdiction over the plan or pension funds.

5. Subject to paragraph 2 and without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under paragraph 3, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Article 11.6 (Performance Requirements), shall apply to tax measures .

6. Articles 11.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) and 11.16 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), shall apply to a tax measure that is alleged to be expropriatory. However, no investor may invoke article 11.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) as the basis of a claim, when it has been determined in accordance with this paragraph that the measure does not constitute an expropriation. An investor who intends to invoke article 11.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) with respect to a tax measure, must first submit the matter to the competent authorities indicated in Annex 17.3, at the time of making the notification of intent in accordance with article 11.16.3 ( Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), so that said authorities can determine if the measure constitutes an expropriation.


Article 17.4: Difficulties in the Balance of Payments

1. If a Party experiences serious external balance of payments and financial difficulties or the threat thereof, or is at risk of experiencing them, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures with respect to trade in goods and services and with respect to payments and movements of capital, including those related to direct investment.

2. The Parties shall endeavor to avoid the application of the restrictive measures referred to in paragraph 1.

3. The restrictive measures adopted or maintained under this article must be non-discriminatory and of limited duration and must not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments and external financial situation. They must be in accordance with the conditions established in the WTO Agreements and consistent with the articles of the Agreement or Constitutive Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, as appropriate.

4. The Party that maintains or has adopted restrictive measures, or any modification of these, will inform the other Party without delay and present, as soon as possible, a schedule for their elimination.

5. The Party applying restrictive measures shall initiate consultations without delay within the framework of the Administrative Commission. Such consultations shall assess the balance of payments situation of that Party and the restrictions adopted or maintained under this Article, taking into account, inter alia, factors such as:

(a) the nature and extent of external financial and balance of payments difficulties;

(b) the foreign economic and trade environment of the Party subject to consultations;

(c) other possible corrective measures that can be used.

Consultations will examine the conformity of any restrictive measures with paragraphs 3 and 4. All statistical or other factual findings submitted by the International Monetary Fund on exchange, reserve and balance issues will be accepted. of payments and the conclusions shall be based on the Fund's assessment of the external financial and balance of payments situation of the Party subject to consultations.


Article 17.5: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

tax treaty means an international double taxation avoidance treaty or other international taxation treaty or arrangement; and

Taxes and tax measures does not include:

(a) liens;

(b) antidumping or countervailing duties; neither

(c) duties or other charges related to importation, proportional to the bear d services rendered.

 

Chapter 18

Cooperation and Trade Promotion 1


Article 18.1: Cooperation

1. The Parties shall promote cooperation in economic matters such as trade policies and techniques; financial, monetary and public finance policies; customs matters; zoo and phytosanitary and bromatological regulations; energy and fuels, transport and communications; modern services, such as technology, engineering, consulting and others.

2. To carry out specific cooperation actions in economic matters, the competent entities of the respective areas may enter into agreements within the framework of their competence.

3. The Parties, with the participation of their respective private sectors, will foster the development of economic complementarity actions in the areas of goods and services.


Article 18.2: Commercial Promotion

The Parties will arrange joint commercial promotion programs that include, among other actions, the holding of samples, fairs and exhibitions, as well as reciprocal meetings and visits by businessmen and information on supply and demand and market studies.

 

Chapter 19

General disposition


Article 19.1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

The Exhibits, Appendices and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.


Article 19.2: Relationship with other International Agreements

1. The Parties confirm the existing rights and obligations between them in accordance with the WTO Agreement, the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, other international agreements to which both Parties are party, and regional or subregional integration agreements in which they participate. the parts.

2. In case of incompatibility between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in numeral 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

3. The Treaty of Lima of 1929 and its complementary Protocol, the Implementation Act of November 13, 1999 and its Regulations, as well as the Agreement between the Arica Port Company and the National Port Company SA of 1999, and the Inter-institutional Agreement on Dispute Settlement of 1999, shall prevail over the provisions of this Agreement.


Article 19.3: Succession of Agreements

Any reference to any other international agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms as to a successor agreement to which the Parties are party.


Article 19.4: Scope of Obligations

The Parties will guarantee the adoption of all necessary measures to give effect to the provisions of this Agreement in their respective territories.


Article 19.5: Information divulgation

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to disclose or allow access to information the disclosure of which may be:

(a) contrary to the public interest in accordance with its law;

(b) contrary to its laws including, but not limited to, the protection of privacy or financial affairs and individual customer accounts of financial institutions;

(c) constitutes an obstacle to compliance with the laws; either

(d) that may harm the legitimate commercial interests of public or private companies.


Article 19.6: Confidentiality

When a Party provides information to another Party in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and indicates that this information is confidential, the other Party must maintain the confidentiality of said information. This information will only be used for the specific purposes indicated, and may not be disclosed without the express authorization of the Party providing the information, unless said information must be disclosed in the context of a legal proceeding.


Article 19.7: Intellectual property

The Parties undertake to grant adequate protection to intellectual property, within their national legislation, undertaking that the defense of such rights do not constitute unjustified obstacles to bilateral trade.


Article 19.8: Public Price Policies

The Parties recognize that public pricing policies may have distorting effects on bilateral trade. Consequently, they agree not to resort to public pricing practices and policies that directly or indirectly mean an annulment or impairment of the benefits derived from this Agreement.


Article 19.9: Coordination

The Parties will promote coordinated action in international economic forums and in relation to industrialized countries, tending to improve the access of their products to the large international markets.

 

Chapter 20

Final Provisions


Article 20.1: Amendments, Modifications and Additions

1. The Parties may agree to any amendment, modification or addition to this Agreement.

2. The previously agreed and approved amendments, modifications and additions in accordance with the corresponding legal procedures of each Party, shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement.


Article 20.2: Amendment to the WTO Agreement

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into this Agreement is amended, the Parties will consult as to whether to amend this Agreement.


Article 20.3: Accession

1. In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement is open to accession, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries.

2. The accession will be formalized once its terms have been negotiated between the Parties and the adhering country, through the execution of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement that will enter into force 30 days after being deposited with the ALADI General Secretariat.


Article 20.4: convergence

The Parties will promote the convergence of this Agreement with other integration agreements of the Latin American countries, in accordance with the mechanisms established in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty.


Article 20.5: Future Negotiations

Public contracts

1. The Administrative Commission will study and propose, during the first year of entry into force of the Agreement, the terms that will regulate the negotiation of the Parties, in matters of public procurement.

Financial services

2. The Parties will meet 1 year after the entry into force of this Agreement to negotiate a chapter on financial services on a mutually convenient basis. For this purpose, the competent authorities will previously carry out the corresponding coordination.

Free trade zone

3. In order to evaluate the possibility of granting some special treatment to merchandise manufactured or coming from free zones, under the Agreement, the Administrative Commission, within a period of one year, counted from the entry into force of this Agreement, will focus on the analysis of these special regimes in force in both countries.

Tourism

4. The Parties agree to sign a cooperation agreement between the respective competent bodies of the tourism sector, in order to achieve, among other matters, the joint promotion of integrated tourism circuits in third countries and technical assistance.


Article 20.6: Entry into force

1. The entry into force of this Agreement is subject to the conclusion of the necessary internal legal procedures of each Party.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date of the last Notice in which one of the Parties communicates to the other that the aforementioned procedures have been completed or in any other term that the Parties agree.


Article 20.7: Complaint

1. The Party that wishes to denounce this Agreement must communicate its decision to the other Party, 180 days in advance of depositing the respective instrument of denunciation with the General Secretariat of ALADI.

2. As of the formalization of the complaint, the rights and obligations derived from this Agreement will automatically cease for the complaining Party, except in what refers to the treatments, received and granted, for the importation of negotiated products, which They will continue in force for a term of 1 year from the date of deposit of the respective denunciation instrument, unless the parties agree on a different period upon denunciation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement in two equally authentic copies.

DONE in Lima, on the twenty-second day of August 2006.

 

For the Government
of the Republic of Peru:

 

For the Government
of the Republic of Chile:

José García Belaúnde
Minister of Foreign Affairs

Alejandro Foxley
Minister of Foreign Affairs