FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE 
Preamble
The Government of the People’s Republic of China (“China”) and the Government of
the Republic of Chile (“Chile”), hereinafter referred to as “the Parties”;
Committed to strengthening the special bonds of friendship and cooperation between
their countries;
Sharing the belief that a free trade agreement shall produce mutual benefits to each
Party and contribute to the expansion and development of world trade under the
multilateral trading system embodied in the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the
World Trade Organization (“the WTO Agreement”);
Building on their respective rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement and other
multilateral, regional and bilateral instruments of cooperation;
Supporting the wider liberalization process in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) and in particular the efforts of all APEC economies to meet the Bogor goals of
free and open trade and the actions subscribed on the Osaka Action Agenda;
Recognizing the contribution, guidance and meaningful reference of the APEC Best
Practices for Regional Trade Arrangements (RTAs), Free Trade Agreements (FTAs),
and other Preferential Arrangements;
Resolved to promote reciprocal trade through the establishment of clear and mutually
advantageous trade rules and the avoidance of trade barriers;
Recognizing that this Agreement should be implemented with a view toward raising the
standard of living, creating new job opportunities, and promoting sustainable
development in a manner consistent with environmental protection and conservation;
and
Committed to promoting the public welfare within each of their countries;
Have agreed as follows:
2
Chapter I
Initial Provisions
Article 1 Establishment of a Free Trade Area
 The Parties to this Agreement, consistent with Article XXIV of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, hereby establish a free trade area.
Article 2 Objectives
1. The objectives of this Agreement, as elaborated more specifically through its
principles and rules, including national treatment, most-favored-nation (MFN) treatment,
and transparency, are to:
 (a) encourage expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;
 (b) eliminate barriers to trade in, and facilitate the cross-border movement of,
goods between the Parties;
 (c) promote conditions of fair competition in the free trade area;
 (d) create effective procedures for the implementation and application of this
Agreement, for its joint administration, and for the resolution of disputes;
and
 (e) establish a framework for further bilateral, regional, and multilateral
cooperation to expand and enhance the benefits of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in the light
of its objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with customary rules of
interpretation of public international law.
Article 3 Relation to Other Agreements
 The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which both Parties are parties.
Article 4 Extent of Obligations
 The Parties shall ensure that all necessary measures are taken in order to give
effect to the provisions of this Agreement in their respective territories.
3
Chapter II
General Definitions

Article 5 Definitions of General Application
 For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:
Commission means the Free Trade Commission established under Article 97;
customs authorities means the competent authority, which is responsible for the
enforcement national customs legislation;
days mean calendar days;
existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, which is part of
the WTO Agreement;
goods of a Party means domestic products as these are understood in the GATT 1994
or such goods as the Parties may agree and includes originating goods of that Party;
Harmonized System (HS) means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding
System, adopted by World Customs Organization;
heading means the first four digits in the tariff classification number under the
Harmonized System;
import customs duty means the duties which are collected in connection with the
importation of a good, but does not include:
(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with Article
III:2 of the GATT 1994; in respect of like, directly competitive or
substitutable goods of the Party, or in respect of goods from which the
imported good has been manufactured or produced in whole or in part;
(b) anti-dumping or countervailing duty; and
(c) fee or other charge in connection with importation commensurate with
 the cost of services rendered.
measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement, or practice;
originating means qualifying under the Rules of Origin set out in Chapter IV;
person means a natural person or a legal person, or any other entity established in
accordance with domestic law;
4
preferential tariff means the import customs duty rate applicable under this Agreement
to an originating good;
subheading means the first six digits in the tariff classification number under the
Harmonized System;

territory means:
(a) with respect to China, the entire customs territory of People’s Republic
of China, including land, maritime and air space, and the exclusive
economic zone and the continental shelf within which it exercises
sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international law and
its domestic law; and
 (b) with respect to Chile, the land, maritime, and air space under its
sovereignty, and the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf
within which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance
with international law and its domestic law.
TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights, which is part of the WTO Agreement;
WTO means the World Trade Organization; and
WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, done on April 15, 1994.
5
Chapter III
National Treatment and Market Access for Goods
Article 6 Scope and Coverage
Except as otherwise provided, this Chapter applies to trade in goods between the
Parties.
Article 7 National Treatment
 Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in
accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to
this end Article III of GATT 1994, and its interpretative notes, are incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
Article 8 Tariff Elimination
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any
existing import customs duty, or adopt any new import customs duty, on a good of the
other Party.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively
eliminate its import customs duties on originating goods in accordance with Annex 1.
3. If a Party reduces its applied most favored nation import customs duty rate
(except for the interim duty rate referred in the Article 4 and 9 of Regulation on Import
and Export Tariff of the People’s Republic of China) after the entry into force of this
Agreement and before the end of the tariff elimination period, the tariff elimination
schedule (Schedule) of that Party shall apply to the reduced rate.
4. On the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult to consider accelerating
the elimination of import customs duties set out in their Schedules. An agreement
between the Parties to accelerate the elimination of an import customs duty on a good
shall supersede any duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to their Schedules
for such good when approved by each Party in accordance with their respective
applicable legal procedures and subparagraph b of paragraph 3 of Article 97.
Article 9 Administrative Fees and Formalities
1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII:1 of the GATT 1994
and its interpretive notes, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than
import customs duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge
applied consistently with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, and antidumping and
countervailing duties) imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation are
limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent an
indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal
purposes.
6
2. Neither Party may require consular transactions, including related fees and
charges, in connection with the importation of any good of the other Party.
3. Each Party shall make available through the Internet or a comparable computerbased telecommunications network a current list of the fees and charges it imposes in
connection with importation or exportation.
Article 10 Geographical Indications
1. The terms listed in Annex 2A are geographical indications in China, within the
meaning of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of the TRIPS Agreement. Subject to domestic
laws and regulations, in a manner that is consistent with the TRIPS Agreement, such
terms will be protected as geographical indications in the territory of the other Party.
2. The terms listed in Annex 2B are geographical indications in Chile, within the
meaning of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of the TRIPS Agreement. Subject to domestic
laws and regulations, in a manner that is consistent with the TRIPS Agreement, such
terms will be protected as geographical indications in the territory of the other Party.
Article 11 Special Requirements Related to Border Measures
1. Each Party shall provide that any right holder initiating procedures for
suspension by the customs authorities of the release of suspected counterfeit trademark
or pirated copyright goods 1 into free circulation is required to provide adequate
evidence to satisfy the competent authorities that, under the laws of the Party of
importation, there is prima facie an infringement of the right holder’s intellectual
property right and to supply sufficient information to make the suspected goods
reasonably recognizable to the customs authorities. The sufficient information required
shall not unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures.
2. Each Party shall provide the competent authorities with the authority to require
an applicant to provide a reasonable security or equivalent assurance sufficient to
protect the defendant and the competent authorities and to prevent abuse. Such security
or equivalent assurance shall not unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures.
3. Where the competent authorities have made a determination that goods are
counterfeit or pirated, a Party shall grant the competent authorities the authority to
inform the right holder, at the right holder’s request, of the names and addresses of the
consignor, the importer, and the consignee, and of the quantity of the goods in question.
4. Each Party shall provide that the competent authorities are permitted to initiate
border measures ex officio, without the need for a formal complaint from a person or

1
 For the purposes of this Article:
(a) counterfeit trademark goods means any goods, including packaging, bearing without authorization a
trademark which is identical to the trademark validly registered in respect of such goods, or which cannot
be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark, and which thereby infringes the rights of
the owner of the trademark in question under the law of the Party of importation;
(b) pirated copyright goods means any goods which are copies made without the consent of the right
holder or person duly authorized by the right holder in the Party of production and which are made
directly or indirectly from an article where the making of that copy would have constituted an
infringement of a copyright or a related right under the law of the Party of importation.
7
right holder. Such measures shall be used when there is reason to believe or suspect that
goods being imported, or destined for export are counterfeit or pirated.
5. This Article shall be implemented no later than two years upon entry into force
of this Agreement.
Article 12 Agricultural Export Subsidies
1. The Parties share the objective of the multilateral elimination of export subsidies
for agricultural goods and shall work together toward an agreement in the World Trade
Organization to eliminate those subsidies and prevent their reintroduction in any form.
2. Neither Party shall introduce or maintain any export subsidy on any agricultural
good destined for the territory of the other Party.
Article 13 Committee on Trade in Goods
1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods, comprising
representatives of each Party.
2. The Committee shall meet on the request of either Party or the Commission to
consider any matter arising under this Chapter, Chapter IV or Chapter V.
3. The Committee’s functions shall include:
(a) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through
consultations on accelerating tariff elimination under this Agreement and
other issues as appropriate; and
(b) addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties, especially those
related to the application of non-tariff measures, and, if appropriate,
referring such matters to the Commission for its consideration.
Article 14 Definitions
 For purposes of this Chapter:
agricultural goods means those goods referred to in Article 2 of the Agreement on
Agriculture, which is part of the WTO Agreement;
consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for export to
the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the supervision of the consul of
the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining
consular invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin,
manifests, shippers’ export declarations or any other customs documentation required
on or in connection with importation; and
export subsidies shall have the meaning assigned to that term in Article 1(e) of the
Agreement on Agriculture, which is part of the WTO Agreement, including any
amendment of that Article.
8
Chapter IV
Rules of Origin
Article 15 Originating Goods
 For the purpose of this Agreement, a good shall be regarded as originating in
China or in Chile when:
(a) the good is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one
Party, within the meaning of Article 16;
(b) the good is produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties,
exclusively from materials whose origin conforms to the provisions of
this Chapter; or
(c) the good is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, using nonoriginating materials that conform to a regional value content not less
than 40%, except for the goods listed in the Annex 3, which must comply
with the requirements specified therein. All goods must meet the other
applicable requirements of this Chapter.
Article 16 Wholly Obtained Goods
 For the purpose of subparagraph (a) of Article 15, the following goods shall be
regarded as wholly obtained or produced in the territory of one Party:
(a) mineral products extracted from the soil or from the seabed of China or
Chile;
(b) plants and plants products harvested in China or Chile;
(c) live animals, born and raised in China or Chile;
 (d) products from live animals raised in China or Chile;
(e) products obtained by hunting, trapping or fishing in inland waters
conducted in China or Chile;

(f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the territorial sea
or the exclusive economic zone of China or Chile; 2

(g) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea beyond the
exclusive economic zone by a vessel flying the flag of China or Chile;

2
 Products of sea fishing and other products, if exclusively taken by a vessel registered or recorded within
a Party and flying its flag, from the sea within its exclusive economic zone shall be regarded as wholly
obtained in that Party.
9
(h) products manufactured on board a factory ship flying the flag of China or
Chile, exclusively from products referred to in subparagraphs (f) and (g);
(i) used articles collected in China or Chile fit only for the recovery of raw
materials;
(j) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted in
China or Chile and are fit only for the recovery of raw materials;
(k) products extracted from the seabed or beneath the seabed outside the
territorial sea of China or Chile, provided that they have sole rights to
exploit such seabed; and
(l) products manufactured in China or Chile exclusively from products
specified in subparagraphs (a) to (k).
Article 17 Regional Value Content (RVC)
1. The regional value content of a good shall be calculated on the basis of the
following method:
 V – VNM
RVC = ----------------- x 100
 V
where:
RVC means the regional value content expressed as a percentage;
V means the value of the good, as defined in the Customs Valuation
Agreement, adjusted on an FOB basis; and
VNM means the value, as defined in the Customs Valuation Agreement, of the
non-originating materials, adjusted on a CIF basis, except as provided in
paragraph 4.
2. The percentage of regional value content shall not be less than 40%, except for
the goods listed in Annex 3, which shall comply with the Product Specific Rules as
provided under Article 18.
3. The value of the non-originating materials used by the producer in the
production of a good shall not include, for purposes of calculating the regional value
content of the good, pursuant to paragraph 1, the value of non-originating materials used
to produce originating materials that are subsequently used in the production of the
good.
4. When the producer of the good acquires a non-originating material within the
Party’s territory where it is located, the value of such material shall not include freight,
insurance, packing costs, and any other costs incurred in transporting the material from
the supplier’s warehouse to the producer’s location.
10
Article 18 Product Specific Rules
 For the purpose of determining the origin of the goods, the goods listed in Annex
3 shall comply with the corresponding origin criteria specified therein.
Article 19 Operations that Do Not Confer Origin
1. The following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or
processing to confer the status of originating products:
(a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good
condition during transport and storage;
(b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;
(c) washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
(d) ironing or pressing of textiles;
(e) simple painting and polishing operations;
(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and
rice;
(g) operations to color sugar or form sugar lumps;
(h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;
(i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching; (including the
making-up of sets of articles);
(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards
or boards and all other simple packaging operations;
(l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing
signs on products or their packaging;
(m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds;
(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or
disassembly of products into parts;
(o) operations whose sole purpose is to ease port handling;
(p) a combination of two or more operations specified in subparagraphs (a)
to (o); and
11
(q) slaughter of animals.
2. For purposes of this Article:
(a) simple, generally describes activities which need neither special skills
nor special machines, apparatus or equipment specially produced or
installed for carrying out the activity; and
(b) simple mixing, generally describes activities which need neither special
skills nor machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or
installed for carrying out the activity. However, simple mixing does not
include chemical reaction.
Article 20 Accumulation
 Where originating goods or materials of a Party are incorporated into a good in
the other Party’s territory, the goods or materials so incorporated shall be regarded to be
originating in the latter’s territory.
Article 21 De Minimis.
 A good that does not conform to the tariff classification change, pursuant to the
provisions of Annex 3, shall be considered to be originating even if the value of all nonoriginating materials used in its production not meeting the tariff classification change
requirement does not exceed 8% of the value of the given good, determined pursuant to
Article 17.
Article 22 Sets
 Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded
as originating when all the components of the sets are originating. Nevertheless, when a
set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be
regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not
exceed 15% of the total value of the set, determined pursuant to Article 17.
Article 23 Accessories, Spare Parts, and Tools
 Accessories, spare parts, or tools presented as part of the good upon importation
shall be disregarded when determining the origin of the good, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, or tools are classified with and not invoiced
separately from the good; and
(b) the quantities and the value of said accessories, spare parts, or tools are
the normal ones for the good.
12
Article 24 Packaging Materials and Containers for Retail Sale
 If the goods are subject to a change in tariff classification criteria set out in
Annex 3, the origin of the packaging materials and containers in which goods are
packaged for retail sale shall be disregarded in determining the origin of the goods,
provided that the packaging materials and containers are classified with the goods.
However, if the goods are subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of
the packaging materials and containers used for retail sale shall be taken into account
when determining the origin of the goods.

Article 25 Packing Materials and Containers for Shipment
 The packing materials and containers used to protect a good during its
transportation, shall not be taken into account when determining the origin of the good.
Article 26 Neutral Elements
1. In order to determine whether a product originates, the origin of the neutral
elements defined in paragraph 2 shall not be taken into account.
2. Neutral element mean articles used in the production of a good which are, not
physically incorporated into it, neither form part of it, including:
(a) fuel, energy, catalysts and solvents;
(b) equipment, devices, and supplies used for testing or inspecting the goods;
(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and supplies;
(d) tools, dies and molds;
(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and
buildings;
(f) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used in
production or used to operate equipment and buildings; and
(g) any other goods that are not incorporated into the good but whose use in
the production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be a part
of that production.
Article 27 Direct Transport
1. Preferential tariff treatment provided for in this Agreement shall be applied to
goods which satisfy the requirements of this Chapter and are directly transported
between the Parties.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, where the transit of goods takes place through
non-Parties for storage, with or without transshipment, a maximum length of time not
13
exceeding three months shall be imposed on the duration of stay of the goods since its
entry into non-Parties.
3. To be eligible for preferential tariff treatment, goods shall not undergo any
processing or production process in a non-Party except for loading, unloading, reloading,
packing, packaging, repackaging or any other operation necessary for preservation in
good condition or transportation.
4. Compliance with the provisions set out in paragraph 2 and 3 shall be
authenticated by presenting to the customs authorities of the importing Party either with
customs documents of the non-Parties or with any other documents so provided to the
satisfaction of the customs authorities of the importing Party.
Article 28 Exhibitions
1. Preferential tariff treatment as provided for under this Agreement shall be
granted to originating products, sent for exhibition in a non-Party and sold after the
exhibition for importation in China or Chile when the following conditions are met to
the satisfaction of the customs authorities of the importing Party:
(a) an exporter has consigned these products from China or Chile to the
non-Party where the exhibition has actually taken place;
(b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to
a person in China or Chile;
(c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately
thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition;
(d) the products have not been used for any purpose other than
demonstration at the exhibition since they were consigned for exhibition;
and
(e) the products have remained during the exhibition under customs
authorities control.
2. For the purpose of application of paragraph 1, a certificate of origin shall be
issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V and submitted to the customs
authorities of the importing Party, with the name and address of the exhibition being
attached thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence related to the
exhibition may be required.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition,
fair or similar public show or display which is not organized for private purposes in
shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products.
14
Article 29 Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter:
CIF means the value of the good imported, inclusive of the cost of freight and insurance
up to the port or place of entry into the country of importation;
Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, which is part of the WTO
Agreement;
FOB means the value of the good free on board, independent of the means of
transportation, at the port or site of final shipment abroad;
material means a good that is used in the production or transformation of another good,
including a part or an ingredient;
production means growing, raising, mining, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting,
manufacturing, processing, or assembling a good; and
producer means a person who grows, raises, mines, harvests, fishes, hunts,
manufactures, processes or assembles a good.
15
Chapter V
Procedures Related to Rules of Origin
Article 30 Certificate of Origin
1. To qualify originating goods for preferential tariff treatment,
Certificate of Origin as set out in Annex 4 shall be submitted on
importation.
2. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the competent governmental
authorities, for China by the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection
and Quarantine, and for Chile as defined in the Annex 5, on the written application
presented by the exporter. The Certificate of Origin must be completed in English and
duly signed, covering one or more goods under one consignment. The original
Certificate of Origin must be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party.
3. The exporter applying for a Certificate of Origin shall provide all necessary
documents to prove the originating status of the products concerned as required by the
competent governmental authorities, and undertake to fulfill the other requirements as
laid down under this Chapter.
4. The issuing competent governmental authorities shall have the rights, by taking
any appropriate measures prior to the exportation, to examine the originating status of
the products and the fulfillment of the other requirements of this Chapter. For this
purpose, they shall have the rights to request any supportive evidence and to carry out
any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.
5. A Certificate of Origin as referred to in paragraph 1 shall be valid for one year
from the date of issue in the exporting Party. The original Certificate of Origin must be
submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing Party. In the
case of China, the original Certificate of Origin without the stamp of “ORIGINAL”
shall be presented to the customs authorities of Chile. In the case of Chile, there shall be
only one copy of the Certificate of Origin bearing the stamp of “ORIGINAL” to be
presented to the customs authorities of China.
6. The Parties shall implement a Certification and Verification Networking System
on the Certificate of Origin (CVNSCO) in two years after the signature of this
Agreement as laid down under the Annex 6.
Article 31 Refund of Import Customs Duties or Deposit
 Each Party shall provide that, where a good would had been qualified as an
originating good when it was imported into the territory of that Party but without
Certificate of Origin under this Agreement at that time, the importing customs
authorities may impose general import customs duty or deposit on that good, where
applicable. In this case, the importer may apply for a refund of any excess import
customs duties paid or deposit imposed, where applicable, as the result of the good not
having been accorded with preferential tariff treatment, within one year for the duty
16
paid or three months for the deposit imposed, where applicable, after the date on which
the good was imported, on presentation of:
(a) a written declaration at the time of importation that the good presented is
qualified as an originating good;
(b) the original Certificate of Origin which was issued prior to or within 30
days after the exportation; and
(c) other documentation relating to the importation of the good as the
customs authorities of the importing Party may require.
Article 32 Exceptions from Certificate of Origin
1. Each Party shall provide that a Certificate of Origin shall not be required for:
(a) a commercial importation of a good whose value does not exceed US$
600 or its equivalent amount in the Party's currency, except that it may
require that the invoice accompanying the importation include a
statement certifying that the good is qualified as an originating good;
(b) a non-commercial importation of a good whose value does not exceed
US$ 600 or its equivalent amount in the Party's currency; or
(c) an importation of a good for which the Party into whose territory the
good is imported has waived the requirement for a Certificate of Origin.
If a Party decides to apply this provision it shall notify the exporting
Party.
2. Exceptions established in subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c), shall be applicable
provided that the importation does not form part of one or more importations that may
reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of
avoiding the certification requirements of Article 30.
Article 33 Supporting Documents
The documents referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 30 used for the purpose of
proving that products covered by a Certificate of Origin can be considered as products
originating and fulfill the other requirements of this Chapter may include but not limited
to the following:
(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to
obtain the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or
internal book-keeping;
(b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, where these
documents are used in accordance with the domestic legislation;
(c) documents proving the working or processing of materials, where these
documents are used in accordance with the domestic legislation; or
17
(d) certificates of origin proving the originating status of materials used.
Article 34 Obligations Regarding Importations
1. Each Party’s customs authorities shall require that an importer claiming
preferential tariff treatment for a good to:
(a) make a written declaration, in the importation document established in its
legislation, based on a valid Certificate of Origin, that the good is
qualified as an originating good;
(b) have a Certificate of Origin in its possession at the time the import
declaration referred to in subparagraph (a);
(c) provide, upon request of the customs authorities, the original Certificate
of Origin; and
(d) promptly make a corrected declaration and pay any duties owed, where
the importer has reason to believe that a Certificate of Origin on which a
declaration was based contains information that is not correct.
2. Each Party shall provide that, when an importer in its territory does not comply
with any requirement established in Chapter III, Chapter IV and this Chapter, the
claimed preferential tariff treatment shall be denied for the imported goods from the
territory of the other Party.
Article 35 Invoicing by a Non-Party Operator
 When a good to be traded is invoiced by a non-Party operator, the exporter of
the originating Party shall indicate, in the field title “Remarks” of the respective
Certificate of Origin, the following data of the producer in the originating Party: name,
address and country. The consignee written in the Certificate of Origin must be from
China or Chile.
Article 36 Preservation of Certificate of Origin and Supporting
 Documents
1. The exporter applying for the issue of a Certificate of Origin shall keep for at
least three years the documents referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 30 and Article 34.
2. The competent governmental authorities of the exporting Party issuing a
Certificate of Origin shall keep a copy of the Certificate of Origin for at least three years.
Article 37 Cooperation and Mutual Assistance
1. The competent governmental authority of the exporting Party shall provide to
the customs authorities of the importing Party with specimen impression of stamps used
for the issuing of Certificate of Origin, and the specimen of the stamp of “ORIGINAL”
from Chile, and with the address of the competent governmental authorities.
18
2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Chapter, the Parties shall assist
each other, in checking the authenticity of Certificate of Origin and the correctness of
the information given in this certificate and supporting documents as established in
paragraph 3 of Article 30 and may use electronic means in this process.
3. The customs authorities of the Parties shall negotiate a Mutual Administrative
Assistance Agreement that will cover relevant customs issues.
Article 38 Verification of Origin
1. Verification of origin shall be carried out whenever the customs authorities of
the importing Party have doubts as to the authenticity of Certificate of Origin, the
originating status of the products concerned or the fulfillment of the other requirements
of this Chapter.
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs
authorities of the importing Party shall return a photo-copy of Certificate of Origin, to
the competent governmental authorities of the exporting Party, indicating the reasons
for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained establishing that the
information given on the Certificate of Origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support
of the request for verification.
3. The verification shall be carried out by the competent governmental authorities
of the exporting Party. For this purpose, they shall have the rights to call for any
evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check
considered appropriate.
4. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the
results of this verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate clearly
whether the documents are authentic, whether the products concerned can be considered
as products originating and fulfill the other requirements of this Chapter, including the
findings of facts and the legal basis for the determination.

5. If no reply within six months of the date of the verification request was received
or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of
the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs
authorities shall deny preferential tariff treatment.
6. Where the customs authorities of the importing Party determines that it has been
certified more than once falsely or without substantiation that a good qualifies as
originating, the customs authorities of the importing Party may suspend preferential
tariff treatment to identical goods imported by the same importer, until it demonstrates
that it has complied with the provisions under this Agreement.
7. All the information requested, supporting documents, and all other related
information exchange between the customs authorities of the importing Party and the
competent governmental authorities regarding this Article may be communicated
electronically.
19
Article 39 Penalties
 Penalties shall be imposed in accordance with domestic legislation of each Party
for infringement on the provisions of this Chapter.
Article 40 Confidentiality
1. The Parties shall maintain the confidentiality of confidential business
information acquired pursuant to this Chapter. Any violation of the confidentiality shall
be treated in accordance with the domestic legislation of each Party.
2. This information may only be disclosed to those customs and revenue authorities,
or in the context of judicial proceedings.
Article 41 Advance Rulings
1. Customs authorities of each Party, shall issue written advance rulings prior to the
importation of a good into its territory upon written request of an importer in its territory,
or an exporter in the territory of the other Party 3 , on the basis of the facts and
circumstances provided by the requester, including a detailed description of the
information required to process a request for an advance ruling, concerning:
(a) tariff classification; or
(b) whether a good qualifies as an originating good under the provision
established in this Agreement.
2. The customs authorities shall issue advance rulings after receiving a written
request, provided that the requester has submitted all necessary information. The
issuance of advance ruling on determination of origin of a good shall be made within
150 days.
3. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings shall be in force from their date of
issuance, or such other date specified by the ruling, for at least one year, provided that
the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based remain unchanged.
4. The customs authorities issuing the advance ruling may modify or revoke an
advance ruling where facts or circumstances prove that the information on which the
advance ruling is based is false or inaccurate.
5. Where an importer claims that the treatment accorded to an imported good
should be governed by an advance ruling, the customs authorities may evaluate whether
the facts and circumstances of the importation are consistent with the facts and
circumstances upon which the advance ruling was based.
6. Each Party shall make its advance rulings publicly available, subject to
confidentiality requirements in its domestic law, for purposes of promoting the
consistent application of advance rulings to other goods.

3
 For China, the applicant of an advance ruling on tariff classification shall be registered with a local
customs authority of China.
20
7. If a requester provides false information or omits relevant circumstances or facts
in its request for an advance ruling, or does not act in accordance with the ruling’s terms
and conditions, the importing Party may apply appropriate measures, including civil,
criminal, and administrative actions, penalties, or other sanctions in accordance with its
domestic laws.
Article 42 Other Customs Issues Related to Rules of Origin
 Each Party:
(a) subject to its domestic law, shall publish its customs laws, regulations,
and customs procedures of general application which are related to Rules
of Origin, on the websites and designate one or more inquiry points to
address inquiries from interested persons concerning origin matters,
consulting by Internet or other means;
(b) shall exchange the statistics regarding the imports under this Agreement
from the other Party as early as possible, and at least before the end of
February; and
(c) shall designate focal points between the two customs authorities to
ensure the effective and efficient implementation of Rules of Origin
under this Agreement.
Article 43 Transitional Provision for Goods in Transit or Storage
 The provisions of this Agreement may be applied to goods which comply with
the provisions of this Chapter and which on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement are either in transit from China or Chile, or in temporary storage in customs
warehouses or in free zones. The importer shall submit to the customs authorities of the
importing Party, within four months of the said date, a Certificate of Origin, and shall
be prepared to submit all documents supporting that good is originating. In this case, the
competent governmental authorities may issue retroactively Certificates of Origin
within this transitional period.
21
Chapter VI
Trade Remedies
Section 1
Bilateral Safeguards
Article 44 Imposition of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure
l. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a duty provided for in this
Agreement, a product benefiting from preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement
is being imported into the territory of a Party in such increased quantities, in absolute
terms or relative to the domestic production and under such conditions as to constitute a
substantial cause of serious injury or threat thereof to a domestic industry producing a
like or directly competitive product, the importing Party may impose a safeguard
measure described in paragraph 2, during the transition period only.
2. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, a Party may, to the extent as may be
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury, or threat thereof, and to facilitate
adjustment:
(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of duty on the product provided
for under this Agreement; or
(b) increase the rate of duty on the product to a level not to exceed the lesser
of
i) the MFN applied rate of duty in effect at the time the action is
taken; or
ii) the MFN applied rate of duty in effect on the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.4
Article 45 Standards for a Definitive Bilateral Safeguard
1. A Party may apply a definitive safeguard measure for an initial period of one
year, with an extension not exceeding one year. Regardless of its duration, such measure
shall terminate at the end of the transition period.
2. Neither Party may impose a safeguard measure more than once on the same
product.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, in the case of a product for which the transition
period is over five years, a Party may impose a safeguard measure for a second time on
the same product, provided that a period equal to that of the previously imposed
measure has elapsed.

4
 The Parties understand that neither tariff rate quotas nor quantitative restrictions would be a permissible
form of a safeguard measure.
22
4. Neither Party may impose a safeguard measure on a product that is subject to a
measure that the Party has imposed pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the
Safeguards Agreement, and neither Party may continue maintaining a safeguard
measure on a product that becomes subject to a measure that the Party imposes pursuant
to Article XIX of GATT l994 and the Safeguards Agreement.
5. On the termination of a safeguard measure, the rate of duty shall be the duty set
out in the Party’s schedu1e to Annex 1 of this Agreement as if the measure had never
been applied.
Article 46 Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements
1. The importing Party may take a safeguard measure under this Section only
following an investigation by its competent authorities and in accordance with Article 3
of the Safeguards Agreement; and to this end Article 3 of the Safeguards Agreement is
incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
2. In determining whether increased imports of an originating product of the other
Party have caused serious injury or are threatening to cause serious injury to a domestic
industry, the competent authority of the importing Party shall, based on objective
evidence, evaluate the effect of the increased imports on the domestic industry by
considering the following economic factors: the rate and amount of the increase in
imports of the originating product, the share of the domestic market taken by the
increased imports, changes in the level of sales, production, productivity, capacity
utilization, profits and losses, and employment. The list is not exhaustive, nor can one
or several of these factors necessarily give decisive guidance.
3. When factors other than increased imports of an originating product of the other
Party resulting from the reduction or elimination of an import custom duty pursuant to
this Agreement are simultaneously causing injury to the domestic industry, the injury
caused by other factors shall not be attributed to the increased imports of the product
from the other Party.
Article 47 Provisional Measures
 In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage which it would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional safeguard measure pursuant to a
preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports have
caused or are threatening to cause serious injury. The duration of the provisional
measure shall not exceed 200 days. Such a measure should take the form of tariff
increase to be promptly refunded if the subsequent investigation does not determine that
increased imports have caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a domestic
industry. The duration of any such provisional measure shall be counted as a part of the
initial period and any extension of a definitive measure.
Article 48 Notification
1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party, in writing, on:
23
 (a) initiating an investigation;
 (b) taking a provisional safeguard measure;
(c) making a finding of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased
imports;
(d) taking a decision to impose or extend a definitive measure; and
(e) taking a decision to modify a measure previously undertaken.
2. In making the notifications referred to in subparagraphs (d) and (e) of paragraph
1, the Party applying the measure shall provide the other Party all pertinent information,
such as a precise description of the product involved, the proposed measure, the grounds
for introducing such a measure, the proposed date of introduction and its expected
duration. The notifying Party shall provide a courtesy non-official English translation of
the notification.
3. A Party applying a provisional or definitive measure or extending a safeguard
measure shall provide adequate opportunity for exchange of information and views on
the measure with the other Party.
Article 49 Compensation
l. Upon the request of the Party whose product is subject to a safeguard measure,
the Party taking a safeguard measure shall hold consultations in order to provide to the
other Party mutually agreed trade liberalizing compensation in the form of concessions
having substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value of the additional
duties expected to result from the measure.
2. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement on compensation within 45 days
after the request under paragraph 1, the exporting Party shall be free to suspend the
application of substantially equivalent concessions to the trade of the Party applying the
safeguard measure. The right of suspension referred to in this paragraph shall not be
exercised for the first year that a safeguard measure is in effect, provided that the
safeguard measure has been taken as a result of an absolute increase in imports and that
such a measure conforms to the provisions of this Chapter.
3. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing at least 30 days before suspending
concessions under paragraph 2.
4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph l and the right to
suspend substantially equivalent concessions under paragraph 2 shall terminate on the
date of the termination of the safeguard measure.
Article 50 Definitions
 For purposes of this Section:
24
competent authority means:
 (a) in the case of China, Ministry of Commerce, or its successor; and
(b) in the case of Chile, the National Commission in Charge of the
Investigation of the Existence of Price Distortions in Imported Products
(Comisión Nacional Encargada de Investigar la Existencia de
Distorsiones en el Precio de las Mercaderías Importadas), or its
successor;
domestic industry means, with respect to an imported product, the producers as a
whole of the like or directly competitive product or those producers whose collective
production of the like or directly competitive product constitutes a major proportion of
the total domestic production of such product;
Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, which is part of the WTO
Agreement;
safeguard measure means a safeguard measure described in paragraph 2 of Article 44;
serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry;
threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and not merely
on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility, is clearly imminent; and
transition period means the three year period beginning on the date of entry into force
of this Agreement, except in the case of a product where the liberalization process lasts
five or more years, the transition period shall be equal to the period in which such a
product reaches zero tariff according to the Schedule to Annex 1 of this Agreement.
Section 2
Global Safeguards, Antidumping and Countervailing
Article 51 Global Safeguard Measures
1. The Parties maintain their rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT
l994 and the Safeguards Agreement as defined in Article 50.
2. Actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement as defined in Article 50 shall not be subject to Chapter X of this Agreement.
Article 52 Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Duty Matters
l. The Parties maintain their rights and obligations under the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures, which are parts of the WTO Agreement.
25
2. Antidumping actions taken pursuant to Article VI of GATT l994 and the
Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 or countervailing actions
taken pursuant to Article VI of GATT l994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures shall not be subject to Chapter X of this Agreement.
26
Chapter VII
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Article 53 Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) promote and facilitate the trade of animals, products of animal origin,
plants and products of vegetal origin between the Parties, protecting at
the same time public health, animal and vegetable health;
(b) improve between the Parties the implementation of the SPS Agreement;
(c) provide a forum to approach bilateral sanitary and phytosanitary
measures, to solve the problems of trade that from them derives, and to
expand trade opportunities; and
(d) provide mechanisms of communication and cooperation to resolve
sanitary and phytosanitary issues in a prompt and efficient manner.
Article 54 Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party which
may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.
2. The Parties shall ensure that the memoranda and protocols which will be
amended or agreed in the future by competent authorities shall be in accordance with
the principles and disciplines stipulated in this Chapter.
Article 55 Competent Authorities
1. The competent authorities of the Parties are the authorities competent for the
application of the measures of this Chapter, as provided in paragraph 10 of Article 58.
2. The Parties will communicate any significant change in the structure,
organization and division of the competent authorities.
3. For the suitable implementation of the Chapter, bilateral contact between the
homologous sanitary and phytosanitary agencies will be promoted and strengthened.
Article 56 General Provisions
1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other under
the SPS Agreement, which is considered as an integral part of this text, specially that
relates to:
27
(a) each Party will ensure that its sanitary and phytosanitary measures do not
arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminate between its own and that of the
other Party;
(b) the Parties will tend to harmonize in the highest possible degree their
sanitary and phytosanitary measures;
(c) these measures must have a scientific base, either through the adoption
of an international norm, or by means of risk assessment;
(d) these measures will adapt to regional conditions; and
(e) these measures should be established in a transparent form, notified
opportunely and reasonable period of time should be granted for their
coming into effect except otherwise prescribed by the SPS Agreement.
2. In accordance with the provisions of the SPS Agreement, the Parties have the
right to establish or maintain their sanitary and phytosanitary measures as their domestic
legislation, for the protection of human, animal and plant life or health.
3. For the purpose of trade facilitation, access shall be given, upon request, to the
importing Party for inspection, testing and other relevant procedures that may include:
(a) inspection and quarantine of the shipments of plants and animals and
their respective products;
(b) verification on the procedures of certification and control, and production
processes of the other Party; and
(c) the results of these verifications will be informed in writing to the other
Party, in a reasonable period of time, giving sufficient time for the
implementation of the corrective measures.

Article 57 Transparency
1. The Parties agree the full implementation of Article 7 of the SPS Agreement in
accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.
2. The Parties shall work towards increasing the information exchange, including
the rule-making procedures for the establishment of the sanitary and phytosanitary
measures that needs to be undertaken as well as information regarding noncompliance
with sanitary and phytosanitary requirements of importing Party without undue delay.
3. The Parties will opportunely exchange information related to the sanitary and
phytosanitary condition in their territories and will provide the necessary information to
develop risk assessment and equivalence processes.
4. The sanitary and phytosanitary enquiry points of the Parties established under
the SPS Agreement, shall set up a bilateral mechanism for further communication and
28
transparency. The Parties shall provide upon request a copy of the full text of the
proposed regulation notified and allow at least 60 days for comments.
Article 58 Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Matters
1. The Parties hereby agree to establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Matters composed of each Party’s representatives who have responsibility for sanitary
and phytosanitary matters.
2. The Parties shall establish the Committee in a period not longer than one year
after the date of entry into force of this Agreement through an exchange of letters
identifying the primary representatives of each Party to the Committee.
3. The objectives of the Committee shall be to ensure the achievement of the
objectives stated in this Chapter.
4. The Committee shall seek to enhance any present or future relationship between
the Parties’ agencies with responsibility for sanitary and phytosanitary matters.
5. The Committee shall provide a forum for:
 (a) enhancing mutual understanding of each Party’s sanitary and
phytosanitary measures and the regulatory processes related to those
measures;
 (b) consulting on matters related to the development or application of
sanitary and phytosanitary measures that affect, or may affect, trade
between the Parties;
 (c) consulting on issues, positions, and agendas for meetings of the WTO
SPS Committee, the various Codex committees (including the Codex
Alimentarius Commission), the International Plant Protection
Convention, the World Organization for Animal Health, and other
international and regional fora on food safety and human, animal, and
plant health;
 (d) coordinating technical cooperation programs on sanitary and
phytosanitary matters;
 (e) improving bilateral understanding related to specific implementation
issues concerning the SPS Agreement;
 (f) reviewing progress on addressing sanitary and phytosanitary matters that
may arise between the Parties’ agencies with responsibility for such
matters; and
(g) holding consultations on the disputes concerning sanitary and
phytosanitary matters, which will constitute consultations under Article
82 of this Agreement.
29
6. The Committee shall meet at least once a year unless the Parties otherwise agree.
7. The Committee shall perform its work in accordance with the terms of reference
established at its first meeting. The Committee may revise the terms of reference and
may develop procedures to guide its operation.
8. Each Party shall ensure that appropriate representatives with responsibility for
the development, implementation, and enforcement of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures from its relevant trade and regulatory agencies or ministries participate in
meetings of the Committee. The official agencies and ministries of each Party
responsible for such measures shall be set out in the Committee’s terms of reference.
9. The Committee may agree to establish ad hoc technical working groups in
accordance with the Committee’s terms of reference.
10. The Committee shall be coordinated by:
(a) in the case of China, the Director General of Inspection & Quarantine
Clearance Department of General Administration of Quality Supervision
Inspection and Quarantine (AQSIQ), or its representative; and
(b) in the case of Chile, the General Director of the General Directorate for
International Economics Affairs (Dirección General de Relaciones
Económicas Internacionales) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or its
representative.
Article 59 Definitions
1. For purposes of this Chapter, SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which is part of the WTO
Agreement.
2. The definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement will be applied in the
implementation of this Chapter.
30
Chapter VIII
Technical Barriers to Trade
Article 60 Objectives
 The objectives of this Chapter are to increase and facilitate trade, and to fulfill
the objectives of this Agreement, through the improvement of the implementation of the
TBT Agreement, the elimination of unnecessary technical barriers to trade, and the
enhancement of bilateral cooperation.
Article 61 Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter applies to all technical regulations, and conformity assessment
procedures that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade in goods except as provided in
paragraph 2.
2. This Chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures which are
covered by Chapter VII of this Agreement.
Article 62 Affirmation of Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade
 The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the TBT Agreement.
Article 63 International Standards
1. The Parties shall use international standards, or the relevant parts of international
standards, as a basis for their technical regulations and related conformity assessment
procedures where relevant international standards exist or their completion is imminent,
except when such international standards or their relevant parts are ineffective or
inappropriate to fulfill legitimate objectives.
2. In this respect, the Parties shall apply the principles set out in the "Decision of
the Committee on Principles for the Development of International Standards, Guides
and Recommendations with relation to Articles 2,5 and Annex 3 of the Agreement”,
adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade since 1 January 1995,
G/TBT/1/Rev.7, 28 November 2000, Section IX.
Article 64 Trade Facilitation
1. The Parties shall intensify their joint work in the field of technical regulations,
and conformity assessment procedures with a view to facilitating access to each other’s
markets. In particular, the Parties shall seek to identify bilateral initiatives that are
appropriate for particular issues or sectors.
2. The Parties shall ensure that, in cases where a positive assurance of compulsory
conformity assessment is required, one Party applies the following provisions to
products originating in the territories of the other Party:
31
(a) the Parties agreed to start a mutual recognition agreement (MRA)
feasibility study within six months following the date of entry into force
of this Agreement, referring to APEC framework whenever possible;
(b) the standard processing period of each compulsory conformity
assessment procedure is published or the anticipated processing period is
communicated to the applicant upon request;
(c) notify the other Party of the list of products which are subject to
compulsory conformity assessment procedures within six months
following the date of entry into force of this Agreement. This notification
shall be made in English with its HS code, in eight or more digits;
(d) any fees imposed for compulsory conformity assessment procedures, by
governmental bodies of products originating in the territories of other
Party, are no more than any fees chargeable for compulsory conformity
assessment procedures by governmental bodies of like products
originating in any non-Party and are limited in amount to the
approximate cost of services rendered; and
(e) the Parties shall timely exchange information regarding products which
are subject to an authorization process prior to their entry into the other
Party’s territory, especially when they have been rejected.
Article 65 Equivalency of Technical Regulations
1. Each Party shall give positive consideration to accepting as equivalent technical
regulations of the other Party, even if these regulations differ from their own, provided
that they are satisfied that these regulations adequately fulfill the objectives of their own
regulations.
2. A Party shall, upon request of the other Party, explain the reasons why it has not
accepted a technical regulation of that Party as equivalent.
Article 66 Conformity Assessment
1. The Parties recognize that a broad range of mechanisms exists to facilitate the
acceptance of conformity assessment procedures and results thereby, including:
(a) voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies from
each Party’s territory;
(b) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment
procedures with respect to specified regulations conducted by bodies
located in the other Party’s territory;
(c) recognition by one Party of the results of conformity assessments
performed in the other Party’s territory;
32
(d) accreditation procedures for qualifying conformity assessment bodies
and promotion of the recognition of accreditation and certification bodies
under international mutual recognition arrangements; and
(e) government designation of conformity assessment bodies.
2. The Parties shall intensify their exchange of information on the range of
mechanisms to facilitate the acceptance of conformity assessment results.
3. Before accepting the results of a conformity assessment procedure, and to
enhance confidence in the continued reliability of each other’s conformity assessment
results, the Parties may consult on such matters as the technical confidence of the
conformity assessment bodies involved, as appropriate.
4. A Party shall, on the request of the other Party, explain its reasons for not
accepting the results of a conformity assessment procedure performed in the other
Party’s territory.
5. Where a Party declines a request from the other Party to engage in or conclude
negotiations to reach agreement on facilitating recognition in its territory of the results
of conformity assessment procedures conducted by bodies located in the other Party’s
territory, it shall, on request, explain its reasons.
Article 67 Transparency
1. In order to enhance the opportunity for persons to provide meaningful comments,
a Party publishing a notice under Article 2.9 or 5.6 of the TBT Agreement shall:
(a) include in the notice a statement describing the objective of the proposal
and the rationale for the approach the Party is proposing; and
(b) transmit electronically the proposal to the other Party through the inquiry
point established under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement at the same
time as it notifies WTO Members of the proposal pursuant to the TBT
Agreement.
Each Party should allow at least 60 days from the transmission under
subparagraph (b) for persons and the other Party to make comments in writing
on the proposal.
2. Where a Party makes a notification under Article 2.10 or 5.7 of the TBT
Agreement, it shall at the same time transmit the notification to the other Party,
electronically, through the inquiry point referenced in subparagraph (b) of paragraph 1.
3. The Parties agree to publish, in print or electronically, or otherwise make
available to the public, responses to significant comments at the same time as the
publication of the final technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure.
33
4. Each Party shall, on request of the other Party, provide information regarding the
objective of, and rationale for, a technical regulation, or conformity assessment
procedure that the Party has adopted or is proposing to adopt.
5. The Parties shall promote that their national standardizing bodies provide each
other the respective Agenda of Creation and Modification on National Standard, which
are notified to ISO information centre.
6. Each Party shall provide and keep updated information about the competent
authorities and will communicate any significant change in their structure, organization
and division.
7. The obligations contained in this article shall be implemented as soon as
practicable and under no event later than eighteen months following the date of entry
into force of this Agreement.
Article 68 Technical Cooperation
1. Each Party shall, on request of the other Party:
(a) provide to that Party technical advice, information and assistance on
mutually agreed terms and conditions to enhance that Party's standards,
technical regulation and conformity assessment procedures, and related
activities, processes and systems; and
(b) provide to that Party information on its technical cooperation programs
regarding standards, technical regulation and conformity assessment
procedures, relating to specific areas of interest.

2. The Parties will study the possibility of strengthening the relationship and links
between compulsory and voluntary certification and strengthen the bilateral
communication in this regard, as a mean to facilitate market access especially
considering international standards such as the ISO 9000 and 14000 series, associated to
risk analyses considerations.
3. The Parties shall work towards increasing the information exchange, particularly
regarding bilateral non-compliance with technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures.

Article 69 Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
1. The Parties hereby establish the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade,
comprising representatives of each Party.
2. For purposes of this Article, the Committee shall be coordinated by:
(a) in the case of China, the Director General of Inspection & Quarantine
clearance Department of AQSIQ, or its successor; and
34
(b) in the case of Chile, the Ministry of Economy (Ministerio de Economia)
through the Head of Foreign Trade Department (Departamento de
Comercio Exterior, or its successor.
3. In order to facilitate the communication and ensure the proper functioning of the
Committee, the Parties will designate a contact person no later than two months
following the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
4. The Committee’s functions shall include:
(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this Chapter;
(b) promptly addressing any issue that a Party raises related to the
 development, adoption, application, or enforcement of technical
 regulations and conformity assessment procedures;
(c) enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement of technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures;
(d) where appropriate, facilitating sectorial cooperation among governmental
and non-governmental conformity assessment bodies in the Parties’
territories;
(e) exchanging information on developments in non-governmental, regional,
and multilateral fora engaged in activities related to standardization,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures;
(f) taking any other steps which the Parties consider to assist them in
implementing the TBT Agreement and in facilitating trade in goods
between them;
(g) consulting on any matter arising under this Chapter, upon a Party’s
request;
(h) reviewing this Chapter in light of any developments under the TBT
Agreement, and developing recommendations for amendments to this
Chapter in light of those developments;
(i) reporting to the Commission on the implementation of this Chapter, as it
considers appropriate; and
(j) exchanging information on charge parameters or services fees of
compulsory conformity assessment procedures performed by
governmental bodies.
5. Where the Parties have had recourse to consultations under subparagraph (g) of
paragraph 4, such consultations shall, upon agreement by the Parties, constitute
consultations under Article 82.
35
6. A Party shall, upon request, give favorable consideration to any sector-specific
proposal the other Party makes for further cooperation under this Chapter.
7. The Committee shall meet at least once a year unless the Parties otherwise agree.
These meetings may be held via teleconference, videoconference, or through any other
means, as mutually determined by the Parties. By mutual agreement, ad hoc working
groups may be established if necessary.
Article 70 Information Exchange
 Any information or explanation provided upon request of a Party pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, shall be provided in print or electronically within a
reasonable period of time agreed between the Parties.
Article 71 Definitions
 For purposes of this Chapter:
 (a) TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade,
which is part of the WTO Agreement; and
 (b) the definitions of Annex I of the TBT Agreement shall apply.
36
Chapter IX
Transparency
Article 72 Contact Points
1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between
the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.
2. Upon request of the other Party, the contact point shall identify the office or
official responsible for the matter and assist, as necessary, in facilitating communication
with the requesting Party.
Article 73 Publication
1. Each Party shall ensure that its measures respecting any matter covered by this
Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made available in such a manner as to
enable interested persons of the other Party and the other Party to become acquainted
with them.
2. To the extent possible, each Party shall provide a reasonable period for the other
Party and interested persons of the other Party to comment to the appropriate authorities
before the aforementioned laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of
general application are implemented.
Article 74 Notification and Provision of Information
1. To the extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Party of any actual
measure or proposed measure that the Party considers might materially affect the
operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect the other Party’s legitimate
interests under this Agreement.
2. Upon request of the other Party, to the extent possible, a Party shall promptly
provide information and respond to questions pertaining to any actual or proposed
measure, that the other Party considers might materially affect the operation of this
Agreement or otherwise substantially affect its legitimate interests under this
Agreement, whether or not the other Party has been previously notified of that measure.
3. Any notification or information provided under this Article shall be without
prejudice as to whether the measure is consistent with this Agreement.
4. The information referred to under this Article shall be considered to have been
provided when it has been made available by appropriate notification to the WTO or
when it has been made available on the official, public and fee-free accessible website
of the Party concerned.
37
Article 75 Administrative Proceedings
 With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial, and reasonable manner
all measures of general application affecting matters covered by this Agreement, each
Party shall ensure that in its administrative proceedings applying measures referred to in
Article 73 to particular persons or goods of the other Party in specific cases that:
(a) wherever possible, persons of the other Party that are directly affected by
a proceeding are provided reasonable notice, in accordance with
domestic procedures, when a proceeding is initiated, including a
description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal
authority under which the proceeding is initiated, and a general
description of any issues in controversy;
(b) such persons are afforded a reasonable opportunity to present facts and
arguments in support of their positions prior to any final administrative
action, when time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public interest
permit; and
(c) its procedures are in accordance with domestic law.
Article 76 Review and Appeal
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain tribunals or procedures for the purpose of
the prompt review and, where warranted, correction of final administrative actions
relating to the implementation of laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative
rulings of general application respecting any matters covered by this Agreement. Such
tribunals shall be impartial and independent of the office or authority entrusted with
administrative enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of
the matter.
2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties to
the proceeding are provided with the right to:
 (a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions;
and
 (b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where
required by domestic law, the record compiled by the administrative
authority.
3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided in its
domestic law, that such decisions shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice
of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative action that is the subject of
the decision.
38
Article 77 Relation with other Chapters
1. This Chapter will not apply to Chapter XIII.
2. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter in
this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 78 Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:
administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling or
interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall generally within its
ambit and that establishes a norm of conduct but does not include:
 (a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-judicial
proceeding ,where applicable, that applies to a particular person, good, or
service of the other Party in a specific case; or
 (b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice; and
measures means laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general
application.
39
Chapter X
Dispute Settlement
Article 79 Cooperation
The Parties shall at all times endeavor to agree on the interpretation and
application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation and
consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might
affect its operation.
Article 80 Scope of Application
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement
provisions of this Chapter shall apply:
(a) with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the
Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement; and
(b) wherever a Party considers that a measure of the other Party is
inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or that the other Party
has failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement.
Article 81 Choice of Forum
1. Where a dispute regarding any matter arises under this Agreement and under
another free trade agreement to which both Parties are parties or the WTO Agreement,
the complaining Party may select the forum in which to settle the dispute.
2. Once the complaining Party has requested a panel under an agreement referred to
in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of the others.
Article 82 Consultations
1. Either Party may request in writing consultations with the other Party with
respect to any measure that it considers might affect the operation of this Agreement.
2. The requesting Party shall set out the reasons for the request, including
identification of the measure at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the
complaint, and shall deliver the request to the other Party.
3. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory
resolution of any matter through consultations under this Article or other consultative
provisions of this Agreement. To this end, the Parties shall:
(a) provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of how the
measure might affect the operation and application of this Agreement;
and
40
(b) treat any confidential information exchanged in the course of
consultations on the same basis as the Party providing the information.
4. In consultations under this Article, a Party may request the other Party to make
available personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies who have
expertise in the matter subject to consultations.
5. The consultations shall be confidential and are without prejudice to the rights of
any Party in any further proceedings.
Article 83 Commission - Good Offices, Conciliation, and Mediation
1. A Party may request in writing a meeting of the Commission if the Parties fail to
resolve a matter pursuant to Article 82 within:
(a) 60 days of receipt of a request for consultations;
(b) 15 days of receipt of a request for consultations in matters regarding
perishable goods; or
(c) such other period as they may agree.
2. A Party may also request in writing a meeting of the Commission where
consultations have been held pursuant to Article 58 or 69.
3. The requesting Party shall state in the request the measure complained of and the
provisions of this Agreement considered relevant and deliver the request to the other
Party.
4. Unless it decides otherwise, the Commission shall convene within 10 days of
receipt of the request and shall endeavor to resolve the dispute promptly. The
Commission may:
(a) call on such technical advisers or create such working groups or expert
groups as it deems necessary;
(b) have recourse to good offices, conciliation, mediation; or
(c) make recommendations,
as may assist the Parties to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of the dispute.
5. The proceedings under this Article and the positions taken by the Parties during
these proceedings shall be confidential and are without prejudice to the rights of any
Party in any further proceedings.
Article 84 Request for an Arbitral Panel
41
1. If the Parties fail to resolve a matter within:
(a) 30 days of the Commission convening pursuant to Article 83;
(b) 75 days after receipt of the request for consultations under Article 82, if
the Commission has not convened pursuant to Article 83;
(c) 30 days after receipt of the request for consultations under Article 82 in a
matter regarding perishable goods, if the Commission has not convened
pursuant to Article 83; or
(d) such other period as the Parties agree,
either Party may request in writing the establishment of an arbitral panel to
consider the matter. The requesting Party shall state in the request the measure
complained of and indicate the provisions of this Agreement that it considers
relevant, and shall deliver the request to the other Party. An arbitral panel shall
be established upon receipt of a request.
2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitral panel shall be established and
perform its functions in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
Article 85 Composition of an Arbitral Panel
1. An arbitral panel shall comprise three members.
2. In the written request under Article 84, the Party requesting the establishment of
an arbitral panel shall designate one member of that arbitral panel.
3. Within 15 days of the receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 2, the Party
to which it was addressed shall designate one member of the arbitral panel.
4. The Parties shall designate by common agreement the appointment of the third
panelist within 15 days of the appointment of the second panelist. The panelist thus
appointed shall chair the arbitral panel.
5. If any member of the arbitral panel has not been designated or appointed within
30 days from the date of receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 2, at the request
of any Party to the dispute the necessary designations shall be made by the DirectorGeneral of the WTO within a further 30 days.
6. The Chair of the arbitral panel shall not be a national of any of the Parties, nor
have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of any of the Parties, nor be
employed by any of the Parties, nor have dealt with the matter in any capacity.
7. All panelists shall:
42
(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters
covered by this Agreement, or the resolution of disputes arising under
international trade agreements;
(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound
judgment;
(c) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take instructions from,
any Party; and
(d) comply with a code of conduct in conformity with the rules established
in the document WT/DSB/RC/1 of the WTO.
8. Individuals may not serve as panelists for a dispute in which they have
participated pursuant to Article 83.
9. If a panelist appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable to act, a
successor panelist shall be appointed within 15 days in accordance with the selection
procedure as prescribed for the appointment of the original panelist and the successor
shall have all the powers and duties of the original panelist. The work of the arbitral
panel shall be suspended during the appointment of the successor panelist.
Article 86 Functions of Arbitral Panel
1. The function of an arbitral panel is to make an objective assessment of the
dispute before it, including an examination of the facts of the case and the applicability
of and conformity with this Agreement.
2. Where an arbitral panel concludes that a measure is inconsistent with this
Agreement, it shall recommend that the responding Party bring the measure into
conformity with this Agreement. In addition to its recommendations the arbitral panel
may suggest ways in which the responding Party could implement the recommendations.
3. The arbitral panel, in their findings and recommendations, cannot add to or
diminish the rights and obligations provided in this Agreement.
Article 87 Rules of Procedure of an Arbitral Panel
1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitral panel proceedings shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure set out in Annex 7.
2. The arbitral panel shall, apart from the matters set out in this Article, regulate its
own procedures in relation to the rights of the Parties to be heard and its deliberations in
consultation with the Parties.
3. The arbitral panel shall take its decisions by consensus; provided that where an
arbitral panel is unable to reach consensus it may take its decisions by majority vote.
4. Unless the Parties otherwise agree within 20 days from the date of receipt of the
request for the establishment of the arbitral panel, the terms of reference shall be:
43
"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement,
the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitral
panel pursuant to Article 84 and to make findings of law and fact
together with the reasons therefore for the resolution of the dispute.”
5. Each Party shall bear the cost of its appointed panelist and its own expenses. The
cost of the chair of an arbitral panel and other expenses associated with the conduct of
the proceedings shall be borne by the Parties in equal shares.
Article 88 Suspension or Termination of Proceedings
1. The Parties may agree that the arbitral panel suspends its work at any time for a
period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement. If the work of the
arbitral panel has been suspended for more than 12 months, the authority for
establishment of the arbitral panel shall lapse unless the Parties agree otherwise.
2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of an arbitral panel in the
event that a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute has been found.
Article 89 Experts and Technical Advice
1. On its own initiative unless the Parties disapprove, or upon request of a Party,
the arbitral panel may seek information and technical advice on matters raised by a
Party in a proceeding, from any person or body that it deems appropriate.
2. Before an arbitral panel seeks information or technical advice, it shall establish
appropriate procedures in consultation with the Parties. The arbitral panel shall provide
the Parties:
(a) advance notice of, and an opportunity to provide comments to the
arbitral panel on, proposed requests for information and technical advice
pursuant to paragraph 1; and
(b) a copy of any information or technical advice submitted in response to a
request pursuant to paragraph 1 and an opportunity to provide comments.
3. Where the arbitral panel takes the information or technical advice into account in
the preparation of its report, it shall also take into account any comments by the Parties
on the information or technical advice.
Article 90 Initial Report
1. The arbitral panel shall base its report on the relevant provisions of this
Agreement and the submissions and arguments of the Parties.
2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitral panel shall:
(a) within 120 days after the last panelist is selected; or
44
(b) in case of urgency including those relating to perishable goods within 60
 days after the last panelist is selected,
 present to the Parties an initial report.
3. The initial report shall contain:
(a) findings of fact;
(b) its conclusions as to whether a Party has not conformed with its
obligations under this Agreement or any other determination if requested
in the terms of reference; and
(c) the recommendation of the arbitral panel on the dispute and the
suggestions if requested by the Parties.
4. In exceptional cases, if the arbitral panel considers it cannot release its initial
report within 120 days, or within 60 days in cases of urgency, it shall inform the Parties
in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period within
which it will release its report. Any delay shall not exceed a further period of 30 days
unless the Parties otherwise agree.
5. Panelists may furnish separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed.
6. A Party may submit written comments to the arbitral panel on its initial report
within 14 days of presentation of the report or within such other period as the Parties
may agree.
7. After considering any written comments on the initial report, the arbitral panel
may reconsider its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.
Article 91 Final Report
1. The arbitral panel shall present a final report to the Parties, including any
separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed, within 30 days of presentation of
the initial report, unless the Parties otherwise agree. The final report shall be available
to the public within 15 days thereafter, subject to the protection of confidential
information.
2. No arbitral panel may, either in its initial report or its final report, disclose which
panelists are associated with majority or minority opinions.
Article 92 Implementation of Final Report
1. On receipt of the final report of an arbitral panel, the Parties shall agree on the
resolution of the dispute.
2. If in its final report the arbitral panel concludes that a Party has not conformed
with its obligations under this Agreement, the resolution, whenever possible, shall be to
eliminate the non-conformity.
45
3. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, they shall implement the recommendations
contained in the final report of the arbitral panel within a reasonable period of time if it
is not practicable to comply immediately.
4. The reasonable period of time shall be mutually determined by the Parties, or
where the Parties fail to agree on the reasonable period of time within 45 days of the
release of the arbitral panel’s report, either Party may, to the extent possible, refer the
matter to the original arbitral panel, which shall determine the reasonable period of time
following consultation with the Parties.
5. Where there is disagreement as to the existence or consistency with this
Agreement of measures taken within the reasonable period of time to comply with the
recommendations of the arbitral panel, such dispute shall be referred to an arbitral panel
proceeding, including wherever possible by resort to the original arbitral panel.
6. The arbitral panel shall provide its report to the Parties within 60 days after the
date of the referral of the matter to it. When the arbitral panel considers that it cannot
provide its report within this timeframe, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the
reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period within which it will submit
its report. Any delay shall not exceed a further period of 30 days unless the Parties
otherwise agree.
Article 93 Non-Implementation - Suspension of Benefits
1. If the Party concerned fails to bring the measure found to be inconsistent with
this Agreement into compliance with the recommendations of the arbitral panel under
Article 90 within the reasonable period of time established in accordance with Article
92, that Party shall, if so requested, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party
with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory agreement on any necessary
compensatory adjustment.
2. If there is no agreement in accordance with paragraph 1 within 20 days after
receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1, the complaining Party may suspend the
application of benefits of equivalent effect to the responding Party if the arbitral panel
decides the responding Party does not implement the recommendations contained in the
final report to bring the inconsistent measure into conformity within the reasonable
period of time established in accordance with Article 92. The complaining Party shall
notify the responding Party 30 days before suspending benefits.
3. Compensation and the suspension of benefits shall be temporary measures.
Neither compensation nor the suspension of benefits is preferred to full implementation
of the recommendations to bring a measure into conformity with this Agreement.
Compensation and suspension of benefits shall only be applied until such time as the
measure found to be inconsistent with this Agreement has been removed, or the Party
that must implement the arbitral panel’s recommendation has done so, or a mutually
satisfactory solution is reached.
4. In considering what benefits to suspend pursuant to paragraph 2:
46
(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend benefits in the same
sector(s) as that affected by the measure that the arbitral panel has found
to be inconsistent with the obligations derived of this Agreement ; and
(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable or effective to
suspend benefits in the same sector(s), it may suspend benefits in other
sectors. The communication in which it announces such a decision shall
indicate the reasons on which it is based.
5. Upon written request of the Party concerned, the original arbitral panel shall
determine whether the level of benefits to be suspended by the complaining Party is
excessive pursuant to paragraph 2. If the arbitral panel cannot be established with its
original members, the proceeding set out in Article 85 shall be applied.
6. The arbitral panel shall present its determination within 60 days from the request
made pursuant to paragraph 5, or if an arbitral panel cannot be established with its
original members, from the date on which the last panelist is selected. The ruling of the
arbitral panel shall be final and binding. It shall be delivered to the Parties and be made
publicly available.
Article 94 Compliance Review
1. Without prejudice to the procedures in Article 93, if the responding Party
considers that it has eliminated the non-conformity that the arbitral panel has found, it
may provide written notice to the complaining Party with a description of how nonconformity has been removed. If the complaining Party has disagreement, it may refer
the matter to the original arbitral panel within 60 days after receipt of such written
notice. Otherwise, the complaining Party shall promptly stop the suspension of benefits.
2. The arbitral panel shall release its report within 90 days after the referral of the
matter. If the arbitral panel concludes that the responding Party has eliminated the nonconformity, the complaining Party shall promptly stop the suspension of benefits.
Article 95 Private Rights
 Neither Party may provide for a right of action under its domestic law against
the other Party on the ground that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this
Agreement.
47
Chapter XI
Administration
Article 96 Trade & Economic Mixed Commission
1. The Parties hereby incorporate the Trade and Economic Mixed Commission
(Mixed Commission) into this Agreement.
2. The Mixed Commission was established according to the Trade Agreement
between the Government of the People’s Republic of China and the Government of the
Republic of Chile, signed in Santiago on April 20 1971.
3. The Mixed Commission is composed of officials as follows:
(a) in the case of China, the high ranking official of Ministry of Commerce;
and
(b) in the case of Chile, the Director General of International Economic
Affairs, or his/her designee.
4. The Mixed Commission shall:
(a) hear the reports of the Free Trade Commission;
(b) provide guidance to the work of the Free Trade Commission;
(c) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this Agreement;
and
(d) deal with any other issues related to bilateral cooperation in the area of
economy, trade and investment.
Article 97 The Free Trade Commission
1. The Parties hereby establish the Free Trade Commission (Commission),
comprising representatives of the Parties as follows:
(a) in the case of China, the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM); and
(b) in the case of Chile, the General Directorate of International Economic
Affairs (DIRECON).
2. The Commission shall:
(a) supervise the implementation of this Agreement;
(b) oversee the further elaboration of this Agreement;
48
(c) seek to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or
application of this Agreement;
(d) supervise the work of all committees and working groups established
under this Agreement;
(e) establish the amounts of remuneration and expenses that will be paid to
panelists; and
(f) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this Agreement.
3. The Commission may:
(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to committees and working groups;
(b) further the implementation of the Agreement’s objectives by approving
any modifications of:
(i) the Schedules attached to Annex 1, by accelerating tariff
elimination,
(ii) the Rules of Origin established in Annex 3, and
(iii) Annex 5,
in the case of Chile, these modifications shall be made in accordance
with Annex 8;
(c) seek the advice of the public; and
(d) take such other action in the exercise of its functions as the Parties may
agree.
4. The Commission shall establish its rules and procedures. All decisions of the
Commission shall be taken by mutual agreement.
5. The Commission shall convene at least once a year in regular session. Regular
sessions of the Commission shall be chaired alternatively by each Party.
Article 98 Administration of Dispute Settlement Proceedings
1. Each Party shall designate an office that shall provide administrative assistance
to arbitral panels established under Chapter X and perform such other functions as the
Commission may direct.
2. Each Party shall be responsible for the operation and costs of its designated
office, and shall notify the Commission of the location of its office.
49
Chapter XII
Exceptions
Article 99 General Exceptions
 For the purpose of this Agreement, Article XX of GATT 1994 and its
interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.
Article 100 Essential Security
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
(a) to require a Party to furnish or allow access to any information the
disclosure of which it determines to be contrary to its essential security
interests;
(b) to prevent any Party from taking any action which it considers necessary
for the protection of its essential security interests
(i) relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they
are derived,
(ii) relating to traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war
and to such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on
directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military
establishment,
(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;
or
(c) to preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers necessary
for the fulfillment of its obligations under the United Nations Charter
with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international peace or
security, or the protection of its own essential security interests.
Article 101 Taxation
1. For the purposes of this Article:
tax convention means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation or other
international taxation agreement or arrangement in force between the Parties; and
taxation measures do not include an “import customs duty” as defined in Article 5.
2. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to
taxation measures.
50
3. This Agreement shall only grant rights or impose obligations with respect to
taxation measures where corresponding rights or obligations are also granted or
imposed under Article III of GATT 1994.
4. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties
under any tax convention in force between the Parties. In the event of any inconsistency
relating to a taxation measure between this Agreement and such tax convention, the
latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax convention
between the Parties, the competent authorities under that convention shall have sole
responsibility for determining whether any inconsistency exists between this Agreement
and that convention.
Article 102 Measures to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
 Where the Party is in serious balance of payments and external financial
difficulties or threat thereof, it may, in accordance with the WTO Agreement and
consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, adopt
measures deemed necessary.
Article 103 Disclosure of Information
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or
allow access to confidential information the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement or would be contrary to the public interests, the Party’s law protecting
personal privacy or the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of
financial institutions or which prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular
enterprises, public or private.
51
Chapter XIII
Cooperation
Article 104 General Objectives
1. The Parties shall establish close cooperation aimed inter alia at:
(a) promoting economic and social development;
(b) stimulating productive synergies, creating new opportunities for trade
and investment and promoting competitiveness and innovation;
(c) increasing the level of and deepening cooperation actions while taking
into account the association relation between the Parties;
(d) reinforce and expand cooperation, collaboration and mutual interchanges
in the cultural areas;
(e) encouraging the presence of the Parties and their goods and services in
their respective markets of Asia, Pacific and Latin America; and
(f) increasing the level of and deepening collaboration activities among the
Parties in areas of mutual interest.
2. The Parties reaffirm the importance of all form of cooperation, with particular
attention to economic, trade, financial, technical, educational and cultural cooperation,
as means to contribute to implementing the objectives and principles derived from this
Agreement.
Article 105 Economic Cooperation
1. The aims of economic cooperation will be:
(a) to build on existing agreements or arrangements already in place for
trade and economic cooperation; and
(b) to advance and strengthen trade and economic relations between the
Parties.
2. In pursuit of the objectives in Article 104, the Parties will encourage and
facilitate, as appropriate, the following activities, including, but not limited to:
(a) policy dialogue and regular exchanges of information and views on ways
to promote and expand trade in goods and services between the Parties;
(b) keeping each other informed of important economic and trade issues, and
any impediments to furthering their economic cooperation;
52
(c) providing assistance and facilities to businesspersons and trade missions
that visit each other’s country with the knowledge and support of the
relevant agencies;
(d) supporting dialogue and exchanges of experience among the respective
business communities of the Parties;
(e) establishing and developing mechanisms for providing information and
identifying opportunities for business cooperation, trade in goods and
services, investment, and government procurement; and
(f) stimulating and facilitating actions of public and /or private sectors in
areas of economic interest.
Article 106 Research, Science and Technology
1. The aims of cooperation in research, science and technology, carried out in the
mutual interest of the Parties and in compliance with their policies, particularly as
regards the rules for use of intellectual property resulting from research, will be:
(a) to build on existing agreements already in place for cooperation on
research, science and technology and the follow up done by the existing
Joint Commission for Scientific and Technical Cooperation between the
Parties;
(b) to encourage, where appropriate, government agencies, research
institutions, universities, private companies and other research
organisations in each other’s country to conclude direct arrangements in
support of cooperative activities, programmes or projects within the
framework of this Agreement, specially related to trade and commerce;
and
(c) to focus cooperative activities towards sectors where mutual and
complementary interests exist, with special emphasis on information and
communication technologies and software development to facilitate trade
and commerce between the Parties.
2. In pursuit of the objectives in Article 104, the Parties will encourage and
facilitate, as appropriate, the following activities including, but not limited to:
(a) identifying strategies, in consultation with universities and research
centres, to encourage joint postgraduate studies and research visits;
(b) exchange of scientists, researchers and technical experts;
(c) exchange of information and documentation; and
(d) promoting public/private sector partnerships in support of the
development of innovative products and services and study joint efforts
to enter into new markets.
53
Article 107 Education
1. The aims of education cooperation will be:
(a) to build on existing agreements or arrangements already in place for
cooperation in education; and
(b) to promote networking, mutual understanding and close working
relationships in the area of education between the Parties.
2. In pursuit of the objectives in Article 104, the Parties shall encourage and
facilitate, as appropriate, exchanges between and among their respective educationrelated agencies, institutions, organizations, in fields such as:
(a) education quality assurance processes;
(b) on-line and distance education at all levels;
(c) primary and secondary education systems;
(d) higher education;
(e) technical education; and
(f) industry collaboration for technical training.
3. Cooperation in education can focus on:
(a) exchange of information, teaching aids, and demonstration materials;
(b) joint planning and implementation of programs and projects, and joint
coordination of targeted activities in agreed fields;
(c) development of collaborative training, joint research and development,
across graduate and postgraduate studies;
(d) exchange of teaching staff, administrators, researchers and students in
relation to programs that will be of mutual benefit;
(e) gaining understanding of each Parties’ education systems and policies
including information relevant to the interpretation and evaluation of
qualifications, potentially leading to discussions between institutions of
higher learning on academic credit transfer and the possibility of mutual
recognition of qualifications; and
(f) collaboration on the development of innovative quality assurance
resources to support learning and assessment, and the professional
development of teachers and trainers in training.
54
Article 108 Labor, Social Security and Environmental Cooperation
 The Parties shall enhance their communication and cooperation on labor, social
security and environment through both the Memorandum of Understanding on Labor
and Social Security Cooperation, and the Environmental Cooperation Agreement
between the Parties.
Article 109 Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
1. The Parties will promote a favorable environment for the development of small
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
2. Cooperation shall be oriented to share knowledge and good practices with SMEs.
These practices should promote partnership and productive chain linkage development,
downstream and upstream oriented, to improve SMEs productivity, development of
capacities to increase SMEs access to markets, integrate technology to labor intensive
processes and human resources development to increase their knowledge about Chinese
and Chilean markets.
3. Co-operation shall be developed, among other activities, through:
(a) information exchange;
(b) conferences, seminars, experts dialogue and training programs with
experts; and
(c) promoting contacts between economic operators, encouraging
prospecting for industrial and technical opportunities;
4. Co-operation shall include, among other subjects:
(a) designing and develop mechanisms to encourage partnership and
productive chain linkage development;
(b) defining and develop methods and strategies for clusters development;
(c) increasing access to information regarding mandatory procedures and
any other relevant information for an SME exporter;
(d) defining technological transference: programs oriented to transfer
technological innovation to SMEs and to improve their productivity;
(e) increasing access to information on technological promotion programs
for SMEs and financial support and encouragement programs for SMEs;
(f) supporting new exporting SMEs (sponsorship, exporters club); and
(g) identifying specific areas subject to potential improvement.
55
Article 110 Cultural Cooperation
1. The aims of cultural cooperation shall be:
(a) to build on existing agreements or arrangements already in place for
cultural cooperation; and
(b) to promote information and cultural exchanges between the Parties.
2. In pursuit of the objectives in Article 104, the Parties will encourage and
facilitate, as appropriate, the following activities, including, but not limited to:
(a) encouraging dialogue on cultural policies and promotion of local culture;
(b) encouraging exchange of cultural events and promote awareness of
artistic works;
(c) encouraging exchange of experience in conservation and restoration of
national heritage;
(d) encouraging exchange of experience on management for the arts;
(e) encouraging cooperation in the audio-visual field, mainly through
training programs in the audio-visual sector and means of
communication, including co-production, training, development and
distribution activities; and
(f) having a consultation mechanism between the two countries’ culture
authorities.
Article 111 Intellectual Property Rights
1. The aim of cooperation on intellectual property rights will be:
(a) to build on the foundations established in existing international
agreements in the field of intellectual property, to which both are parties,
including the TRIPS Agreement and, particularly, on the principles set
out in the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement on Public Health,
adopted on November 14, 2001, by the WTO at the Fourth WTO
Ministerial held in Doha, Qatar, and the Decision on the Implementation
of Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and
Public Health, adopted on August 30, 2003;
(b) to promote economic and social development, particularly in the new
digital economy, technological innovation as well as the transfer and
dissemination of technology to the mutual advantage of technology
producers and users, and to encourage the development of social
economic well-being, and trade;
56
(c) to achieve a balance between rights of right holders and the legitimate
interests of users and the community with regard to protected subject
matters;
(d) to provide certainty for right holders and users of intellectual property
over the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights;
(e) to encourage the rejection of practices or conditions pertaining to
intellectual property rights which constitute abuse of rights, restrain
competition or may impede transfer and dissemination of new
developments; and
(f) to promote the efficient registration of intellectual property rights.
2. The Parties will cooperate, on mutually agreed terms and subject to the
availability of appropriated funds, by means of:
(a) educational and dissemination projects on the use of intellectual property
as a research and innovation tool;
(b) training and specialization courses for public servants on intellectual
property rights and other mechanisms;
(c) exchange of information on:
 (i) implementation of intellectual property systems,
(ii) appropriate initiatives to promote awareness of intellectual
property rights and systems, and
(iii) developments on intellectual property policy. Such developments
may, for example, include, but not be limited to, the
implementation of appropriate limitations and exceptions under
copyright law, and the implementation of measures concerning
the appropriate protection of digital rights management
information;
(d) notification of policy dialogue on initiatives on intellectual property in
multilateral and regional fora;
(e) notification of contact points for the enforcement of intellectual property
rights;
(f) reports regarding on developments, improvements, relevant
jurisprudence and bills in Congress;
(g) enhancing knowledge of electronic systems used for the management of
intellectual property; and
57
(h) other activities and initiatives as may be mutual determined between the
Parties.
Article 112 Promoting Investment
1. The aim of cooperation shall be to help the Parties to promote, within the bounds
of their own competence, an attractive and stable reciprocal investment climate.
2. The Parties will promote the establishment of information exchange channels
and facilitate full communication and exchange in the following aspects:
(a) communication on investment policy laws, as well as, economic trade
and commercial information;
(b) exploring the possibility of establishing investment promotion
mechanisms; and
(c) providing national information for the potential investors and on
investment cooperative parties.
Article 113 Mining and Industrial Cooperation
1. The aims of cooperation in mining and industry sectors carried out in the mutual
interest of the Parties and in compliance with their policies, will be:
(a) to encourage, where appropriate, government agencies, research
institutions, universities, private companies and other research
organizations in each other’s country to conclude direct arrangements in
support of cooperative activities, programs, projects or joint ventures
within the framework of this Agreement;
(b) to focus cooperative activities towards sectors where mutual and
complementary interests exist; and
(c) to build on existing agreements and arrangements already in place
between the Parties such as intergovernmental protocols, or association
agreements between copper companies and corporations of the Parties.
2. Mining and Industrial cooperation may include work in, but not be limited to,
the following areas:
(a) bio-mining (mining using biotechnology procedures);
b) mining techniques, specially underground mining, and conventional
metallurgy;
c) productivity in mining;
d) industrial robotics for mining and other sector applications;
58
e) informatics and telecommunication applications for mining and
industrial plant production; and
f) software development for mining and industrial applications.
3. In pursuit of the objectives in Article 104, the Parties will encourage and
facilitate, as appropriate, the following activities including, but not limited to:
(a) exchange of information, documentation and institutional contacts in
areas of interest;
(b) mutual access to academic, industrial and entrepreneurial networks in the
area of mining and industry;
(c) identification of strategies, in consultation with universities and research
centres, that encourage joint postgraduate studies, research visits and
joint research projects;
(d) exchange of scientists, researchers and technical experts;
(e) promotion of public/private sector partnerships and joint ventures in the
support of the development of innovative products and services specially
related to productivity in the sector activities;
(f) technology transfer in the areas mentioned in paragraph 2; and
(g) designing of innovation technology models based in public/private
cooperation and association ventures.
Article 114 Mechanisms for Cooperation
1. The Parties will establish a national contact point to facilitate communication on
possible cooperation activities. The national contact point will work with government
agencies, private sector representatives and educational and research institutions in the
operation of this Chapter.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Commission shall have, the following
functions:
(a) to oversee the implementation of the cooperation framework agreed by
the Parties;
(b) to encourage the Parties to undertake cooperation activities under the
cooperation framework agreed by the Parties;
(c) to make recommendations on the cooperation activities under this
Chapter, in accordance with the strategic priorities of the Parties; and
(d) to review through regular reporting from each Party the operation of this
Chapter and the application and fulfillment of its objectives between the
59
relevant institutions (including but not limited to the relevant government
agencies, research institutes, and universities) of the Parties to help foster
closer cooperation in thematic areas.
Article 115 Dispute Settlement
 No Party shall have recourse to Chapter X for any issue arising from or relating
to this Chapter.
60
Chapter XIV
Final Provisions
Article 116 Annexes and Footnotes
 The annexes and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part of this
Agreement.
Article 117 Amendments
1. The Parties may agree on any modification of or addition to this Agreement.
2. When so agreed, and entered into force according to Article 119, a modification
or addition shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 118 Amendment of the WTO Agreement
 If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into
this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall consult on whether to amend this
Agreement.
Article 119 Entry into Force and Termination
1. The entry into force of this Agreement is subject to the completion of necessary
domestic legal procedures by each Party.
2. This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which the Parties
exchange written notification that such procedures have been completed, or after such
other period as the Parties may agree.
3. Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification to the other
Party. This Agreement shall expire 180 days after the date of such notification.
Article 120 Future Work Program
 Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, they will negotiate trade in services and
investment after the conclusion of the negotiations of this Agreement.
Article 121 Authentic Texts
 This Agreement shall be done in Chinese, Spanish and English. The three texts
of this Agreement are equally authentic. In the event of divergence, the English text
shall prevail.
61
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized by their
respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Pusan, Republic of Korea, in duplicate, this eighteenth day of
November two thousand and five.
62

ANNEX TEXT

Annex 1
Elimination of Import Customs Duties
Introductory notes
The tariff elimination schedules 5
 in this Annex contains the following five
columns:
(a) “Code”: the code used in the nomenclature of the Harmonized System
2002.
(b) “Description”: description of the product falling under the heading.
(c) “Base Rate”: the basic import customs duty rate from which the tariff
elimination program starts.
(d) “Category”: the category under which the product concerned falls for
the purposes of tariff elimination.
(e) “Observation”: additional information if it corresponds.

5
 The dates established in the Schedules contained in this Annex shall be subject to the domestic legal
procedures of each Party.
63
Section 1
Import Customs Duties on Imports Originating in China
The categories which are applicable to imports into Chile from China are the
following:
1) "Year 1": import customs duties shall be eliminated entirely and such goods
shall be duty-free on the date this Agreement enters into force. The margin of
preference is as follows:
Category Entry into force
Year 1 100%
2) "Year 5": import customs duties shall be removed in five equal annual
stages beginning on the date this Agreement enters into force, and such
goods shall be duty-free, effective from January 1st of year five. Each year’s
margin of preference is as follows:
Category
Entry into
force 01.01.0701.01.08 01.01.09 01.01.10
Year 5 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
3) "Year 10": import customs duties shall be removed in ten equal annual
stages beginning on the date this Agreement enters into force, and such
goods shall be duty-free, effective January 1st of year ten. Each year’s
margin of preference is as follows:
Category
Entry into
force 01.01.07 01.01.08 01.01.09 01.01.10 01.01.11 01.01.12 01.01.13 01.01.14 01.01.15
Year 10 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
4) “EXCL”: these products are not subject to tariff elimination.
Schedule of Chile
 The Schedule of Chile is attached to this Section (130 pages)
64
Section 2
Import Customs Duties on Imports Originating in Chile
The categories which are applicable to imports into China from Chile are the
following:
1) "Year 1": import customs duties shall be eliminated entirely and such
goods shall be duty-free on the date this Agreement enters into force. The
margin of preference is as follows:
Entry into
Category force
Year 1 100%
2) “Year 2”: import customs duties shall be removed in two equal annual
stages beginning on the date this Agreement enters into force, and such
goods shall be duty-free, effective January 1st of year two. Each year’s
margin of preference is as follows:
Category
Entry into
force 01.01.07
Year 2 50% 100%
3) "Year 5": import customs duties shall be removed in five equal annual
stages beginning on the date this Agreement enters into force, and such
goods shall be duty-free, effective January 1st of year five. Each year’s
margin of preference is as follows:

 Category
Entry into
force 01.01.0701.01.08 01.01.09 01.01.10
Year 5 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
4) "Year 10": import customs duties shall be removed in ten equal annual
stages beginning on the date this Agreement enters into force, and such
goods shall be duty-free, effective January 1st of year ten. Each year’s
margin of preference is as follows:
Category
Entry into
force 01.01.07 01.01.08 01.01.09 01.01.10 01.01.11 01.01.12 01.01.13 01.01.14 01.01.15
Year 10 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
5) “EXCL”: These products are not subject to tariff elimination

Annex 2A
List of Geographical Indications in China 

Annex 2B
List of Geographical Indications in Chile

Annex 4
Certificate of OriginAnnex 6
Model Of Certification And Verification Networking System
On Certificate Of Origin (CVNSCO)
Definitions
1. Electronic Information: exchange of electronic information of the certificate
of origin, and or information regarding the supporting documents
 The Parties shall implement the CVNSCO in two years after the signature of this
Agreement. During the first year after the signature of this Agreement the system will
be developed, and during the second year will have a testing period.
2. Process Status for the issuance of the electronic data of Certificate of Origin
 Process status regarding with issuance, transmission, reception of the electronic
Certificate of Origin and the ex post verification process.
3. Authority who receives the electronic data of Certificate of Origin
 In the case of China is the General Administration of Customs and in the case of
Chile is the National Customs Service.
4. Authority who sends the electronic data of Certificate of Origin
 In the case of China is the General Administration of Quality Supervision,
Inspection and Quarantine (AQSIQ). In the case of the Chile is the General Directorate
for International Economic Affairs (DIRECON).
5. Authority who request ex post verification
 In the case of China is General Administration of Customs, and in the case of
Chile is the National Customs Service.
6. Authority who receives the ex post verification request
 In the case of China is the AQSIQ. In the case of Chile DIRECON.
Operation Flow
7. Procedures for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin
(a) the exporter request a certificate of origin to the competent governmental
authorities, and the Certificate of Origin is signed electronically and
printed in paper in accordance with Chapter V.
73
(b) the competent governmental authorities will record the information as
well as any other supporting documentation in digital form, such as the
invoice; allocate a unique number to the Certificate of Origin and set the
process status to "Issued”6
.
(c) the competent governmental authorities shall send the electronic
information to the customs authorities of the importing Party.
8. Modification and nullification of the Certificate of Origin
(a) the competent governmental authorities may modify the data of the
Certificate of Origin only if the status of the Certificate of Origin is
“Pending”7
.
(b) the competent governmental authorities may nullify the Certificate of
Origin only if the status of the Certificate of Origin is “Pending”8
. In this
case the competent governmental authorities should send a new status to
the customs authorities of the importing Party.
9. Transmission of electronic information
(a) the competent governmental authorities of the exporting Party will send
electronic information to the customs authorities of the importing Party
according to the predefined standard and issue the Certificate of Origin
in hard copy.
(b) upon the arrival of electronic information, the customs authorities of the
importing Party will confirm to the competent governmental authorities
of the exporting Party according to the predefined standard that it has
received information in its totality.
10. Customs verification on importing
Once the customs authorities of the importing Party accept an import declaration
that will apply for the preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement, it shall change
the status of the Certificate of Origin sent electronically to a defined status and shall not
be modified or nullified.
11. Feedback the status of verification
(a) if the Certificate of Origin is accepted, the customs authorities should
send a status9
 to the competent governmental authorities of the exporting
Party.

6 The status established for sending electronic data could be adjusted to the specific technical
requirements agreed by the technical group.
7
 The definition for this status could be adjusted to the specific technical requirements agreed by the
technical group.
8
 The meaning of this footnote is the same as footnote 2.
9
 Status shall be established by the technical group.
74
(b) the competent governmental authority updates the information included
in the database.
12. Ex post verification
 When the customs authorities of the importing Party initiate an ex post
verification process could request among others, the supporting documents to the
competent governmental authorities of the exporting Party. All the exchange of this
information shall be done by e-mail or by other digital media.
Technical Solution
13. Network
Internet.
14. Secure mechanism
Network Layer: VPN.
15. Digital signature
(a) confidentiality, integrity, availability, non-repudiation, authenticity.
(b) PKI/CA.
(c) cross validate the digital signature based on X.509 V3 standard.
(d) algorithm of digest Sha-1.
(e) algorithm of encrypt RSA.
(f) encoding algorithm of digital signature DER and Base64.
(g) scope of data for digital signature: entire data of Certificate of Origin.
16. Platform of transmission
The platform of transmission shall be established by the technical group.
17. Language
English.
18. Message standard
(a) Format XML 1.0.
(b) Character Set UTF-8.
75
(c) message types: Certificate of Origin and feedback message.
(d) data element shall be established by the technical group and project
supervisors.
(e) other formats.
19. Coding list shall be established by the technical group
(a) codes of Chinese Ports and Chilean Ports.
(b) codes of unit.
(c) codes of HS.
(d) codes of countries.
(e) codes of transfer modes.
(f) codes of currencies.
(g) other codes.
Organization of the Working Group
20. From the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will establish a working
group composed of experts. In order to implement CVNSCO, the working group will be
divided into two teams, one team is project supervisor’s team, the other is technical
team.
21. Project supervisor’s terms of reference:
(a) write the requirements of CVNSCO.
(b) define the data elements.
(c) test the system and arrange the pilot.
(d) establish the mechanism that can deal with the problem on the system
running.
22. Contact points

23. Technical terms of reference
(a) Write the technical solution.
(b) coding and test.
(c) network test.
(d) technical support.

Additional Provision

24. The above project planning shall be subject to any technical improvements with
the agreement of the Parties.
77
Annex 7
Rules of Procedure of Arbitral Panel
General provisions
1. For the purposes of this Agreement and Chapter X:
arbitral panel means an arbitral panel established pursuant to Article 84;
complaining Party means a Party that requests the establishment of an arbitral panel
under Article 84; and
responding Party means a Party that has been complained against pursuant to Article
84.
Notifications
2. Any request, notice, written submissions or other document shall be delivered by
either Party or the arbitral panel by delivery against receipt, registered post, courier,
facsimile transmission, telex, telegram or any other means of telecommunication that
provides a record of the sending thereof.
3. A Party shall provide a copy of each of its written submissions to the other Party
and to each of the panelists. A copy of the document shall also be provided in electronic
format.
4. All notifications shall be made and delivered to each Party.
5. Minor errors of a clerical nature in any request, notice, written submission or
other document related to the arbitral panel proceeding may be corrected by delivery of
a new document clearly indicating the changes.
6. If the last day for delivery of a document falls on a legal holiday of a Party, the
document may be delivered on the next business day.
Commencing the arbitration
7. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, they shall meet with the arbitral panel within
15 days following the composition of the arbitral panel in order to determine such
matters that the Parties or the arbitral panel deems appropriate.
Initial submissions
8. The Party shall deliver its initial written submission no later than 20 days after
the composition of the arbitral panel. The responding Party shall deliver its written
counter-submission no later than 30 days after the date of delivery of the initial written
submission.
78
Operation of arbitral panels
9. The chair of the arbitral panel shall preside at all of its meetings.
10. Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the arbitral panel may conduct its
activities by any means, including telephone, facsimile transmissions or computer links.
11. Only panelists may take part in the deliberations of the arbitral panel.
12. The drafting of the report shall remain the exclusive responsibility of the arbitral
panel.
13. Where a procedural question arises that is not covered by these rules, an arbitral
panel may adopt an appropriate procedure that is not inconsistent with this Agreement.
14. When the arbitral panel considers that there is a need to modify any time period
applicable in the proceeding, or to make any other procedural or administrative
adjustment in the proceeding, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the
modification or adjustment with the indication of the period or adjustment needed.
Hearings
15. The Chair shall fix the date and time of the hearing in consultation with the
Parties and the other members of the arbitral panel. The Chair shall notify in writing to
the Parties of the date, time and location of the hearing. Unless either of the Parties
disagrees, the arbitral panel may decide not to convene a hearing.
16. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the hearing shall be held in the responding
Party’s territory. The responding Party shall be in charge of the logistical administration
of dispute settlement proceedings, in particular the organization of hearings, unless
otherwise agreed.
17. The arbitral panel may convene additional hearings if the Parties so agree.
18. All panelists shall be present at hearings.
19. No later than five days before the date of a hearing, each Party shall deliver a list
of the names of those representatives or advisers who will be attending the hearing.
20. The hearings of the arbitral panel shall be held in closed session.
21. The arbitral panel shall conduct the hearing in the following manner: argument
of the complaining Party; argument of the responding Party; rebuttal arguments of the
Parties; the reply of the complaining Party; the counter-reply of the responding Party.
The Chair may set time limits for oral arguments to ensure that each Party is afforded
equal time.
22. The arbitral panel may direct questions to either Party at any time during a
hearing.
79
23. Within 15 days after the date of the hearing, each Party may deliver a
supplementary written submission responding to any matter that arose during the
hearing.
Questions in writing
24. The arbitral panel may at any time during the proceedings address questions in
writing to one or both Parties. The arbitral panel shall deliver the written questions to
the Party to whom the questions are addressed.
25. A Party to whom the arbitral panel addresses written questions shall deliver a
copy of any written reply to the other Party and to the arbitral panel. Each Party shall be
given the opportunity to provide written comments on the reply within five days after
the date of delivery.
Confidentiality
26. The Parties shall maintain the confidentiality of the arbitral panel’s hearings.
Each Party shall treat as confidential the information submitted by the other Party to the
arbitral panel which that Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party submits a
confidential version of its written submissions to the arbitral panel, it shall also, upon
request of the other Party, provide a non-confidential summary of the information
contained in its submissions that could be disclosed to the public, no later than 15 days
after the date of either the request or the submission, whichever is later. Nothing in
these rules shall preclude a Party from disclosing statements of its own positions to the
public.
Ex parte contacts
27. The arbitral panel shall not meet or contact a Party in the absence of the other
Party.
28. No Party may contact any panelist in relation to the dispute in the absence of the
other Party or other panelists.
29. No panelist may discuss an aspect of the subject matter of the proceeding with a
Party or both Parties in the absence of the other panelists.
Role of experts
30. Upon request of a Party or on its own initiative, the arbitral panel may obtain
information and technical advice from any person or body that it deems appropriate.
Any information so obtained shall be submitted to the Parties for comments.
31. When a request is made for a written report of an expert, any time period
applicable to the arbitral panel proceeding shall be suspended for a period beginning on
the date of delivery of the request and ending on the date the report is delivered to the
arbitral panel.
80
Cases of urgency
32. In cases of urgency referred to in Article 90 of this Agreement, the arbitral panel
shall appropriately adjust the time periods mentioned to in these rules.
Working language
33. The working language of the dispute settlement proceedings shall be English.
34. Written submissions, documents, oral arguments or presentations at the hearings,
initial and final reports of the arbitral panel, as well as all other written or oral
communications between the Parties and the arbitral panel, shall be conducted in the
working language.
35. Any Party may provide comments on a translated version of a document that is
prepared in accordance with these rules.
Computation of time
36. Where anything under this Agreement or these rules is to be done, or the arbitral
panel requires anything to be done, within a number of days after, before or of a
specified date or event, the specified date or the date on which the specified event
occurs shall not be included in calculating that number of days.
37. Where, by reason of the operation of Rule 6, a Party receives a document on a
date other than the date on which the same document is received by the other Party, any
period of time the calculation of which is dependent on such receipt shall be calculated
from the date of receipt of the last such document.
81
Annex 8
Implementation of Modifications Approved by the Commission
 Chile shall implement the actions of the Commission referenced in Article 97 of
this Agreement through Executive Agreements (Acuerdos de Ejecución), in accordance
with Article 50, number 1, second paragraph, of the Political Constitution of the
Republic of Chile (Constitución Política de la República de Chile). 
