AGREEMENT CONCERNING DELIMITATION OF MARINE AND
SUBMARINE AREAS AND MARITIME CO-OPERATION BETWEEN
THE REPUBLICS OF COLOMBIA AND ECUADOR
The Governments of the Republics of Colombia and Ecuador, having regard to
the productive friendship prevailing in relations between their two countries, and
considering:
that their identical interests in the South Pacific region make it necessary to
establish the closest co-operation between them, with a view to adopting appropriate
measures for the preservation, conservation and rationalization of the resources to
be found in the marine and submarine areas over which they currently exercise or
may in future exercise sovereignty, jurisdiction or surveillance;
that it is their duty to ensure for their people the necessary conditions for sub
sistence and to provide them with means for their economic development, and that
they must therefore use the resources they possess for their benefit and prevent their
despoliation;
that it is expedient to delimit their respective marine and submarine areas;
have for that purpose appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:
His Excellency the President of Colombia: Mr. Indalecio Li vano Aguirre,
Minister for Foreign Affairs;
His Excellency the President of Ecuador: Mr. Antonio Jos Lucio Paredes,
Minister for Foreign Affairs;
Who have agreed:
Article 1. To designate the line of the geographical parallel traversing the
point at which the international land frontier between Ecuador and Colombia
reaches the sea as the boundary between their respective marine and submarine
areas, which have been established or may be established in the future.
Article 2. To establish, beyond the twelve-mile limit from the coast, a special
zone, ten miles wide, on either side of the parallel forming the sea boundary between
the two countries, to ensure that the fortuitous presence of small private fishing
craft from either country in the aforesaid zone is not considered a violation of the
maritime frontier. This does not imply recognition of any right to engage in fishing
or hunting in the special zone.
Article 3. To recognize and respect the conditions for the current or future
exercise by each of the two States of sovereignty, jurisdiction or surveillance in the
marine and submarine areas adjacent to their coasts up to a distance of 200 miles, in
accordance with the requirements established or to be established by each country
and with the provisions of their respective laws.
Article 4. To recognize the right of each of the two countries to establish the
base lines from which the width of the territorial sea is to be measured, using the
system of straight base lines connecting the most salient points on their coasts, and
to abide by the provisions which they have adopted or may adopt fo.r that purpose,
Article 5, To develop the broadest possible co-operation between the two
countries for the protection of the renewable and non-renewable resources to be
found in the marine and submarine areas over which they exercise or may in the
future exercise sovereignty, jurisdiction or surveillance and for the use of such
resources for the benefit of their peoples and for their national development.
Article 6. To afford each other all possible facilities for activities connected
with the exploitation and use of the living resources of their respective territorial sea
areas, through the exchange of information, co-operation in scientific research,
technical collaboration and encouragement of the establishment of joint enterprises.
Article 7. To co-ordinate, as far as possible, the enactment of laws and
regulations by each country in the exercise of its sovereignty, concerning the issue of
fishing licences and permits.
Article 8. To extend the fullest possible international co-operation for the co
ordination of the conservation measures applied by each State in the sea areas under
its sovereignty or jurisdiction, particularly in respect of species travelling beyond the
areas under its national jurisdiction, taking into account the recommendations of
the regional agencies concerned and the most accurate and up-to-date scientific
data. Such international co-operation shall not affect the sovereign right of each
State to adopt, within the framework of its maritime jurisdiction, such rules and
regulations as it deems appropriate.
Article 9. To extend the fullest possible co-operation to promote the expedi
tious conduct of international shipping operations in the seas under the sovereignty
or jurisdiction of each State.
Article 10, This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the exchange
of instruments of ratification, which shall take place at Bogota.
Article 11.
authentic.
This Agreement is signed in duplicate, both texts being equally
DONE at Quito, on 23 August 1975.
For the Government of the Republic of Colombia:
Indalecio Lievano Aguirre
Minister for Foreign Affairs
For the Government of the Republic of Ecuador
Antonio Jose Lucio Paredes
Minister for Foreign Affairs
