Treaty on Delimitation of Marine and Submarine Areas and Maritime Cooperation
between the Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Costa Rica
(17 March 1977)
The Republic of Colombia and the Republic of Costa Rica,
Realizing that international cooperation and reciprocity constitute the best means to resolve matters of common interest
to nations which are friends,
Agreeing on the advisability and need to delimit their marine and submarine areas in the Caribbean Sea,
Concurring on safeguarding the sovereignty and jurisdiction of marine areas belonging to each country and the free and
unimpeded transit through them,
Mutually interested in the adoption of adequate means for the preservation, conservation, and exploitation of the
resources existing in those areas, and for the prevention, control, and elimination of their pollution, have decided to conclude a
Treaty and for that purpose have appointed as their plenipotentiaries:
The President of the Republic of Colombia: Dr. Heraclio Fernandez Sandoval, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary in Costa Rica;
The President of the Republic of Costa Rica: Dr. Gonzalo J. Facio, Minister of Foreign Relations,
Who, after exchanging their respective full powers, found in proper and due form, have agreed as follows:
Article 1
To delimit their respective marine and submarine waters which are established or may be established in the future by
the following lines:
A. From the intersection of a straight line, drawn with azimuth 225&#186; (45&#186; SW.) from a point located at lat.
11&#186;00'00"N. and long. 81&#186;15'00"W., with the parallel 10&#186;49'00"N.
West along the said parallel to its intersection with the meridian 82&#186;14'00"W.
  B. From the intersection of the parallel 10&#186;49'00"N. and the meridian 82&#186;14'00"W., the boundary shall continue
north along the said meridian to where delimitation must be made with a third State.
N.B. The agreed lines and points are shown on the nautical chart, signed by the plenipotentiaries, which is annexed
to this Treaty, it being understood that in all cases the wording of the Treaty shall prevail.
Article 2
To accept and respect the methods by which each of the two States currently exercises or may in the future exercise its
sovereignty, jurisdiction, supervision, control, or rights in the marine and submarine areas adjacent to its coasts, delimited
pursuant to this Treaty, in conformity with what each country has established or may establish in the future and with the
regulations laid down by its domestic law.
Article 3
To develop the broadest cooperation between the two countries for the protection of the renewable or nonrenewable
resources found within the marine or submarine areas over which they exercise or may in the future exercise sovereignty,
jurisdiction, or supervision and to use those resources for the welfare of their peoples and their national development.
Article 4
To support the broadest international cooperation in order to coordinate the conservation measures which each State
applies in the zones of the sea subject to its sovereignty or jurisdiction, particularly as regards species that move beyond its
jurisdictional zone, taking into account the recommendations of appropriate regional organizations and the most accurate and
current scientific data. The said cooperation shall not impair the sovereign right of each State to adopt, within the framework of
its respective maritime jurisdictions, the rules and regulations that it deems pertinent.
Article 5
To offer each other the greatest possible facilities for the purpose of developing activities to exploit and use the living
resources of their respective maritime jurisdictional zones through the exchange of information, cooperation in scientific
research, technical collaboration, and encouragement of the formation of mixed corporations.
Article 6
Each of the Parties expresses its determination to cooperate with the other, in accordance with its possibilities, in the
application of the most adequate measures to impede, reduce, and control any pollution of the marine environment which affects
the neighboring State, irrespective of the source of such pollution.
Article 7
To support the broadest cooperation to promote rapid development of international navigation in seas subject to the
sovereignty or jurisdiction of each State.
Article 8
This Treaty shall be subject to the constitutional formalities of ratification by the High Contracting Parties and shall
enter into force upon the exchange of the instruments of ratification which shall take place at Bogota, Republic of Colombia.
This treaty is signed in two copies, in the Spanish language, both texts being equally authentic.
Signed at San Jose, Republic of Costa Rica, on March 17, 1977.
