Protocol On The Control Of Marine Transboundary Movements And Disposal Of Hazardous Wastes And Other Wastes
PREAMBLE
THE CONTRACTING STATES
BEING PARTIES to the Kuwait Regional Convention for
Cooperation on the Protection of the Marine Environment
from Pollution, adopted in 1978;
RECOGNIZING the danger posed to human health and the
environment of the Protocol Area by the transboundary movements
and disposal of hazardous wastes and other wastes, and that such
movements and disposal transfer the detrimental effects of such
wastes from the place of origin to transit States and States in which
the wastes shall be disposed of or stored;
CONVINCED that the most effective way to reduce the risk to
human health and the marine environment from the dangers arising
from hazardous wastes and other wastes, including their
transboundary movements, is to reduce and eliminate their
generation, and, where this is not possible, to dispose of them at or
near the place of origin in an environmentally sound manner;
FULLY RECOGNIZING that any Contracting State has the
sovereign right to ban the entry or disposal of foreign hazardous
wastes and other wastes in its territory;
EMPHASIZING the importance of cooperation and coordination
of action on a regional basis with the aim of controlling the
transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and other wastes
among themselves, and of restricting the importation of wastes from
non-Contracting States for disposal;
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT Article 11 of the Basel Convention on
the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes
and their Disposal, 1989, and adhering to the spirit of that
Convention;
MINDFUL of the provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, 1982, the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships and its Protocol, MARPOL
73/78, and the International Convention on the Prevention of Marine
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and other Matter, 1972 and its
1996 Protocol;
ALSO TAKING INTO ACCOUNT relevant international
agreements and actions, especially the 1992 Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development and Agenda 21;
DESIROUS to strengthen the implementation of Articles IV and V,
and in compliance with Article XIX of the Kuwait Regional
Convention;
HAVE AGREED as follows:
Article 1
SCOPE OF THE PROTOCOL
1. This Protocol shall apply to the following wastes that are
subject to transboundary movements to, from or through the
Protocol Area and their disposal:
a) Wastes that belong to any category contained in
Annex I shall be hazardous wastes, unless they do not
possess any of the characteristics contained in Annex ill;
and
b) Wastes that belong to any category contained in
Annex II shall be other wastes.
2. Wastes which, as a result of being radioactive, are
subject to other international control systems, are excluded
from the scope of this Protocol.
3. Wastes which derive from offshore installations, as
covered by the Protocol concerning Marine Pollution resulting
from Exploration and Exploitation of the Continental Shelf,
1989, are excluded from the scope of this Protocol.
4. Nothing in this Protocol shall be construed as
prohibiting or regulating the overland or airborne
transboundary movements and disposal of hazardous wastes
and other wastes, which movements and disposals do not
intrude upon the marine environment of the Protocol Area.
Article 2
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Protocol:
1. \"Wastes\" are substances or objects which are disposed of or are
intended to be disposed of or are required to be disposed of
by the provisions of national law;
2. \"Management\" means the collection, transport and disposal of
hazardous wastes or other wastes, including after-care of
disposal sites;
3. \"Transboundary movement\" means any movement of
hazardous wastes or other wastes from an area under the
national jurisdiction of one State to or through an area under
the national jurisdiction of another State or to or through an
area not under the national jurisdiction of any State, provided
that at least two States are involved in the movement;
4. \"Environmentally solid management of hazardous wastes or
other wastes\" means taking all practicable steps to ensure that
hazardous wastes or other wastes are managed in a manner
which will protect human health and the environment against
the adverse effects which may result from such wastes;
5. \"State of import\" means any State to which a transboundary
movement of hazardous wastes or other wastes is planned or
undertaken for the purpose of disposal therein, or for the
purpose of loading prior to disposal in an area not under the
national jurisdiction of any State;
6. \"State of export\" means any State from which a transboundary
movement of hazardous wastes or other wastes is planned to be
initiated or is initiated;
7. \"State of transit\" means any State, other than the State of
export or import, through which a movement of hazardous
wastes or other wastes is planned or takes place;
8. \" States concerned \" means States which are States of export,
import or transit, whether or not Contracting States.
9. \"Importer\" means any person under the jurisdiction of the State
of import who arranges :for hazardous wastes or other wastes to
be imported;
10. \"Exporter\" means any person under the jurisdiction of the State
of export who arranges for hazardous wastes or other wastes to
be exported;
11. \"Generator\" means any person whose activity produces
hazardous wastes or other wastes or, if that person is not
known, the person who is in possession and control of those
wastes;
12. \"Disposer\" means any person to whom hazardous wastes or
other wastes are shipped and who carries out the disposal of
such wastes;
13. \"Disposal\" means any operation specified in Annex IV to this
Protocol;
14. \"Carrier\" means any person who carries out the transport of
hazardous wastes or other wastes;
15. \"Person\" means any natural or legal person;
16. \"Ship\" means a vessel of any type whatsoever operating in the
marine environment and includes hydrofoil boats, air-cushion
vehicles , submersibles, floating craft and fixed or floating
platforms;
17. \"Protocol Area\" means the area as defined in Article 3 of this
Protocol;
18. \"Contracting State\" means any State which has become a party
to this Protocol;
19. \"Convention\" means the Kuwait Regional Convention for
Cooperation on the Protection of the Marine Environment from
Pollution, 1978;
20. \"Organization\" means the Regional Organization for the
Protection of the Marine Environment established under Article
XVI of the Convention;
21. \"Council\" means the organ of the Organization comprised of
the Contracting States and established in accordance with
Article XVI of the Convention;
22. \"Competent Authority\" means either the National Authority
defined in Article I of the Convention, or the authority or
authorities within the Government of a Contracting State,
designated by the National Authority to be responsible for the
fulfilment of the obligations and duties specified in the Protocol;
23. \"Regional Technical Guidelines\" means the guidelines for the
environmentally sound management of hazardous wastes and
other wastes, established pursuant to paragraph c of Article
14 of this Protocol;
24. \"Regional reception facility\" means any facility established on
the Regional initiative to receive wastes and provide services to
more than one Contracting State;
25. \"Illegal traffic\" means any transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes or other wastes as specified in Article 10 of
this Protocol.
Article 3
AREA OF APPLlCATION
The area to which this Protocol applies (hereinafter referred to as the
\"Protocol Area\") shall be the Sea Area as defined in Article II,
paragraph (a) of the Convention, together with the waters on the
landward side of the baselines from which the breadth of the
territorial sea of the Contracting States is measured and extending, in
the case of watercourses, up to the freshwater limit and including
intertidal zones, salt marshes, khores and sabkhas.
Article 4
GENERAL OBLlGATIONS
1 . Contracting States shall ensure that the generation of hazardous
wastes or other wastes is reduced to a minimum, taking into
account social, technological and economic aspects.
2. Each Contracting State shall prohibit all persons under its
national jurisdiction from transporting or disposing of
hazardous wastes or other wastes unless such persons are
authorized or allowed to perform such types of operations.
3. Each Contracting State shall take appropriate measures to
ensure that persons involved in the management of hazardous
wastes and other wastes under its national jurisdiction take such
steps as are necessary to prevent pollution due to hazardous
wastes or other wastes arising from such management and, if
such pollution occurs, to minimize the consequences thereof
for human health and the environment.
4. Each Contracting State shall require that hazardous wastes and
other wastes that are to be the subject of a transboundary
movement be packaged, labelled, and transported in
conformity with generally accepted and recognized international
rules and standards.
5 . Each Contracting State shall require that hazardous wastes and
other wastes be accompanied by a movement document from
the point at which a transboundary movement commences to
the point of disposal.
6. Contracting States shall ensure the effective control of transport
and disposal facilities for hazardous wastes or other wastes
including routine inspection and monitoring of environmental
effects of thes6 operations.
7. Each Contracting State shall require that hazardous wastes or
other wastes, to be exported, are managed in an
environmentally sound manner in the State of import or
elsewhere.
8 . Contracting States shall cooperate in monitoring the effects of
the management of hazardous wastes and other wastes on
human health and the environment.
9. Contracting States shall cooperate in the development of
programmes of technical and other assistance related to the
environmentally sound management of hazardous wastes and
other wastes.
10. Contracting States shall consider that illegal traffic in hazardous
wastes or other wastes is criminal.
1 1 . Each Contracting State shall take appropriate legal,
administrative and other measures to implement and enforce the
provisions of this Protocol, including measures to prevent and
punish conduct in contravention of the Protocol.
12. Each Contracting State shall designate its Competent Authority
responsible for the fulfilment of the obligations and duties
specified in the Protocol.
13. Contracting States exercising their right to prohibit the import of
hazardous wastes or other wastes for disposal shall inform in
writing other Contracting States directly or through the
Organisation. The Contracting States shall prohibit or shall not
permit the export of hazardous wastes and other wastes to those
Contracting States which have prohibited the import of such
wastes.
14. Nothing in this Protocol shall affect in any way the sovereignty
of Contracting States over their territorial sea established in
accordance with international law, and the sovereign rights and
the jurisdiction which Contracting States have in their exclusive
economic zones and their continental shelves in accordance
with international law, and the exercise by ships and aircraft of
all States of navigational rights and freedoms as provided for in
international law and as reflected in relevant international
instruments.
Article 5
Prohibition ON IMPORTATION
1 . The importation of hazardous wastes or other wastes from
Non-Contracting States into or through the Protocol Area for
the purposes of final disposal by any Contracting State is
prohibited.
2. Contracting States may import hazardous wastes or other
wastes for the purposes of resource recovery, recycling,
reclamation, direct re-use or alternative uses from non-Contracting
States through the Protocol Area, provided:
a) The State of import has the facilities and technical capacity
to manage the hazardous wastes and other wastes in an
environmentally sound manner consistent with the Regional
Technical Guidelines and such facilities are registered with
the Organization in consultation with the Competent
Authority of the State of import;
b) The State of export lacks the technical capacity, the
necessary facilities, or suitable disposal sites to dispose of
the hazardous wastes and other wastes in an environmentally
sound manner; and
c) The transboundary movement of wastes is consistent with
all relevant international agreements and national laws.
Article 6
PROHIBITION ON DISPOSAL
1 . Disposal of hazardous wastes in the Protocol Area is
prohibited unless they are destined for operations specified
in Annex IV Section B.
In conformity with relevant international legal regimes all
ships must provide adequate waste receiving facilities
on-board for subsequent discharge of wastes to
national/Regional reception facilities. Adequate national
and/ or Regional facilities shall be provided for the reception
of such wastes and the wastes generated from ports.
Contracting States may levy charges for services rendered at
the reception facilities towards management of wastes,
taking into consideration the national regulations and
Regional Technical Guidelines.
3. Disposal of other wastes shall require a prior permit as
granted by the Competent Authority of each Contracting
State in accordance with the Regional Technical Guidelines.
Article 7
EXPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS WASTES AND OTHER
WASTES
TO NON-CONTRACTING STATES
The export of hazardous wastes and other wastes by a
Contracting State to a non-Contracting State is allowed
provided that:
a) The State of export notifies other States concerned, through
the Organization, of its intent to export hazardous wastes or
other wastes;
b) The State of import has the facilities and technical capacity to
manage the hazardous wastes and other wastes in an
environmentally sound manner; and
c) The transboundary movement is consistent with the provisions
of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, other
relevant international agreements, and national laws.
Article 8
TRANSBOUNDARY MOVEMENT OF HAZARDOUS WASTES
AND
OTHER WASTES BETWEEN CONTRACTING STATES.
1. Except as provided in paragraph 2 below, no Contracting State
shall export hazardous wastes and other wastes to any other
Contracting State unless :
a) Regional Technical Guidelines have been adopted by the
Council;
b) The State of import has the facilities and technical capacity
to manage the hazardous wastes and other wastes in an
environmentally sound manner consistent with the Regional
Technical Guidelines and such facilities are registered with
the Organization in consultation with the Competent
Authority of the State of import; and
c) The State of export lacks the technical capacity, the
necessary facilities or suitable disposal sites to dispose of the
hazardous wastes and other wastes in accordance with the
Regional Technical Guidelines.
2. Hazardous wastes or other wastes may be exported by a
Contracting State to another Contracting State for operations
specified in Annex IV section B.
3 . The State of export shall notify m writing the Contracting
States concerned, directly or through the Organization, of any
proposed transboundary movement of hazardous wastes and
other wastes. Such notification shall contain the declaration
and information specified in Annex V A. Only one notification
needs to be sent to each Contracting State concerned, with a
copy to the Organization.
4. The State of import shall respond to the notifier in writing,
consenting to the movement with or without conditions,
denying permission for the movement, or requesting additional
information. A copy of the final response of the State of
import shall be sent to the Competent Authorities of the States
concerned, with a copy to the Organization.
5. Each State of transit which is a Contracting State shall
promptly acknowledge to the notifier receipt of the notification.
It may subsequently respond to the notifier in writing
Within thirty days, consenting to the movement with or without conditions, denying permission for the movement, or requesting
additional information. The State of export shall not allow the
transboundary movement to commence until it has received the
written consent of the State of transit. However, if at any time
a Contracting State decides not to require prior written
consent, either generally or under specific conditions, for transit
trans boundary movements of hazardous wastes or other wastes,
or modifies its requirements in this respect, it shall forthwith
inform the other Contracting States of its decision. In this
latter case, if no response is received by the State of export
within thirty days of the receipt of a given notification by the
State of transit, the State of export may allow the export to
proceed through the State of transit.
6. A copy of the movement documents described in Annex V B
should be sent to the Organization along with the notification.
7. Any transboundary movement of hazardous wastes and/ or
other wastes shall be covered by insurance, bond or other
guarantee as may be required by the State of import or any
State of transit.
8. Contracting States shall cooperate with a view to achieving the
objectives of this Article, and shall endeavour to promote sound
environmental management of hazardous wastes and other
wastes in accordance with the Regional Technical Guidelines.
Article 9
Third PARTY USE OF PORT FACILITIES
Whenever port facilities within the Protocol Area are used for the
export of hazardous wastes or other wastes, any Contracting State
having national jurisdiction over the facilities, and which knowingly
allowed or sanctioned such use of the facilities, shall be considered
the State of export for purposes of this Protocol.
Article 10
II.LEGAL TRAFFIC
1 . For the purposes of this Protocol, any transboundary movement
of hazardous wastes and other wastes in contravention of this
Protocol and of general provisions of international law shall be
deemed to be illegal traffic.
2. In case of a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes or
other wastes deemed to be illegal traffic as the result of conduct
on the part of the exporter or generator, the State of export
shall ensure that the wastes in question are:
a) taken back by the exporter or the generator or, if necessary,
by itself into the State of export, or, if impracticable,
b) otherwise disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
this Protocol,
within 30 days from the time the State of export has been
informed about the illegal traffic or such other period of time as
States concerned may agree. To this end the States concerned
shall not oppose, hinder or prevent the return of those wastes to
the State of export.
3. In the case of a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes
or other wastes deemed to be illegal traffic as the result of
conduct on the part of the importer or disposer, the State of
import shall ensure that the wastes in question are disposed of
in an environmentally sound manner by the importer or
disposer or, if necessary, by itself within 30 days from the time
the illegal traffic has come to the attention of the State of import
or such other period of time the States concerned may agree.
To this end, the States concerned shall co-operate, as necessary,
in the disposal of the wastes in an environmentally sound
manner.
4. In cases where the responsibility for the illegal traffic cannot be
assigned either to the exporter or generator or to the importer or
disposer, the States concerned shall ensure, through cooperation,
that the wastes in question are disposed of as soon as possible in
an environmentally solid manner, either in the State of export
or the State of import or elsewhere as appropriate.
5. Each Contracting State shall enact appropriate
national/domestic legislation to prevent and punish illegal traffic.
The Contracting States shall co-operate with a view to
achieving the objectives of this Article.
Article 11
DUTY TO RE-IMPORT
When a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes or other
wastes to which the consent of the States concerned has been
given, subject to the provisions of this Protocol, cannot be
completed in accordance with the terms of the contract, the State
of export shall ensure that the wastes in question are taken back
into the State of export, by the exporter, if alternative arrangements
cannot be made for their disposal in an environmentally sound
manner, within thirty days from the time that the importing State
informed the State of export and the Organization. To this end,
the State of export and the State of transit shall not hinder the
return of those wastes to the State of export.
Article 12
ADOPTION OF OTHER RESTRICTIONS
Nothing in this Protocol shall prevent any Contracting State from
imposing additional requirements that are consistent with the
provisions of this Protocol, and are in accordance with the Basel
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, and the rules of international
law, in order to better protect human health and the environment.
Article 13
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS.
The Organization shall inter alia:
1 . Communicate with Competent Authorities in the Contracting
States on the application of the Protocol;
2. Provide for training of national experts particularly for
monitoring and enforcement of the provisions of the Protocol;
3 . Arrange, upon request, for the provision of legal and technical
assistance and advice to the Contracting States for the effective
implementation of the Protocol;
4. Enhance the Regional capabilities and networks for the
exchange of data and information of relevance to the Protocol;
5 . Maintain a special Register, in consultation with the Competent
Authorities, of disposal facilities in the Contracting States
which have adequate technical capacities to manage hazardous
wastes and other wastes in an environmentally sound manner as
specified in the Regional Technical Guidelines;
6. Establish a unified monitoring system for the transboundary
movement of hazardous wastes and other wastes in the Protocol
Area;
7. Facilitate the establishment of Regional reception facilities in
close cooperation with Contracting States and relevant
regional/international organizations;
8. Prepare reports based upon information received from
Contracting States on the application of the Protocol and
present them to the Council;
9. Establish and maintain liaison with relevant regional and
international organizations, and appropriate private
organizations outside the Contracting States, including
generators and carriers of hazardous wastes and other wastes;
10. Establish and maintain liaison with the Secretariat of the Basel
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal; and
11 . Perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the
Council for the implementation of the Protocol.
Article 14
FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL
The Council shall perform the following functions :
a) Review the implementation of the Protocol, and consider the efficacy
of the measures adopted and the need for any other
measures, including the addition of Annexes;
b) Adopt, review and amend as required any Annex to this
Protocol;
c) Adopt, revise and amend the Regional Technical Guidelines;
and
d) Discharge any other functions as may be appropriate for
implementation of this Protocol.
Article 15
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1 . The provisions of the Convention relating to any Protocol shall
apply to this Protocol.
2. Procedures for amendments to Protocols and their Annexes
adopted in accordance with Articles XX and XXI of the
Convention shall apply to this Protocol.
3. The Rules of Procedure and Financial Rules adopted pursuant
to Article XXIl of the Convention, and amendments thereto,
shall apply to this Protocol.
4. The Annexes shall form an integral part of this Protocol unless
expressly provided otherwise therein.
Article 16
FINAL PROVISIONS
1 . This Protocol shall be open for signature in Tehran, the Islamic
Republic of Iran from 17 March to 14 June 1998
corresponding to 18 Thulqida 1418 to 19 Safar 1419 of Hejira
by any Contracting State to the Convention.
2. This Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance,
approval or accession by the Contracting States to the
Convention. Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval
or accession shall be deposited with the Government of Kuwait
which shall assume the functions of the Depository in
accordance with Article XXX of the Convention.
3. This Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day
following the date of deposit of at least five instruments of
ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to the
Protocol by the States as referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article.
4. After the date of deposit of five instruments of ratification,
acceptance or approval of, or accession to this Protocol, this
Protocol shall enter into force with respect to any State as
referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article on the nineteenth day
following the date of deposit by that State of the instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
IN WITNES S WHEREOF the undersigned Plenipotentiaries,
being duly authorized by their respective Governments, have
signed this Protocol.
DONE AT TEHRAN this seventeenth day of March, in the
year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight corresponding
to eighteenth day of Thulqida in the year one thousand four
hundred and eighteen of Hejira in the Arabic, English and Farsi
languages, the texts being equally authentic.
Annex I
CATEGORIES OF WASTES TO BE CONTROLLED
Waste Streams
Y1 Clinical wastes from medical care in hospitals, medical centers and clinics
Y2 . Wastes from the production and preparation of pharmaceutical products
Y3 Waste pharmaceuticals, drugs and medicines
Y4 Wastes from the pro duction, formulation and use of biocides and
phytopharmaceuticals
Y5 Wastes from the manufacture, formulation and use of wood preserving
chemicals
Y6 Wastes from the production, formulation and use of organic solvents
Y7 Wastes from heat treatment and tempering operations containing cyanides
Y8 Waste mineral oils unfit for their originally intended use
Y9 Waste oils/water, hydrocarbons/water mixtures, emulsions
Y10 Waste substances and articles containing or contaminated with polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCB s) and/or polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs) and/or
polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs)
Y11 Waste tarry residues arising from refining, distillation and any pyrolytic
treatment
Y11 Wastes from pro duction, formulation and use of inks, dyes, pigments, paints,
lacquers, varnish
Y13 Wastes from pro duction, formulation and use of resins, latex, plasticizers,
glues/adhesives
Y14 Waste chemical substances arising from research and development or teaching
activities which are not identified and/or are new and whose effects on man
and/or the environment arc not known
Y15 Wastes of an explosive nature not subject to other legislation
Y16 Wastes from pro duction, formulation and use of photographic chemicals and
processing materials
Y17 Wastes resulting from surface treatment o f metals and plastics
Y18 Residues arising from industrial waste disposal operations
Waste having as constituents;
Yl9 Metal carbonyls
Y20 Beryllium; beryllium compounds
Y21 Hexavalent chromium compounds
Y22 Copper compounds
Y23 Zinc compounds
Y24 Arsenic; arsenic compounds
Y25 Selenium; selenium compounds
Y26 Cadmium; cadmium compounds
Y27 Antimony; antimony compounds
Y28 Tellurium; tellurium compounds
Y29 Mercury; mercury compounds
Y30 Thallium; thallium compounds
Y31 Lead; lead compounds
Y32 Inorganic fluorine Compounds excluding calcium fluoride
Y33 Inorganic cyanides
Y34 Acidic solutions or acids in solid form
Y35 Basic solutions or bases in solid form
Y36 Asbestos (dust and fibres)
Y37 Organic phosphorus compounds
Y3 8 Organic cyanides
Y39 Phenols; phenol compounds including chlorophenols
Y40 Ethers
Y41 Halogenated organic solvents
Y42 Organic solvents excluding halogenated solvents
Y43 Any congener of polychlorinated dibenzo-furan
Y44 Any congener of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin
Y45 Organohalogen compounds other than s1.1bstances referred to in this
Annex (e.g. Y3 9, Y41 ; Y42, Y43, Y44)
To facilitate the application of this Protocol, Annex VI provides further guidance as
to wastes characterized as hazardous pursuant to Article 1, paragraph l (a), of this
Protocol, and Annex VII provides further guidance as to wastes that are not
hazardous pursuant to Article 1, Paragraph l (a), of this Protocol. Annexes VI and
VIl do not affect the application of Article 1, paragraph l (a), of this Protocol for the
purposes of characterization of wastes.
Annex II
OTHER WASTES
CATEGORIES OF WASTES REQUIRING SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
Y46 Wastes collected from households
Y47 Residues arising from the incineration of household wastes
ANNEX III
LIST OF HAZARDOUS CHARACTERISTICS
UN Class Code Characteristics
1 H1 Explosive
An explosive substance or waste is a solid or liquid substance or waste
(or mixture of substances or wastes) which is in Itself capable by
chemical reaction of producing gas at such a temperature and pressure
and at such speed as to cause damage to the surroundings.
3 H3 Flammable liquids
The word \"flammable\" has the same meaning as \"inflammable\".
Flammable liquids are liquids, or mixtures of liquids, or liquids
containing solids in solution or suspension (for example, paints,
varnishes, lacquers, etc., but not including substances or wastes
otherwise classified on account of their dangerous characteristics)
which give off a flammable vapour at temperatures of not more than
60.5C, closed-cup test, or not more than 65.6C, open-cup test.
(Since the results of open-cup tests and of closed-cup tests are not
strictly comparable and even individual results by the same test are
often. variable, regulations varying from the above figures to make
allowance for such differences would be within the spirit of this
definition.)
4.1 H4.1 Flammable solids
Solids, or waste solids, other than those classed as explosives, which
under conditions encountered in transport are readily combustible, or
may cause or contribute to fire through friction.
4.2 H4.2 Substances or wastes liable to spontaneous combustion
Substances or wastes which are liable to spontaneous heating under
normal conditions encountered in transport, or to heating up on contact
with air, and being then liable to catch fire.
4.3 H4.3 Substances or wastes which, in contact with water emit flammable
gases
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with water are liable to
become spontaneously flammable or to give off flammable gases in
dangerous quantities.
5.1 H5.1 Oxidizing
Substances or wastes which, while in themselves not necessarily
combustible, may, generally by yielding oxygen cause, or contribute to,
the combustion of other materials.
5.2 H5.2 Organic Peroxides
Organic substances or wastes which contain the bivalent-O-O structure
are thermally unstable substances which may undergo exothermic self accelerating
decomposition.
6.1 H6.1 Poisonous (Acute)
Substances or wastes liable either to cause death or serious injury or to
harm human health if swallowed or inhaled or by skin contact.
6.2 H6.2 Infectious substances
Substances or wastes containing viable micro organisms or their toxins
which are known or suspected to cause disease in animals or humans.
8 H8 Corrosives
Substances or wastes which, by chemical action, will cause severe
damage when in contact with living tissue, or, in the case of leakage.
will materially damage, or even destroy, other goods or the means of
transport; they may also cause other hazards.
9 H10 Liberation of toxic gases in contact with air or water
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with air or water, are liable
to give off toxic gases in dangerous quantities .
9 H11 Toxic (Delayed or chronic)
Substances or wastes which, if they are inhaled or ingested or if they
penetrate the skin, i:nay involve delayed or chronic effects, including
carcinogenicity.
9 H12 Ecotoxic
Substances or wastes which if released present or may present
immediate or delayed adverse impacts to the environment by means of
bioaccumulation and/or toxic effects upon biotic systems.
9 H13 Capable, by any means after disposal, of yielding another material,
e.g., leachate, which possesses any of the characteristics listed above .
Tests
The potential hazards posed by certain types of wastes are not yet fully
documented; tests to define quantitatively these hazards do not exist. Further research
is necessary in order to develop means to characterize potential hazards posed to man
and/or the environment by these wastes. Standardized tests have been derived with
respect to pure substances and materials. Many countries have developed national
tests which can be applied to materials listed in Annex 1, in order to decide if these
materials exhibit any of the characteristics listed in this Annex.
ANNEX IV
Disposal operations
A. OPERATIONS WHICH D O NOT LEAD TO THE P O S SIBILITY OF
RESOURCE RECOVERY, RECYCLING, reclamaTION,
DIRECT RE-USE OR ALTERNATIVE USES
Section A encompasses- all such disposal operations which occur in practice.
DI Deposit into or onto land, (e.g., landfill, etc.)
D2 Land treatment, (e.g., biodegradation of liquid or sludgy discards in soils, etc.)
D3 Deep injection, (e.g., injection of pumpable discards into wells, salt domes of
naturally occurring repositories, etc.)
D4 Surface impoundment, (e. g., placement of liquid or sludge discards into pits,
ponds or lagoons, etc.)
D5 Specially engineered landfill, (e.g., placement into lined discrete cells which
are capped and isolated from one another and the environment, etc.)
D6 Release into a water body .except seas/oceans
D7 Release into seas/oceans including sea-bed insertion
D8 Biological treatment not specified elsewhere in this Annex which results in
final compounds or mixtures which are discarded . by means of any of the
operations in Section A
D9 Physico chemical treatment not specified elsewhere in this Annex which
results in final compounds or mixtures which are discarded by means of any of
the operations in Section A, (e.g., evaporation, drying, calcination,
neutralization, precipitation, etc.)
D 10 Incineration on land
D11 Incineration at sea
D12 Permanent storage (e.g., emplacement o f containers in a mine, etc.)
D13 Blending or mixing prior to submission to any o f the operations in Section A
D14 Repackaging prior to submission to any of the operations in Section A
D15 Storage pending any o f the operations in Section A
B. OPERATIONS WHICH MAY LEAD TO RESOURCE RECOVERY,
RECYCLING, RECLAMATION, DIRECT RE-USE OR ALTERNATIVE
USES
Section B encompasses all such operations. with respect to materials legally
defined as .or considered to be hazardous wastes and which otherwise would
have been destined for operations included in Section A
R1 Use as a fuel (other than in direct incineration) or other means to generate
energy
R2 Solvent reclamation/regeneration
R3 Recycling/reclamation of organic substances which are not used as solvents.
R4 Recycling/reclamation of metals and metal compounds.
R5 Recycling/reclamation of other inorganic materials
R6 Regeneration of acids or bases
R7 Recovery of components used for pollution abatement
R8 Recovery of components from catalysts
R9 Used oil rerefining or other reuses of previously used oil
R1O Land treatment resulting in benefit to agriculture or ecological improvement
R11 Uses of residual materials obtained from any of the operations numbered R1-R10
R12 Exchange of wastes for submission to any of the operations numbered R1-R11
R13 Accumulation of material intended for any operation in Section B
Annex V A
INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED ON NOTIFICATION
1 . Reason for waste export
2. Exporter of the waste 1/
3. Generator(s) of the waste and site of generation 1/
4. Disposer of the waste and actual site of disposal 1/
5. Intended carrier(s) of the waste or their agents, if known 1/
6. Country of export of the waste
Competent authority 2/
7. Expected countries of transit.
Competent authority 2/
8. Country of import of the waste
Competent authority 2/
9. General or single notification
10. Projected date(s) of shipment(s) and period of time over which waste is to be
exported and proposed itinerary (including point of entry and exit) 3/
11. Means of transport envisaged (road, rail, sea, air, inland waters)
12. Information relating to insurance 4/
13. Designation and physical description of the waste including Y number and UN
number and its composition 5/ and information on any special handling
requirements including emergency provisions in case of accidents
14. Type of packaging envisaged (e.g. bulk, drowned, tanker)
15 . Estimated quantity in weight/volume 6/
16. Process by which the waste is generated. 7/
17. For wastes listed in Annex I, classifications from Annex Ill: hazardous
characteristic, H number, and UN class
18. Method of disposal as per Annex IV
19. Declaration by the generator and exporter that the information is correct
20. Information transmitted (including technical description of the plant) to the exporter or generator
From the disposer of the waste upon which the latter has based his assessment that there was no reason
To believe that the wastes will not be managed in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with the
Laws and regulations of the country of import.
21 . Information concerning the contract between the exporter and disposer.
Notes
1/ Full name and address, telephone, telex or telefax number and the name,
address, telephone, telex or telefax number of the person to be contacted.
2/ Full name and address, telephone, telex or telefax number.
3/ Jn the case of a general notification covering several shipments, either the
expected dates of each shipment or, if this is not known, the expected
frequency of the shipments will be required.
4/ Information to be provided on relevant insurance requirements and how they
are met by exporter, carrier and disposer.
5/ The nature and the concentration of the most hazardous components; in terms
of toxicity and other dangers presented by the waste both in handling and in
relation to the proposed disposal method.
6/ In the case of a general notification covering several shipments, both the
estimated total quantity and the estimated quantities for each individual
shipment will be required.
7/ Insofar as this is necessary to assess the hazard and determine the
appropriateness of the proposed disposal operation.
ANNEX V B
1. Exporter of the waste 1/
2. Generator(s) of the waste and site of generation 1/
3. Disposer of the waste and actual site of disposal 1/
4. Carrier(s) of the waste 1/ or his agent(s)
5. Subject of general or single notification
6. The date the transboundary movement started and date(s) and signature on
Receipt by each person who takes charge of the waste
7. Means of transport (road, rail, inland waterway, sea, air) including countries of export, transit
And import, also point and exit where these have been designated
8. General description of the waste (physical state, proper UN shipping name and class, UN number, Y number
And H number as applicable)
9. Information on special handling requirements including emergency provision in case of accidents.
10. Type and number of packages
11. Quantity in weight/volume
12. Declaration by the generator or exporter that the information is correct
13. Declaration by the generator or exporter indicating no objection from the
Competent authorities of all states concerned which are parties
14. Certification by disposer of receipt at designated disposal facility and indication of method of disposal and of the approximate date of disposal
Notes
The information required on the movement document shall where possible be integrated in one document with that required under transport rules. Where this is not possible the information should complement rather than duplicate that required under the transport rules. The movement document shall carry instructions as to who is to provide information and fill out any form.
1/ Full name and address, telephone, telex or telefax number and the name, address, telephone, telex or telefax number of the person to be contacted in case of emergency
