STEPPING STONE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT
BETWEEN CÔTE D'IVOIRE OF THE ONE PART,
AND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
AND ITS MEMBER STATES OF THE OTHER PART 


CE/CI/en 2 


CE/CI/en 3
TABLE OF COTETS
PREAMBLE ...............................................................................................................................6
TITLE I: OBJECTIVES..............................................................................................................9
TITLE II: PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT................................................................10
TITLE III : TRADE REGIME FOR GOODS ..........................................................................15
CHAPTER 1: CUSTOMS DUTIES AND NON-TARIFF MEASURES.......................15
CHAPTER 2: TRADE DEFENCE INSTRUMENTS.....................................................25
CHAPTER 3: CUSTOMS REGIME AND TRADE FACILITATION..........................33
CHAPTER 4: TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE, SANITARY AND
PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES........................................................................41
TITLE IV: SERVICES, INVESTMENTS AND RULES CONCERNING TRADE...............46
TITLE V: PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES ..........................................47
CHAPTER 1: OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE .....................................................................47
CHAPTER 2: CONSULTATION AND MEDIATION..................................................48
CHAPTER 3: PROCEDURES FOR AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.................51
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS.......................................................................62
TITLE VI: GENERAL EXCEPTIONS ....................................................................................65
TITLE VII: INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS.............................69


CE/CI/en 4
THE REPUBLIC OF CÔTE D'IVOIRE,
of the one part,
and
THE KINGDOM OF BELGIUM,
THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA,
THE CZECH REPUBLIC,
THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK,
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
THE REPUBLIC OF ESTONIA,
IRELAND
THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC,
THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN,
THE FRENCH REPUBLIC,
THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC, 


CE/CI/en 5
THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS,
THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA,
THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA,
THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBURG,
THE REPUBLIC OF HUNGARY,
MALTA,
THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS,
THE REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA,
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND,
THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC,
ROMANIA,
THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA,
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC, 


CE/CI/en 6
THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND,
THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN,
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
and
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY,
of the other part,
PREAMBLE
HAVING regard to the Partnership Agreement between the Members of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States, of the one part, and the European Community and its Member States, of the
other part, signed in Cotonou on 23 June 2000 and revised in Luxembourg on 25 June 2005,
hereinafter the "Cotonou Agreement";
HAVING regard to the expiry of the transitional preferential trade regime of the Cotonou
Agreement on 31 December 2007;
HAVING regard to the possible unfavourable impact of the expiry of these transitional trade
preferences provided for under the Cotonou Agreement on trade between the two Parties if they fail
to replace it with an agreement which is compatible with the rules of the World Trade Organisation
by 1 January 2008; 


CE/CI/en 7
RECOGNISING therefore the need to establish a stepping stone Economic Partnership Agreement
in order to safeguard the economic and trade interests of the Parties;
WHEREAS the Parties wish to strengthen their economic and trade relations and establish lasting
relations based on partnership and cooperation;
WHEREAS the Parties are committed to the principles and rules governing international trade, in
particular the rights and obligations arising from the provisions of the General Agreement on Trade
and Tariffs of 1994 (GATT 1994) and the other multilateral agreements annexed to the Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organisation (the Agreement establishing the WTO), and to applying
them in a transparent, non-discriminatory manner;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to respect for human rights, democratic principles and the rule
of law, which constitute the main elements of the Cotonou Agreement, and to good governance,
which is fundamental to the Cotonou Agreement;
WHEREAS the economic, cultural and social development of West African States must be
promoted and expedited with a view to contributing to peace and security and to promoting a stable
and democratic political environment;
WHEREAS the Parties attach importance to the development objectives agreed at the international
level and to the United Nations Millennium Development Goals;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to working together towards the achievement of the Cotonou
Agreement objectives, in particular the eradication of poverty, sustainable development and the
progressive integration of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) States into the world economy; 


CE/CI/en 8
WISHING to create new opportunities for employment, attract investment and improve living
conditions on the territory of the Parties, while promoting sustainable development;
WHEREAS existing traditional links are important, in particular the close historical, political and
economic links between the European Community, its Member States and the West African States;
RECOGNISING the difference in levels of economic and social development which exists between
the West African States and the European Community;
CONVINCED that this Agreement will create a new and more favourable climate for their relations
in the areas of economic governance, trade and investment, and open up new opportunities for
growth and development;
RECOGNISING the importance of cooperation on development for the implementation of this
Agreement;
PENDING the signing of a comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between West Africa
and the European Union with a view to the sustained and harmonious development and integration
of the West African Region;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to supporting the regional integration process in West Africa,
and in particular to promoting regional economic integration as an essential instrument for its
integration in the world economy, which helps it to meet the challenges of globalisation and achieve
its economic and social development objectives, 


CE/CI/en 9
HAVE DECIDED AS FOLLOWS:
TITLE I
OBJECTIVES
ARTICLE 1
Stepping Stone Agreement
This Agreement creates an initial framework for an Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA).
ARTICLE 2
Objectives
The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to allow the Ivorian Party to benefit from the enhanced market access offered by the EC Party
in the context of the EPA negotiations, and thereby to avoid disrupting trade between
Côte d'Ivoire and the European Community on the expiry of the transitional trade regime of
the Cotonou Agreement on 31 December 2007, pending the conclusion of a comprehensive
EPA; 


CE/CI/en 10
(b) to lay the foundations for the negotiation of an EPA which will help to reduce poverty,
promote regional integration, economic cooperation and good governance in West Africa and
to improve West Africa's capacities as regards commercial policy and trade-related issues;
(c) to promote the harmonious and progressive integration of West Africa into the world
economy, in accordance with its political choices and development priorities;
(d) to strengthen the existing relations between the Parties on the basis of solidarity and mutual
interest;
(e) to create an agreement which is compatible with Article XXIV of GATT 1994.
TITLE II
PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 3
Development cooperation in the framework of this Agreement
The Parties undertake to cooperate in order to implement this Agreement and to help support the
Ivorian Party in the achievement of the EPA objectives. This cooperation shall take financial and
non-financial forms. 


CE/CI/en 11
ARTICLE 4
Development finance cooperation
in the framework of this Agreement
1. The provisions of the Cotonou Agreement concerning economic and regional cooperation and
integration shall be implemented with a view to maximising the benefits of this Agreement.
2. European Community financing1
 pertaining to development cooperation between the Ivorian
Party and the European Community in support of the implementation of this Agreement shall be
provided in accordance with the appropriate rules and procedures set out in the Cotonou
Agreement, in particular the programming procedures of the European Development Fund (EDF),
and using the relevant instruments financed by the General Budget of the European Union. In this
context, supporting the implementation of this Agreement shall be one of the priorities.
3. The Member States of the European Community collectively undertake to support, through
their respective development policies and instruments, development actions to encourage regional
economic cooperation and the implementation of this Agreement both at national and regional
levels, in accordance with the principles of efficiency and complementarity of aid.
4. The Parties shall cooperate to facilitate the participation of other donors willing to support the
efforts of the Ivorian Party to achieve the objectives of this Agreement.

1
 Not including financing provided by the individual Member States. 


CE/CI/en 12
5. The Parties acknowledge the usefulness of regional financing mechanisms such as a regional
EPA fund established by and for the region in order to channel financing at regional and national
level and effectively implement the measures accompanying this Agreement. The European
Community undertakes to channel its support either through the financing mechanisms of the region
or through those chosen by the countries signatory to this Agreement in accordance with the rules
and procedures set out in the Cotonou Agreement and in compliance with the aid effectiveness
principle of the Paris Declaration, with a view to ensuring simplified, efficient and rapid
implementation.
6. For the implementation of the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 5 of this Agreement, the Parties
undertake to cooperate using financial and non-financial means in the areas defined in Articles 5,
6, 7 and 8.
ARTICLE 5
Business environment
The Parties consider that the business environment is an essential factor in economic development
and that, consequently, the provisions of this Agreement shall be aimed at contributing to this
common objective. Côte d'Ivoire, which is a signatory to the Treaty establishing the Organisation
for the Harmonisation of Business Law in Africa (OHADA), reaffirms its commitment to applying
the provisions of this Treaty.
In accordance with the provisions of Article 4, the Parties undertake to work unremittingly on
improving the business environment. 


CE/CI/en 13
ARTICLE 6
Support for implementation of the rules
The Parties agree that the setting of trade rules, which include provisions on cooperation detailed in
the various chapters of this Agreement, is fundamental to achieving the objectives of this
Agreement. Cooperation in this field shall be organised in accordance with the arrangements
specified in Article 4.
ARTICLE 7
Strengthening and modernising productive sectors
In relation to the implementation of this Agreement, the Parties affirm their wish to upgrade the
competitiveness of the productive sectors of Côte d'Ivoire affected by this Agreement.
The Parties agree to work together using cooperation instruments and in accordance with the
provisions of Article 4, and to support:
– the repositioning of the private sector vis-à-vis the new economic opportunities created by this
Agreement,
– the definition and implementation of modernisation strategies,
– the improvement of the private sector environment and of the business climate referred to in
Articles 5 and 6,
– the promotion of the partnership between the Parties' private sectors. 


CE/CI/en 14
ARTICLE 8
Cooperation on fiscal adjustment
1. The Parties acknowledge the challenges which the elimination or substantial reduction of
customs duties provided for in this Agreement may pose for Côte d'Ivoire, and they agree to
establish dialogue and cooperation in this field.
2. In the light of the tariff dismantling schedule adopted as part of this Agreement, the Parties
agree to establish in-depth dialogue on fiscal adjustment measures in order to ultimately ensure a
balanced budget position for Côte d'Ivoire.
3. The Parties agree to cooperate as regards the provisions of Article 4, in particular through the
facilitation of assistance measures in the following fields:
(a) a significant contribution to absorbing net fiscal impact in full complementarity with fiscal
reforms;
(b) support for fiscal reform accompanying dialogue in this field.
ARTICLE 9
Cooperation in international fora
The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in all international fora where issues relevant to this
partnership are discussed. 


CE/CI/en 15
TITLE III
TRADE REGIME FOR GOODS
CHAPTER 1
CUSTOMS DUTIES AND NON-TARIFF MEASURES
ARTICLE 10
Customs duties
1. The term "customs duties" refers to the duties or charges of any kind imposed on or in
connection with the importation or exportation of goods, as provided for in the WTO rules.
This provision shall not be interpreted as applying to internal duties or charges or duties or charges
having equivalent effect at the moment of leaving the territory.
2. For each product, the basic customs duty to which the successive reductions apply shall be that
specified in the tariff dismantling schedules of each Party. 


CE/CI/en 16
ARTICLE 11
Fees and other charges
The Parties reaffirm their commitment to complying with the provisions of Article VIII of
GATT 1994.
ARTICLE 12
Customs duties on products originating in Côte d'Ivoire
Products originating in Côte d'Ivoire shall be imported into the EC free of customs duties, except
for the products indicated, and under the conditions set out in Annex 1.
ARTICLE 13
Customs duties on products originating in the EC
Customs duties on products originating in the EC and exported to Côte d'Ivoire shall be reduced or
eliminated in accordance with the tariff dismantling schedule in Annex 2. 


CE/CI/en 17
ARTICLE 14
Rules of origin
1. Within the meaning of this Chapter, "originating" status shall be conferred on goods meeting
the rules of origin in force on 1 January 2008 on the territory of the Parties.
2. The Parties shall establish a reciprocal common regime governing the rules of origin by
31 July 2008 at the latest, based on the rules of origin set out in the Cotonou Agreement and
providing for their simplification, in view of the Ivorian Party's development objectives. The new
regime shall be part of this Agreement by decision of the EPA Committee. Failing agreement
between the Parties, the applicable regime shall be the most favourable regime to Côte d'Ivoire of
either the current regime adopted by the EC Party or the improved rules established under the
Cotonou Agreement.
3. At the latest three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall
revise the provisions in force governing the rules of origin with the common aim of simplifying the
concepts and methods used to determine origin in the light of the development objectives of
Côte d'Ivoire and in line with those of West Africa. In the context of this revision, the Parties shall
take account of technological development, production procedures and all other factors, including
current reforms of the rules of origin which could require consequent amendments to the negotiated
reciprocal regime. All amendments or replacements shall be made pursuant to a decision by the
EPA Committee. 


CE/CI/en 18
ARTICLE 15
Standstill
1. No new customs duties on imports shall be introduced in trade between the Parties, nor shall
those currently applied in trade between the Parties be increased from the date of entry into force of
this Agreement.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, and as part of the finalisation of the common external tariff of
the Economic Community Of West African States (ECOWAS), Côte d'Ivoire may until
31 December 2011 revise its basic customs duties on goods originating in the European Community
insofar as the general impact of these duties is no higher than that resulting from the duties specified
in Annex 2. The EPA Committee shall amend Annex 2 accordingly.
ARTICLE 16
Duties, taxes and other fees and charges on exports
1. No new customs duties on exports or charges with equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor
shall those currently applied in trade between the Parties be increased from the date of entry into
force of this Agreement. 


CE/CI/en 19
2. In exceptional circumstances, if the Ivorian Party can justify specific needs for income,
protection for infant industry or environmental protection, it may, on a temporary basis and after
consulting the EC Party, introduce customs duties on exports or charges with equivalent effect on a
limited number of traditional goods or increase the incidence of those which already exist.
3. The Parties agree to review the provisions of this Article in the framework of the EPA
Committee at the latest three years after entry into force of this Agreement, taking full account of
their impact on the development and diversification of the economy of the Ivorian Party.
ARTICLE 17
More favourable treatment resulting from free-trade agreements
1. For the fields covered by this Chapter, the EC Party shall grant the Ivorian Party any more
favourable treatment applicable as a result of the European Community becoming party to a
free-trade agreement with third parties after signing this Agreement.
2. For the fields covered by this Chapter, the Ivorian Party shall grant the EC Party any more
favourable treatment applicable as a result of Côte d'Ivoire entering into a free-trade agreement with
a major trade partner after signing this Agreement. 


CE/CI/en 20
3. If the Ivorian Party obtains from a major trade partner substantially more favourable treatment
than that offered by the EC Party, the Parties shall consult each other and decide together on the
implementation of the provisions in paragraph 2.
4. The provisions of this Chapter cannot be interpreted as requiring the Parties to reciprocally
grant each other preferential treatment which would be applicable owing to one of the Parties being
signatory to a free-trade agreement with a third party on the date on which this Agreement enters
into force.
5. In this Article, "free-trade agreement" refers to an agreement which substantially liberalises
trade and substantially eliminates discrimination between the parties through the repeal of existing
discriminatory measures and/or the prohibition of new discriminatory measures and measures
which are more discriminatory in nature, either on the entry into force of this Agreement or on the
basis of a reasonable timetable.
6. In this Article, "major trade partner" refers to any developed country, or any country with a
share in world trade greater than 1 per cent in the year preceding the entry into force of the
free-trade agreement mentioned in paragraph 2, or any group of countries acting individually,
collectively or through a free-trade agreement with a share in world trade greater than 1,5 per cent
in the year preceding the entry into force of the free-trade agreement mentioned in paragraph 21
.

1
 For this calculation, the official WTO figures on the leading exporters in world trade will be
used (excluding intra-EU trade). 


CE/CI/en 21
ARTICLE 18
Prohibition of quantitative restrictions
Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 23, 24 and 25, on the entry into force of this Agreement,
all prohibitions or restrictions on importation or exportation affecting trade between the Parties shall
be eliminated, with the exception of the customs duties, taxes, fees and other charges referred to in
Article 11, irrespective of whether they are implemented through quotas, import or export licensing
or other measures. No new measures shall be introduced.
ARTICLE 19
National treatment of internal taxation and regulation
1. Products imported from the other Party shall not be directly or indirectly subject to internal
taxation or other internal charges of any type surpassing those which are directly or indirectly
applicable to similar domestic products. Furthermore, both Parties shall refrain from applying any
other form of taxation or other internal charges with the aim of providing protection for domestic
production.
2. Products imported from the other Party shall benefit from treatment which is no less
favourable than the treatment given to similar domestic products in respect of all laws, regulations
and requirements applicable to their sale, offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or
use on the national market. The provisions of this paragraph shall not prevent the application of
tariffs for differentiated internal transportation based exclusively on the fuel-efficient use of
transport and not on the origin of the product. 


CE/CI/en 22
3. Notwithstanding the provisions on the rules of origin, each Party shall refrain from
establishing or maintaining any internal regulations relating to the mixing, processing or use of
products according to specified quantities or proportions which would require, directly or indirectly,
that any specified amount or proportion of the product subject to the regulation in question be
supplied from internal sources. Furthermore, each Party shall refrain from applying any other form
of domestic quantitative regulation with the aim of providing protection for domestic production.
4. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the laws, regulations, procedures or practices
relating to public procurement.
5. The provisions of this Article shall be without prejudice to Chapter 2 concerning trade
defence instruments.
6. For matters relating to the payment of subsidies to national producers, the Parties shall refer to
the WTO.
ARTICLE 20
Food security
Where the implementation of this Agreement leads to difficulties regarding the availability of, or
access to, foodstuffs necessary to ensure food security, and where this situation gives rise to or is
likely to give rise to major difficulties for Côte d'Ivoire, the latter may take appropriate measures in
accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 25. 


CE/CI/en 23
ARTICLE 21
Special provisions on administrative cooperation
1. The Parties agree that administrative cooperation is essential to the implementation and
control of the preferential treatment granted in this Chapter and underline their commitment to
combating irregularities and fraud as regards customs and related fields.
2. When a Party obtains proof from objective information of a lack of administrative cooperation
and/or irregularities or fraud, this Party may temporarily suspend the preferential treatment granted
to the product(s) concerned in accordance with this Article.
3. For the purposes of this Article, a lack of administrative cooperation shall include the
following:
(a) repeated failure to comply with the obligation to verify the originating status of the product(s)
concerned;
(b) repeated refusal to conduct a subsequent check of proof of origin and communicate the
results, or undue delay in doing so;
(c) repeated refusal to grant authorisation for a cooperation mission to check the authenticity of
documents or the accuracy of information of relevance to the preferential treatment in
question, or undue delay in doing so. 


CE/CI/en 24
4. The application of a temporary suspension shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) A Party which obtains proof from objective information of a lack of administrative
cooperation and/or irregularities or fraud must notify the EPA Committee without undue
delay that it has obtained the proof and the objective information, and must consult with the
EPA Committee to find a solution acceptable to both Parties, drawing on all relevant
information and objective evidence;
(b) When the Parties have entered into consultation with the EPA Committee, as provided for
above, and have been unable to agree on an acceptable solution in the three months following
notification, the Party concerned can temporarily suspend the preferential treatment granted to
the product(s) concerned. The EPA Committee must be notified of the temporary suspension
without undue delay;
(c) Temporary suspensions under this Article shall be limited to those necessary to protect the
financial interests of the Party concerned. They shall not exceed a renewable period of
six months. The EPA Committee shall be notified of temporary suspensions immediately after
their adoption. They shall be subject to periodic consultations within the EPA Committee, in
particular with a view to repealing them once the conditions for application no longer exist.
5. At the same time as the notification to the EPA Committee specified in paragraph 4(a), the
Party concerned shall publish a notice for importers in its Official Journal. This notice for importers
shall indicate that, for the product concerned, and on the basis of objective information, proof has
been obtained of a lack of administrative cooperation and/or irregularities or fraud. 


CE/CI/en 25
ARTICLE 22
Management of administrative errors
In the event of an error on the part of the competent authorities in the management of the
preferential export systems, and in particular in the application of the provisions concerning the
definition of the term "originating products" and the administrative cooperation methods, where this
error has consequences on imports and exports, the Party suffering these consequences can ask the
EPA Committee to examine the possibilities of adopting all appropriate measures in the aim of
remedying the situation.
CHAPTER 2
TRADE DEFENCE INSTRUMENTS
ARTICLE 23
Anti-dumping and countervailing measures
1. Subject to the provisions of this Article, the Agreement does not prevent the EC Party or
Côte d'Ivoire from adopting anti-dumping or countervailing measures in accordance with the
relevant WTO agreements. For the purposes of this Article, origin shall be determined in
accordance with the non-preferential rules of origin of the Parties. 


CE/CI/en 26
2. Before imposing definitive anti-dumping or countervailing measures on goods, the Parties
shall consider the possibility of constructive solutions, such as those provided for in the relevant
WTO agreements. In particular, they may hold appropriate consultations to this end.
3. The EC Party shall notify Côte d'Ivoire of the receipt of a sufficiently-documented complaint
before opening an inquiry.
4. The provisions of this Article shall be applicable to all investigations initiated after this
Agreement enters into force.
5. The provisions of this Article shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 24
Multilateral safeguard measures
1. Subject to the provisions of this Article, this Agreement does not prevent Côte d'Ivoire and
the EC Party from adopting measures in accordance with Article XIX of GATT 1994, the
Agreement on Safeguards or Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. For the purposes of
this Article, origin is determined in accordance with the non-preferential rules of origin of the
Parties. 


CE/CI/en 27
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, in the light of the general development objectives of this
Agreement and the small scale of the Côte d'Ivoire economy, the EC Party shall exclude imports
from Côte d'Ivoire from all measures taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994, the Agreement
on Safeguards and Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.
3. The provisions of paragraph 2 shall apply for a period of five years, beginning with the date
of entry into force of this Agreement. At the latest 120 days before the end of this period, the
EPA Committee shall re-examine the implementation of these provisions in the light of the
development needs of Côte d'Ivoire, in order to determine whether their period of application
should be extended.
4. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not be subject to the dispute settlement mechanisms of
this Agreement.
ARTICLE 25
Bilateral safeguard measures
1. After examining the alternative solutions, a Party may take safeguard measures of limited
duration which derogate from the provisions of Articles 12 and 13, under the conditions of, and in
accordance with, the procedures laid down by this Article. 


CE/CI/en 28
2. The safeguard measures referred to in paragraph 1 may be taken where a product originating
in one Party is imported into the territory of the other Party in such increased quantities and under
such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injury to the domestic industry of similar or directly competitive products in the
territory of the importing Party;
(b) disruptions in a sector of the economy, particularly where these disruptions produce major
social problems or difficulties which could bring about serious deterioration in the economic
situation of the importing Party; or
(c) disruptions in the markets for similar or directly competitive agricultural products1
 or of the
mechanisms regulating these markets in the territory of the importing Party.
3. The safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall not exceed that which is strictly
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury or disruptions as defined in paragraphs 2, 4 and 5.
These safeguard measures of the importing Party may consist only of one or more of the following:
(a) the suspension of any further reduction in the customs duty on imports applicable for the
product concerned, as provided for by this Agreement;
(b) an increase in the customs duty on the product concerned up to a level which does not exceed
the customs duty applied to other WTO Members, and
(c) the introduction of tariff quotas on the product concerned.

1
 For the purposes of this Article, agricultural products shall be those covered by Annex I to the
WTO Agreement on Agriculture. 


CE/CI/en 29
4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, when a product originating in Côte d'Ivoire is imported
in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause one of the
situations described in paragraphs 2(a), (b) and (c) in one or more outermost regions of the
EC Party, the EC Party may take surveillance or safeguard measures, as provided for in
paragraph 3, limited to the region(s) concerned and in accordance with the procedures defined in
paragraphs 6 to 9.
5. (a) When a product originating in the EC Party is imported in such increased quantities and
under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause one of the situations described in
paragraphs 2(a), (b) and (c), Côte d'Ivoire may take surveillance or safeguard measures
limited to its territory in accordance with the procedures defined in paragraphs 6 to 9;
(b) Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, Côte d'Ivoire may take safeguard measures as
provided for in paragraph 3 when a product originating in the EC Party is imported in
such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause
disturbances to an infant industry producing similar or directly competitive products.
Such provision shall be applicable only for a period of ten years from the date of entry into force of
this Agreement. However, this period may be extended subject to an agreement between the Parties
when, despite the development potential of the industry and the efforts actually made, this objective
has not been achieved owing in particular to the world economic situation or to serious problems
affecting Côte d'Ivoire.
The measures must be taken in compliance with the provisions of paragraphs 6 to 9. 


CE/CI/en 30
6. (a) The safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall be maintained only for the
period necessary to prevent or resolve serious damage or disruptions such as those
described in paragraphs 2, 4 and 5;
(b) The safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall be applied for a period not
exceeding two years. Where the circumstances warranting the imposition of safeguard
measures continue to exist, such measures may be extended for a further period of no
more than two years. Where Côte d'Ivoire applies a safeguard measure, or where the
EC Party applies a measure limited to the territory of one or more of its outermost
regions, this measure may nevertheless be applied for a period of no more than four
years and, when the circumstances justifying the imposition of safeguard measures
continue to exist, be extended for a further four-year period;
(c) The safeguard measures referred to in this Article which exceed one year shall be
accompanied by clear evidence of a progressive move towards eliminating the causes of
the damage and disruptions and the measures at the latest by the end of the established
period;
(d) Except in exceptional circumstances subject to the assessment of the EPA Committee,
no safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall be applied to a product which has
previously been subject to such a measure for a period of at least one year from the date
of expiry of this measure.
7. The following provisions shall apply for implementation of paragraphs 1 to 6:
(a) When a Party considers that one of the circumstances referred to in paragraphs 2,
4 and/or 5 exists, it shall immediately refer the matter to the EPA Committee; 


CE/CI/en 31
(b) The EPA Committee can make any necessary recommendation to remedy the
circumstances which have arisen. Where the EPA Committee has not made
recommendations to remedy the circumstances, or where a satisfactory solution has not
been found in the 30 days following notification to this Committee, the importing Party
may adopt appropriate measures to remedy the circumstances, in accordance with this
Article;
(c) Before taking a measure provided for in this Article or, in the cases referred to in
paragraph 8, as soon as possible, the Party concerned shall communicate to the
EPA Committee all information which can be used for a full examination of the
situation with a view to finding an acceptable solution for the Parties;
(d) When selecting safeguard measures, priority must be given to those which help to
efficiently and rapidly solve the problem, while causing the least possible disruption to
the smooth functioning of this Agreement;
(e) All safeguard measures taken in accordance with this Article shall be notified
immediately to the EPA Committee and shall be the subject of periodic consultations
within that body, particularly with a view to establishing a timetable for their abolition
as soon as circumstances permit. 


CE/CI/en 32
8. Where exceptional circumstances require immediate action, the importing Party concerned,
whether the EC Party or Côte d'Ivoire, as the case may be, may take the measures provided for in
paragraphs 3, 4 and/or 5 on a provisional basis and without meeting the requirements of
paragraph 7. Such action may be taken for a maximum period of 180 days where the measures are
taken by the EC Party and 200 days when the measures are taken by Côte d'Ivoire, or when the
measures of the EC Party are limited to one or more of its outermost regions. The duration of such
provisional measures shall be counted as a part of the initial period or of any extension referred to in
paragraph 6. When taking these provisional measures, the interests of all stakeholders must be taken
into account. The importing party concerned shall inform the other Party and immediately refer the
matter to the EPA Committee for examination.
9. If an importing party subjects imports of a product to an administrative procedure having as
its purpose the rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows liable to give rise to the
problems referred to in this Article, it shall inform the EPA Committee without delay.
10. The WTO Agreement shall not be invoked to prevent a Party from adopting safeguard
measures under this Article.
ARTICLE 26
Cooperation
1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation on trade defence instruments. 


CE/CI/en 33
2. The Parties agree to cooperate in accordance with Article 4, including through the facilitation
of assistance measures, particularly in the following fields:
(a) the development of regulations and institutions to ensure trade defence;
(b) the development of capacity to use the trade defence instruments provided for in this
Agreement.
CHAPTER 3
CUSTOMS REGIME AND TRADE FACILITATION
ARTICLE 27
Objectives
1. The Parties recognise the importance of customs issues and of facilitating trade in the
evolving context of world trade. They agree to strengthen cooperation in this area with a view to
ensuring that the relevant legislation and procedures, as well as the administrative capacity of the
administrative authorities concerned, to fulfil the objectives relating to the effective control and
facilitation of trade, and to help promote the development and regional integration of the signatory
countries.
2. The Parties agree that the legitimate objectives of public policy, including those in relation to
security and fraud prevention, shall not be compromised in any way. 


CE/CI/en 34
3. The Parties undertake to ensure the free movement of the goods covered by this Agreement in
their respective territories.
ARTICLE 28
Customs and administrative cooperation
1. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Title, and to respond effectively to
the objectives set out in Article 27, the Parties shall:
(a) exchange information concerning customs legislation and procedures;
(b) develop joint initiatives relating to import, export and transit procedures and initiatives to
offer an efficient service to the business community;
(c) cooperate on the automation of customs procedures and other trade procedures and, where
appropriate, endeavour to establish common data exchange standards;
(d) establish wherever possible common positions in relation to customs in international
organisations such as the WTO, the World Customs Organisation (WCO), the United Nations
(UN) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD); 


CE/CI/en 35
(e) cooperate on the planning and implementation of technical assistance, in particular with a
view to facilitating customs reforms and to facilitating trade in accordance with the provisions
of the Agreement; and
(f) encourage cooperation between all the agencies concerned, both within the country and
between countries.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the administrative authorities of the Parties shall provide
mutual administrative assistance for customs matters, in accordance with the provisions of the
Protocol on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters.
ARTICLE 29
Customs legislation and procedures
1. The Parties agree that their respective trade and customs legislation, provisions and
procedures shall draw on international instruments and standards applicable in the fields of customs
and trade, in particular the substantive elements of the International Convention on the
Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs Procedures, concluded at Kyoto on 18 May 1973 and
revised at Brussels on 26 June 1999 (the 'revised Kyoto Convention'), the WCO Framework of
Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade, the WCO data set and the International
Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (HS).
The Parties shall ensure the free transit of goods through their territory on the most suitable transit
route. 

Any restrictions, controls or requirements must be justified by a legitimate public policy objective,
and must be non-discriminatory, proportionate and applied in a uniform manner.
Without prejudice to legitimate customs checks, the Parties shall treat goods in transit to or from the
territory of the other Party no less favourably than domestic goods, exports, imports and their
movement.
The Parties shall establish transport regimes under customs control to allow the transit of goods
exempt from the payment of customs duties and other charges, subject to the provision of
appropriate guarantees.
The Parties shall endeavour to promote and implement regional transit regimes with the aim of
reducing barriers to trade.
The Parties shall have recourse to the international standards and instruments relating to the transit
of goods.
The Parties shall ensure the cooperation and coordination of all the relevant authorities in their
territories in order to facilitate transit traffic and promote cross-border cooperation.
2. In order to improve working methods and ensure respect for the principles of
non-discrimination, transparency, efficiency, integrity and accountability, the Parties shall:
(a) take the necessary measures to reduce, simplify and standardise the data and documents
required by customs and other related authorities; 


CE/CI/en 37
(b) simplify customs requirements and formalities wherever possible, in respect of the rapid
release and clearance of goods;
(c) provide efficient, prompt and non-discriminatory procedures enabling the right of appeal
against administrative actions, rulings and decisions by the customs authorities affecting
imports, exports or goods in transit. These procedures shall be easily accessible to the
applicants, including small and medium-sized enterprises, and the related costs shall be
reasonable and proportionate to the costs incurred by lodging the appeal;
(d) ensure that the highest standards of integrity are maintained, through the application of
measures reflecting the principles set out in the relevant international conventions and
instruments in this field.
ARTICLE 30
Relations with the business community
The Parties agree:
(a) to ensure that all the legislation, procedures, fees and charges and their justification are made
publicly available, where possible by electronic means; 


CE/CI/en 38
(b) on the need for consultation with trade representatives in due time and on a regular basis
regarding legislative proposals and procedures relating to customs and trade issues. To this
end, appropriate and regular mechanisms for consultation between the administrative
authorities and the business community shall be established by each Party;
(c) that a sufficient period of time must pass between the publication and the entry into force of a
new or amended law, procedure, right or charge;
The Parties shall publish administrative information concerning in particular agency requirements,
entry procedures, working hours and operational procedures of the customs authorities in ports and
at border posts, and also on information contact points:
(d) to encourage cooperation between the operators and the competent administrative authorities
through the use of non-arbitrary, publicly accessible procedures such as the protocols of
agreement, based on those promulgated by the WCO;
(e) to ensure that their respective customs and related regimes and the requirements and
procedures associated with them continue to meet the needs of the business community, are in
line with best practices and remain as unrestrictive as possible for trade. 


CE/CI/en 39
ARTICLE 31
Customs value
1. Article VII of GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of
GATT 1994 shall govern the customs valuation rules applied to trade between the Parties.
2. The Parties shall cooperate with a view to taking a common approach to issues relating to
customs valuation.
ARTICLE 32
Regional integration
The Parties agree to push forward customs reforms aimed at facilitating trade in the region of West
Africa.
ARTICLE 33
Continuation of customs and trade facilitation negotiations
As part of the negotiations on a global EPA, the Parties agree to continue the negotiations on this
Chapter in order to complete it within a regional framework. 


CE/CI/en 40
ARTICLE 34
Special committee on customs and trade facilitation
Through the EPA Committee, the Parties shall establish a special committee on customs and trade
facilitation, composed of representatives from both Parties. This committee shall report to the
EPA Committee. It shall discuss all customs issues with a view to facilitating trade between the
Parties and shall monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter as well as the
implementation of the rules of origin.
ARTICLE 35
Cooperation
1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation on customs and trade facilitation for the
implementation of this Agreement.
2. The Parties agree to cooperate pursuant to the provisions of Article 4, including through the
facilitation of assistance measures, particularly in the following fields:
(a) the development of appropriate, simplified legislative and regulatory provisions;
(b) awareness-raising and information aimed at operators, including training for the staff
concerned;
(c) strengthening the capacities of the customs authorities, and modernising and establishing links
between them. 


CE/CI/en 41
CHAPTER 4
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE,
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
ARTICLE 36
Multilateral obligations
The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the Agreement establishing the WTO and, in
particular, the WTO Agreements on the Application Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
(SPS Agreement) and on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement). The Parties also reaffirm
their rights and obligations under the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), the
Codex Alimentarius, and the World Animal Health Organisation (OIE).
The Parties reaffirm their commitment to improving public health in Côte d'Ivoire, in particular by
strengthening its capacities to identify non-compliant products.
These commitments, rights and obligations underpin the activity of the Parties in relation to this
Chapter. 


CE/CI/en 42
ARTICLE 37
Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to facilitate the trade in goods between the Parties, and to
increase their ability to identify, prevent and eliminate unnecessary barriers to trade caused by
technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures applied by either Party,
while preserving the Parties' ability to protect public health, animals and plants.
ARTICLE 38
Scope and definitions
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to technical regulations and standards, to the
conformity assessment procedures set out in the TBT Agreement and to the sanitary and
phytosanitary measures (hereinafter the 'SPS standards') in so far as they affect trade between the
Parties.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter and except where otherwise indicated, the definitions of the
SPS and TBT Agreements, the Codex Alimentarius, the IPPC and the OIE shall apply, including for
all references to "products" in this Chapter and in the Appendices to this Agreement. 


CE/CI/en 43
ARTICLE 39
Competent authorities
The authorities of the Parties responsible for the implementation of the measures set out in this
Chapter are described in Appendix II.
In accordance with Article 41, the Parties shall keep each other informed in due time of any
significant changes in the competent authorities listed in Appendix II. The EPA Committee shall
adopt any necessary amendments to Appendix II.
ARTICLE 40
Determination of sanitary and phytosanitary areas
In relation to importing conditions, the Parties may, on a case-by-case basis, identify and put
forward areas with an established sanitary and phytosanitary status, with reference to Article 6 of
the SPS Agreement.
ARTICLE 41
Transparency of trade conditions and exchange of information
1. The Parties shall inform each other of any changes to their technical regulations for the
products (in particular live animals and plants). 


CE/CI/en 44
2. The Parties agree to inform each other in writing, as soon as possible, of the measures taken to
prohibit the importation of goods in a spirit of collaboration with the aim of addressing a given
problem concerning health (public, animal or plant), prevention or the environment, in accordance
with the recommendations set out in the SPS Agreement.
3. The Parties agree to exchange information with the aim of cooperating to ensure that their
products comply with the technical regulations and standards subject to which they may access each
other's markets.
4. The Parties shall also directly exchange information on other areas which the Parties agree to
be of potential importance for their trade relations, including food safety issues, the sudden
appearance of animal or plant diseases, scientific opinions and other noteworthy events relating to
product safety. In particular, the Parties undertake to inform each other when they apply the
principle of pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low pest or disease prevalence, as provided for
in Article 6 of the SPS Agreement.
5. The Parties agree to exchange information on the epidemiological surveillance of animal
diseases. As regards phytosanitary protection, the Parties will inform each other of the appearance
of parasites presenting a known and immediate danger for the other Party.
6. The Parties agree to cooperate with a view to rapidly alerting each other when new regional
rules might have an impact on mutual trade.


CE/CI/en 45
ARTICLE 42
Cooperation in international bodies
The Parties agree to cooperate with the international standardisation bodies, including with the aim
of facilitating the participation of Ivorian representatives in the meetings of these bodies.
ARTICLE 43
Cooperation
1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperating in the areas of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment in order to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
2. The Parties agree to cooperate in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 with a view to
improving the quality and competitiveness of priority products for Côte d'Ivoire and access to the
European Community market, including through assistance measures, particularly those which are
financial in nature, in the following fields:
(a) the establishment of an appropriate framework for the exchange of information and sharing of
expertise between the Parties;
(b) the adoption of technical standards and regulations, conformity assessment procedures and
sanitary and phytosanitary measures which are harmonised at regional level on the basis of
the relevant international standards; 


CE/CI/en 46
(c) the strengthening of the capacities of public and private stakeholders, including information
and training, with a view to complying with the standards, regulations and measures of the
European Community, and to participating in international authorities;
(d) the development of national capacities for assessing the conformity of products and access to
the market of the European Community.
TITLE IV
SERVICES, INVESTMENTS AND RULES CONCERNING TRADE
ARTICLE 44
On the basis of the Cotonou Agreement, the Parties shall take all necessary measures and cooperate
in order to encourage the negotiation and earliest possible conclusion of a global EPA in accordance
with the relevant WTO provisions between the EC Party and West Africa as a whole, in the
following areas:
(a) trade in services and e-commerce;
(b) investments;
(c) current payments and capital movements;
(d) competition; 


CE/CI/en 47
(e) intellectual property;
(f) public procurement;
(g) sustainable development;
(h) the protection of personal data.
The Parties shall adopt all appropriate measures with a view to encouraging the conclusion of a
global EPA between the EC Party and West Africa before the end of 2008.
TITLE V
PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
CHAPTER 1
OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
ARTICLE 45
Objective
The objective of this Title is to prevent and settle disputes which could occur between the Parties in
order to reach, as far as possible, a mutually satisfactory solution. 


CE/CI/en 48
ARTICLE 46
Scope
1. This Title shall apply to all disputes concerning the interpretation or application of this
Agreement, with the exception of the provisions of Title II of the Agreement and except where
specifically provided otherwise.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the procedure set out in Article 98 of the Cotonou Agreement
shall apply in the event of disputes concerning the financing of cooperation on development, as
specified in the Cotonou Agreement.
CHAPTER 2
CONSULTATION AND MEDIATION
ARTICLE 47
Consultations
1. The Parties shall endeavour to settle disputes covered by Article 46 by entering into
consultations in good faith in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.
2. A Party wishing to enter into consultations does so by presenting a request in writing to the
other Party with a copy to the EPA Committee, specifying the measure in question and the
provisions of the Agreement with which, in its opinion, the measure fails to comply. 


CE/CI/en 49
3. The consultations shall be initiated within 40 days of the date on which the request was
submitted. They shall be considered closed within 60 days of the date on which the request was
submitted unless the Parties agree to pursue them. The information exchanged during the
consultations shall remain confidential.
4. In urgent situations, in particular those involving perishable or seasonal foodstuffs, the
consultations shall be initiated within 15 days of the date on which the request was submitted and
considered closed within 30 days of the date on which the request was submitted.
5. If the consultations are not initiated within the time-limits specified in paragraph 3 or
paragraph 4, or if the consultations are closed without an agreement on a mutually satisfactory
solution, the complaining Party shall have the option of requesting the creation of a special
arbitration group in accordance with Article 49.
ARTICLE 48
Mediation
1. If the consultations do not lead to a mutually satisfactory solution, the Parties may, by
amicable agreement, resort to a mediator. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the terms of
reference of the mediation shall be those set out in the consultation request. 


CE/CI/en 50
2. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree on a mediator within ten days of the mediation request
being submitted, the Chairperson of the EPA Committee or his/her delegate, shall choose by lot a
mediator from among the individuals on the list referred to in Article 64 and who are not citizens of
the Parties. The selection shall be made within 20 days of the mediation request being submitted, in
the presence of a representative from each of the Parties. The mediator shall convene a meeting of
the Parties at the latest 30 days after being appointed. The mediator shall receive submissions from
each Party at the latest 15 days before the meeting and shall announce his/her opinion at the latest
45 days after being appointed.
3. In his/her opinion, the mediator may make recommendations on how the dispute should be
settled, in accordance with the provisions in Article 53. The mediator's opinion shall not be binding.
4. The Parties may agree to modify the time-limits referred to in paragraph 2. The mediator may
also decide to modify these time-limits on the request of either Party or on his/her own initiative,
depending on the particular difficulties affecting the Party concerned and the complexity of the
case.
5. The mediation procedures and in particular the information exchanged and the positions
adopted during these procedures shall remain confidential. 


CE/CI/en 51
CHAPTER 3
PROCEDURES FOR AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
SECTION I
Arbitration procedure
ARTICLE 49
Initiating the arbitration procedure
1. Where the Parties do not settle the dispute after having recourse to the consultations provided
for in Article 47 or after engaging in the mediation referred to in Article 48, the complaining Party
may request the establishment of an arbitration panel.
2. The request to establish an arbitration panel shall be addressed in writing to the Party
complained against and to the EPA Committee. In its request, the complaining Party shall specify
the measures in question and explain why these measures infringe the provisions of the Agreement.
ARTICLE 50
Creation of an arbitration panel
1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators. 


CE/CI/en 52
2. Within ten days of the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel being submitted to
the EPA Committee, the Parties shall consult in order to reach an agreement on the composition of
the arbitration panel.
3. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the composition of the panel within the
time frame laid down in paragraph 2, either Party may request the Chairperson of the
EPA Committee, or her/his delegate, to select all three members by lot from the list established
under Article 64: one from among the individuals proposed by the complaining Party, one from
among the individuals proposed by the Party complained against and the third from among those
selected by both Parties to act as Chairperson. If the Parties have agreed on the selection of one or
more of the members of the arbitration panel, the remaining member(s) shall be selected according
to the same procedure.
4. The Chairperson of the EPA Committee or his/her delegate shall select the arbitrators within
five days of the request referred to in paragraph 3 from either of the Parties and in the presence of a
representative from each Party.
5. The date on which the arbitration panel is established shall be the date on which the
three arbitrators have been selected. 


CE/CI/en 53
ARTICLE 51
Interim report by the arbitration panel
The arbitration panel shall submit to the Parties an interim report containing both the descriptive
sections and its observations and conclusions, generally within 120 days at the latest from the date
on which the panel was established. In the two weeks following the presentation of the interim
report by the arbitration panel, each Party shall submit to the arbitration panel remarks in writing
concerning specific aspects of the report.
ARTICLE 52
Arbitration panel ruling
1. The arbitration panel shall transmit its ruling to the Parties and the EPA Committee at the
latest 150 days following its establishment. If it considers that this time-limit cannot be respected,
the Chairperson of the panel shall inform the Parties and the EPA Committee in writing, giving
reasons for the delay and stating the date on which the Committee plans to conclude its work. The
arbitration ruling should under no circumstances be delivered any later than 180 days from the date
on which the arbitration panel was established.
2. In urgent situations, including those involving perishable and seasonal foodstuffs, the panel
shall endeavour to deliver its ruling within 75 days of being established. Under no circumstances
should it deliver its ruling any later than 90 days after being established. Within ten days of being
established, the panel may deliver a preliminary ruling on whether it deems the case to be urgent. 


CE/CI/en 54
3. Each Party may ask the arbitration panel to recommend ways in which the Party complained
against could achieve compliance.
SECTION II
Achieving compliance
ARTICLE 53
Compliance with the arbitration panel ruling
Each Party shall take all necessary measures to implement the arbitration panel ruling. The Parties
shall endeavour to agree on a time-limit for compliance with the ruling.
ARTICLE 54
Reasonable time-limit for compliance
1. At the latest 30 days after the Parties have been informed of the arbitration panel ruling, the
Party complained against shall inform the complaining Party and the EPA Committee in writing of
the time it will need to achieve compliance (hereinafter "reasonable time-limit"). 


CE/CI/en 55
2. In the event of a disagreement between the Parties regarding what constitutes a reasonable
time-limit within which to comply with the arbitration panel ruling, the complaining Party shall,
within 20 days of notification by the Party complained against, send a written request to the
arbitration panel asking it to determine a reasonable time-limit. This request shall be communicated
simultaneously to the other Party and to the EPA Committee. The arbitration panel shall announce
its decision to the Parties and to the EPA Committee within 30 days of submitting the request.
3 In order to determine the reasonable time-limit, the arbitration panel shall take account of the
time which the Party complained against would normally need to adopt legislative or administrative
measures comparable to those which the Party complained against deems necessary in order to
ensure compliance. The arbitration panel may also take account of restrictions which might affect
the adoption of the necessary measures by the Party complained against.
4. Where the original arbitration panel or some of its members are unable to attend further
meetings, the procedures set out in Article 50 shall be applied. The time-limit for delivering a ruling
shall be 45 days from the date on which the request referred to in paragraph 2 was submitted.
5. The reasonable time-limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the Parties.
ARTICLE 55
Re-examination of the measures taken to achieve compliance
with the arbitration panel ruling
1. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party and the EPA Committee before the
end of the reasonable time period of any measures it has taken to comply with the arbitration ruling. 


CE/CI/en 56
2. In the event of a disagreement between the Parties concerning the compatibility of the
measures notified under paragraph 1 with the provisions of this Agreement, the complaining Party
may make a written request for an arbitration panel ruling on the matter. The request shall indicate
the specific measures in question and explain why they are incompatible with the provisions of this
Agreement. The arbitration panel shall communicate its ruling within 90 days from the date on
which the request was submitted. In urgent situations, including cases in which perishable and
seasonal foodstuffs are in question, the panel shall deliver its ruling within 45 days of the request
being submitted.
3. Where the original arbitration panel or some of its members are unable to attend further
meetings, the procedures set out in Article 50 shall be applied. The time-limit for notifying a ruling
shall be 105 days from the date on which the request referred to in paragraph 2 was submitted.
ARTICLE 56
Temporary remedies in the event of non-compliance
1. If the Party complained against fails to notify measures it has taken to comply with the
arbitration panel ruling before the expiry of the reasonable time-limit, or if the arbitration panel
rules that the measures notified under Article 55(1) are not compatible with that Party's obligations
under the provisions of Article 53, the Party complained against shall, if so requested by the
complaining Party, present an offer for temporary compensation. 


CE/CI/en 57
2. If the Parties do not agree on compensation within 30 days of the end of the reasonable
time-limit or of the ruling by the arbitration panel referred to in Article 55, according to which the
compliance measures which were taken are not compatible with the provisions referred to in
Article 53, the complaining Party shall be authorised, after notifying the other Party, to adopt
appropriate measures. By adopting such measures, the complaining Party shall endeavour to choose
measures which have the least possible impact on the achievement of the objectives of this
Agreement, and shall take into consideration their impact on the economy of the Party complained
against.
In any case, the appropriate measures adopted pursuant to this paragraph shall not affect the
provision of development assistance for Côte d'Ivoire.
3. The EC Party shall show moderation in its requests for compensation or when adopting the
appropriate measures in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 and shall take account of the fact that
the Ivorian Party is a developing country.
4. Appropriate measures or compensation are temporary and shall be applied only until the
measure recognised to be in infringement of the provisions of Article 53 has been revoked or
amended to bring it into line with the aforementioned provisions, or until the Parties have agreed to
settle their dispute.
ARTICLE 57
Examination of the compliance measures following on from the adoption of appropriate measures
1. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party and the EPA Committee of the
measures which it has taken to achieve compliance with the arbitration panel ruling, and in the
notification shall ask the complaining Party to discontinue the application of the appropriate
measures. 


CE/CI/en 58
2. If the Parties do not reach an agreement on the compatibility of the notified measures with the
provisions of this Agreement within 30 days of the notification being submitted, the complaining
Party shall make a request in writing for the arbitration panel to rule on the matter. The request shall
be notified to the other Party and to the EPA Committee. The arbitration panel shall announce its
decision to the Parties and to the EPA Committee within 45 days of the request being submitted. If
the arbitration group rules that any measures taken to achieve conformity do not comply with the
provisions of this Agreement, it shall decide whether the complaining Party may continue to apply
the appropriate measures. If the arbitration panel rules that measures taken to achieve conformity
comply with the provisions of this Agreement, the appropriate measures shall be discontinued.
3. Where the original arbitration panel or some of its members are unable to attend further
meetings, the procedures set out in Article 50 shall be applied. The time-limit for notifying a ruling
shall be 60 days from the date on which the request referred to in paragraph 2 was submitted. 


CE/CI/en 59
SECTION III
Common provisions
ARTICLE 58
Mutually satisfactory solution
Under this Title, the Parties may at any time agree on a mutually satisfactory solution to a dispute.
They shall notify the EPA Committee of any such solution. The arbitration proceedings must be
complete when a mutually satisfactory solution is adopted.
ARTICLE 59
Rules of procedure
1. The dispute settlement procedures set out in Chapter 3 shall be subject to the rules of
procedure adopted by the EPA Committee three months after its establishment.
2. The meetings of the arbitration panel shall be open to the public in accordance with the rules
of procedure, unless the arbitration panel decides otherwise on its own initiative or at the request of
the Parties. 


CE/CI/en 60
ARTICLE 60
General and technical information
At the request of a Party or on its own initiative, the arbitration panel may obtain information from
any source, including the Parties concerned by the dispute, if it deems this to be appropriate for the
arbitration proceedings. The arbitration panel shall also be authorised to obtain the opinion of
experts where deemed appropriate. The Parties concerned shall have the option of submitting briefs
on an amicus curiae basis to the arbitration group in accordance with the procedural rules. All
information thus obtained must be disclosed to both Parties and subject to their comments.
ARTICLE 61
Language of submissions
Oral and written submissions shall be in one of the official languages of the Parties. However, the
Parties shall endeavour, wherever possible, to use an official language shared by the two Parties as
their common language, and shall take account of the fact that the Ivorian Party is a developing
country, particularly in relation to translation difficulties. 


CE/CI/en 61
ARTICLE 62
Rules of interpretation
The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions of this Agreement in accordance with the
customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties. The decisions of the arbitration panel shall neither add to nor diminish the
rights and obligations set out in this Agreement.
ARTICLE 63
Arbitration panel rulings
1. The arbitration panel shall endeavour to make consensus-based decisions. However, if it is
impossible to reach a decision by consensus, the dispute shall be settled by a majority vote, but the
diverging opinions of the arbitrators shall under no circumstances be published.
2. The decision shall expound the substantive findings, the applicability of the relevant
provisions of this Agreement, and the reasoning underpinning the findings and conclusions reached
by the arbitration panel. The EPA Committee shall make the arbitration ruling known to the public,
unless it decides otherwise. 


CE/CI/en 62
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 64
List of arbitrators
1. Three months at the latest following the application of this Agreement, the EPA Committee
shall draw up a list of 15 people willing and able to act as arbitrators. Each Party shall select
five people capable of being arbitrators. The two Parties shall also agree on the choice of
five individuals who are not nationals of either Party and could be called upon to chair the
arbitration panel. The EPA Committee shall ensure that this list is always complete.
2. The arbitrators shall possess specialist knowledge or experience of law and international
trade. They shall be independent, act individually and not under the instructions of an organisation
or government, shall not be affiliated to the administration of either Party, and shall observe the
code of conduct annexed to the Rules of Procedure.
3. The EPA Committee may draw up an additional list of 15 people with specialist sectoral
knowledge of relevance to the specific matters covered by this Agreement. Where there is recourse
to the selection procedure of Article 50(2), the Chairperson of the EPA Committee may use such a
sectoral list, subject to the agreement of both Parties. 


CE/CI/en 63
ARTICLE 65
Links with the WTO obligations
1. The arbitration authorities set up under this Agreement shall not deal with disputes relating to
the rights and obligations of each Party pursuant to the Agreement establishing the WTO.
2. Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to
any possible action in the WTO framework, including a dispute settlement action. However, when a
Party has initiated a dispute-settlement procedure with regard to a given measure, either under
Article 49(1) or under the Agreement establishing the WTO, it may not initiate a dispute-settlement
procedure for the same measure with the other forum before concluding the first procedure. For the
purposes of this paragraph, a Party is considered to have initiated a dispute-settlement procedure
under the Agreement establishing the WTO once it has requested the establishment of a panel
pursuant to Article 6 of the WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding.
3. This Agreement cannot prevent a Party from applying the suspension of obligations
authorised by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body. 


CE/CI/en 64
ARTICLE 66
Time-limits
1. The time-limits set out in this Title, including time-limits for the notification of decisions by
the arbitration panels, shall be counted in calendar days from the day following the act or event to
which they relate.
2. All time-limits in this Title may be extended by mutual agreement between the Parties.
ARTICLE 67
Amendment of Title V
The EPA Committee and each of the Parties shall be entitled to request the amendment of Title V.
Amendment requests shall be examined by the EPA Committee. Amendments shall take effect only
after approval by the Parties. 


CE/CI/en 65
TITLE VI
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
ARTICLE 68
General exception clause
Subject to the requirement that such measures not be applicable in a manner which would constitute
a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where like conditions
prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in goods, services or establishment, this Agreement shall
not be construed as preventing the adoption or enforcement by the Parties of measures which:
(a) are necessary to ensure the protection of public security, public morality or to maintain public
order;
(b) are necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) are necessary to ensure compliance with laws and regulations and which are not incompatible
with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to:
(i) the prevention of deceptive or fraudulent practices and means to deal with the effects of
a default on contract payments; 


CE/CI/en 66
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and
dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality of individual records
and accounts;
(iii) safety;
(iv) the application of customs rules and procedures; or
(v) the protection of intellectual property rights;
(d) concern the import or export of gold or money;
(e) are necessary for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological
value;
(f) concern the conservation of natural, non-renewable resources where these measures involve
restrictions on domestic production or consumption of goods, domestic supply or
consumption of services and on domestic investors;
(g) relate to the products of prison labour; or
(h) are incompatible with Article 19 on national treatment, provided that the difference in
treatment is aimed at ensuring effective or fair imposition or collection of direct taxes on the
economic activities of investors or service suppliers of the other Party. 


CE/CI/en 67
ARTICLE 69
Security exceptions
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
(a) as requiring the Parties to supply information the disclosure of which they consider contrary
to their essential security interests;
(b) as preventing the Parties from taking any action they deem necessary for the protection of
their essential security interests:
(i) relating to fissionable or fusionable materials or the materials from which they are
derived;
(ii) relating to economic activities undertaken directly or indirectly for the purpose of
delivering supplies or provisions to a military establishment;
(iii) connected with the manufacturing of, or trade in, weapons, ammunition and war
materiel;
(iv) relating to government procurement essential to national security or for national defence
purposes; or
(v) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
(c) as preventing the Parties from taking any action in order to carry out obligations they have
accepted for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security. 


CE/CI/en 68
2. The EPA Committee shall be kept informed as far as possible of the measures taken pursuant
to paragraphs 1(b) and 1(c) and of the date of their termination.
ARTICLE 70
Taxation
1. This Agreement or any arrangement adopted under this Agreement shall not be construed as
preventing the Parties from distinguishing, in the application of the relevant provisions of their
fiscal legislation, between taxpayers who are not in the same situation, in particular with regard to
their place of domicile or the place where their capital is invested.
2. This Agreement or any arrangement adopted under this Agreement shall not be construed as
preventing the adoption or enforcement of any measure aimed at preventing the avoidance or
evasion of taxes pursuant to agreements to avoid double taxation or other tax arrangements or
national fiscal legislation.
3. This Agreement shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under any tax
convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such convention,
that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. 


CE/CI/en 69
TITLE VII
INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 71
Continuation of negotiations and implementation of this Agreement
1. The Parties shall continue negotiations in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.
2. When negotiations are complete, the resulting draft amendments shall be submitted for
approval to the relevant internal authorities.
ARTICLE 72
Definition of the Parties and fulfilment of obligations
1. The Contracting Parties of this Agreement shall be the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, hereinafter
the "Ivorian Party" or "Côte d'Ivoire", of the one part, and the European Community or its
Member States, within their respective areas of competence as derived from the Treaty establishing
the European Community, hereinafter the "EC Party", of the other part.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "Party" shall refer to Côte d'Ivoire or the
EC Party, as appropriate. The term "Parties" shall refer to Côte d'Ivoire and the EC Party. 


CE/CI/en 70
3. The Parties shall adopt any general or specific measures required for them to fulfil their
obligations under this Agreement and shall ensure that they comply with the objectives laid down in
this Agreement.
ARTICLE 73
EPA Committee
1. For the purposes of implementing this Agreement, an EPA Committee shall be established
within three months from the date of signature of this Agreement.
2. The Parties agree that the composition, organisation and operation of this EPA Committee
will respect the principle of equality. The Committee shall determine the rules governing its
organisation and operation.
3. The EPA Committee shall be responsible for the administration of all the fields covered by
this Agreement and for the achievement of all the tasks mentioned in this Agreement.
4. In order to facilitate communication and ensure the effective implementation of this
Agreement, each Party shall designate a correspondent within the EPA Committee.
5. The EPA Committee meetings may be open to third parties. The West African Economic and
Monetary Union (WAEMU) and ECOWAS Commissions may be invited to the EPA Committee
meetings, in accordance with their internal procedures. 


CE/CI/en 71
ARTICLE 74
Outermost regions of the European Community
1. Taking account of the geographical proximity of the outermost regions of the
European Community and Côte d'Ivoire, and in order to strengthen economic and social links
between these regions and Côte d'Ivoire, the Parties shall endeavour to facilitate cooperation in all
the areas covered by this Agreement and facilitate trade in goods and services, promote investments
and encourage transport and communication links between the outermost regions and Côte d'Ivoire.
2. The objectives set out in paragraph 1 shall be pursued as far as possible by fostering the joint
participation of Côte d'Ivoire and the outermost regions in framework and specific programmes of
the European Community in the areas covered by this Agreement.
3. The EC Party shall endeavour to ensure coordination between the different financial
instruments of the European Community's cohesion and development policies in order to foster
cooperation between Côte d'Ivoire and the outermost regions of the European Community in the
areas covered by this Agreement.
4. This Agreement shall not prevent the EC Party from applying existing measures aimed at
addressing the structural, social and economic situation of the outermost regions in accordance with
Article 299(2) of the Treaty establishing the European Community. 


CE/CI/en 72
ARTICLE 75
Entry into force and denunciation
1. This Agreement shall be signed, ratified or approved in accordance with the constitutional
rules specific to each Party or, as far as the EC Party is concerned, according to its internal rules and
procedures.
2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the month following that in which the
Ivorian Party and the EC Party have notified each other of the completion of the procedures thus
required.
3. Notification shall be sent to the Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union, who
shall be the depositary for this Agreement.
4. Pending entry into force of the Agreement, the Parties shall agree to apply it provisionally, in
accordance with their respective laws or by ratification of the Agreement.
5. Provisional application shall be notified to the depositary. The Agreement shall be applied
provisionally ten days after receipt of such notification of provisional application by the
European Community or Côte d'Ivoire.
6. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, the EC Party and Côte d'Ivoire may apply the agreement, in
whole or in part, before its provisional application, to the extent that this is possible under their
national legislation. 


CE/CI/en 73
7. Either Party may give written notice to the other of its intention to denounce this Agreement.
Denunciation shall take effect six months after notification to the other Party.
8. This Agreement shall be superseded by a global EPA concluded at regional level with the
EC Party on the date of its entry into force. In this case, the Parties shall endeavour to ensure that
the global EPA at regional level preserves most of the benefits obtained by Côte d'Ivoire under this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 76
Territorial application
This Agreement shall apply to the territories in which the Treaty establishing the European
Community is applied and under the conditions laid down in that Treaty, on the one hand, and, to
Côte d'Ivoire, on the other hand.
ARTICLE 77
Accession of new Member States to the European Union
1. The EPA Committee shall be advised of any request by a third State to become a member of
the European Union. During the negotiations between the European Union and the applicant State,
the EC Party shall provide Côte d'Ivoire with any relevant information and Côte d'Ivoire shall in
turn convey its concerns to the EC Party so that it can take them fully into account. Côte d'Ivoire
shall be notified of any accession to the European Union. 


CE/CI/en 74
2. Any new Member State of the European Union shall accede to this Agreement from the date
of its accession to the European Union by means of a clause to that effect in the act of accession. If
the act of accession to the European Union does not provide for such automatic accession of the
new Member State of the European Union to this Agreement, the Member State concerned shall
accede by depositing an act of accession with the General Secretariat of the Council of the
European Union, which shall send certified copies to the Ivorian Party.
3. The Parties shall review the effects of the accession of new Member States of the
European Union on this Agreement. The EPA Committee may decide on any transitional measures
or amendments which may be necessary.
ARTICLE 78
Dialogue on financial issues
The Parties agree to foster dialogue and transparency and to share best practices in the area of fiscal
policy and administration. 


CE/CI/en 75
ARTICLE 79
Cooperation in the fight against illegal financial activities
The EC Party and Côte d'Ivoire shall be committed to preventing and combating illegal, fraudulent
and corrupt activities, money laundering and terrorist financing. To this end, the Parties shall take
the necessary legislative and administrative measures to comply with international standards,
including those laid down in the United Nations Convention against Corruption, the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime and its Protocols, the
United Nations Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Financing and the Financial Action
Task Force recommendations. The EC Party and Côte d'Ivoire agree to exchange information and
cooperate in these areas.
ARTICLE 80
Relationships with other agreements
1. With the exception of the articles concerning development cooperation in Title II of Part III of
the Cotonou Agreement, in the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this
Agreement and the provisions of Title II of Part III of the Cotonou Agreement, the provisions of
this Agreement shall prevail.
2. This Agreement shall not be construed as preventing the adoption by the European
Community or by Côte d'Ivoire of measures, including trade measures, deemed appropriate and
provided for in Articles 11b, 96 and 97 of the Cotonou Agreement. 


CE/CI/en 76
3. The Parties agree that this Agreement does not require them to act in a manner inconsistent
with their WTO obligations.
ARTICLE 81
Authentic languages
This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Bulgarian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian,
Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish,
Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovene, Spanish and Swedish languages, each of these texts being
equally authentic.
In the event of contradiction, reference shall be made to the language in which this Agreement has
been negotiated, namely French. 


CE/CI/en 77
ARTICLE 82
Annexes
The Appendices, the Annexes and the Protocol to this Agreement shall form an integral part
thereof.
In witness whereof, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have affixed their signatures below this
Agreement.
Done at,

ANNEX TEXT: 

APPENDIX I
Priority products from Côte d'Ivoire for export to the European Community
These products shall be identified by Côte d'Ivoire and the EPA Committee shall be notified
accordingly at the latest three months after the date on which this Agreement was signed.
 


CE/CI/Appendix II/en 1
APPENDIX II
Competent authorities
A. Competent authorities of the European Community
Responsibility for monitoring activities shall be shared between the national services of the
Member States and the Commission of the European Communities. The following provisions shall
apply on this subject:
– as regards exports to Côte d'Ivoire, the Member States shall be responsible for monitoring
production conditions and requirements, in particular the performance of the compulsory
inspections and the issuing of health (or animal welfare) certificates confirming compliance
with the agreed standards and requirements,
– as regards imports from Côte d'Ivoire, the Member States shall be responsible for monitoring
compliance with the import conditions set by the European Community,
– the Commission of the European Communities shall be responsible for the general
coordination, inspection and auditing of the monitoring systems, and for taking the legislative
initiatives required to ensure the uniform application of standards and requirements on the
European internal market.
B. Competent authorities of Côte d'Ivoire
These authorities shall be appointed by Côte d'Ivoire and the list shall be communicated to the
EPA Committee at the latest three months after the date on which this Agreement was signed.
 


CE/CI/Annex 1/en 1
AEX 1
CUSTOMS DUTIES ON PRODUCTS
ORIGINATING IN CÔTE D'IVOIRE
1. Without prejudice to paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7, customs duties on imports imposed by the
EC Party (hereinafter "EC customs duties") shall be entirely eliminated on all products,
originating in Côte d'Ivoire, in Chapters 1 to 97 of the HS, except those in Chapter 93 thereof,
upon the entry into force of this Agreement. For products in Chapter 93, the EC Party shall
continue to apply the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) duties.
2. Import duties on the products of tariff heading 1006 shall be eliminated as from
1 January 2010, with the exception of import duties on the products of subheading
1006 10 10, which shall be eliminated as from 1 January 2008.
3. The Parties agree that the provisions of Protocol 3 on ACP Sugar of the Cotonou Agreement
(hereinafter the "Sugar Protocol") shall remain applicable until 30 September 2009. After this
date, the EC Party and Côte d'Ivoire agree that the Sugar Protocol will no longer be in force
between them. For the purposes of Article 4(1) of the Sugar Protocol, the delivery period
2008/9 shall last from 1 July 2008 to 30 September 2009. The guaranteed price from
1 July 2008 to 30 September 2009 shall be decided following the negotiations provided for in
Article 5(4) of the Sugar Protocol. 


CE/CI/Annex 1/en 2
4. EC customs duties on products of tariff heading 1701 originating in Côte d'Ivoire shall be
eliminated as from 1 October 2009. No import licence shall be granted with regard to
products to be imported, unless the importer undertakes to purchase such products at a price at
least equal to the guaranteed prices fixed for sugar imported into the EC Party under the
Sugar Protocol.
5. (a) The EC Party may, during the period between 1 October 2009 and 30 September 2015,
impose the applied MFN duty on the products originating in Côte d'Ivoire of tariff
heading 1701 imported in excess of the following levels expressed in white sugar
equivalent, which are deemed to cause a disruption in the EC Party sugar market:
(i) 3,5 million tonnes in a marketing year for products originating in the members of
the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP States) signatory to the
Cotonou Agreement, and
(ii) 1,38 million tonnes in the marketing year 2009/2010 for products originating in
the ACP States which are not recognised by the United Nations as least developed
countries. The figure of 1,38 million tonnes shall increase to 1,45 million tonnes
in marketing year 2010/2011, and 1,6 million tonnes in the following four
marketing years;
(b) The importation of products of tariff heading 1701 originating in any signatory West
African State which is recognised by the United Nations as a least developed country
shall not be subject to the provisions of subparagraph 5(a). However, such imports shall
remain subject to the provisions of Article 251
;

1
 For these purposes and by derogation from Article 25, individual West African States
recognised by the United Nations as least developed countries may be subject to safeguard
measures. 


CE/CI/Annex 1/en 3
(c) The imposition of the applied MFN duty shall cease at the end of the marketing year
during which it was introduced;
(d) Any measure taken pursuant to this paragraph shall be notified immediately to the
EPA Committee and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within that body.
6. As of 1 October 2015, for the purpose of applying the provisions of Article 25, disruptions in
the market for products of tariff heading 1701 may be deemed to arise in situations where the
average European Community price of white sugar falls during two consecutive months
below 80 % of the average European Community price for white sugar prevailing during the
previous marketing year.
7. From 1 January 2008 to 30 September 2015, products of tariff headings 1704 90 99,
1806 10 30, 1806 10 90, 2106 90 59 and 2106 90 98 shall be subject to a special surveillance
mechanism in order to ensure that the arrangements provided for in paragraphs 4 and 5 are not
being circumvented. In the event of a cumulative increase in imports of one or more of such
products originating in Côte d'Ivoire by more than 20 % in volume over a period of
12 consecutive months compared to the average of the yearly imports over the previous
three 12-month periods, the EC Party shall analyse the pattern of trade, the economic
justification and the sugar content of such imports and, if it considers that such imports are
used to circumvent the arrangements provided for under paragraphs 4 and 5, it may suspend
the preferential treatment and introduce the specific MFN duty applied to imports pursuant to
the European Community Common Customs Tariff for products of tariff headings
1704 90 99, 1806 10 30, 1806 10 90, 2106 90 59 and 2106 90 98 originating in Côte d'Ivoire.
Subparagraphs 5(b), (c) and (d) shall apply mutatis mutandis to action under this paragraph. 


CE/CI/Annex 1/en 4
8. Between 1 October 2009 and 30 September 2012, with regard to the products of tariff
heading 1701, no preferential import licence shall be granted unless the importer undertakes
to purchase such products at a price not lower than 90 % of the reference price set by the
EC Party for the relevant marketing year.
9. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to products of tariff heading 0803 00 19 originating in
Côte d'Ivoire and released for free circulation in the outermost regions of the EC Party.
Paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 shall not apply to products of tariff heading 1701 originating in
Côte d'Ivoire and released for free circulation in the French Overseas Departments. This
provision shall be applicable for a period of ten years. This period shall be extended for a
further ten years unless the Parties agree otherwise.
 


CE/CI/Annex 2/en 1
AEX 2
CUSTOMS DUTIES ON PRODUCTS
ORIGINATING IN THE EC PARTY
Côte d'Ivoire shall liberalise products originating in the EC Party imported into its territory.
For this purpose, it shall establish four product groups: A, B, C and D.
The tariff dismantling schedule shall be as follows:
For Group A products, liberalisation shall take place between 1 January 2008 and
31 December 2012, i.e. over a period of five years;
For Group B products, liberalisation shall take place between 1 January 2013 and
31 December 2017, i.e. over a period of five years;
For Group C products, liberalisation shall take place between 1 January 2018 and
31 December 2022, i.e. over a period of five years.
Group D products shall be excluded from liberalisation.
[NOTE TO OJ: Please insert the table contained in the documents 12129/08 ad01 - ad05 which are
available in all language versions] 


CE/CI/P/en 1
PROTOCOL
ON MUTUAL ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE
IN CUSTOMS MATTERS 


CE/CI/P/en 2
ARTICLE 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) "customs legislation" means any legal or regulatory provisions governing the import, export
and transit of goods and their placing under any other customs regime or procedure, including
measures of prohibition, restriction and control;
(b) "applicant authority" means a competent administrative authority which has been designated
by a Party for this purpose and which makes a request for assistance on the basis of this
Protocol;
(c) "requested authority" means a competent administrative authority which has been designated
by a Party for this purpose and which receives a request for assistance on the basis of this
Protocol;
(d) "personal data" means all information relating to an identified or identifiable individual;
(e) "operation in breach of customs legislation" means any infringement or attempted
infringement of customs legislation. 


CE/CI/P/en 3
ARTICLE 2
Scope
1. The Parties shall assist each other, in the areas within their competence, in the manner and
under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, to ensure the correct application of the customs
legislation, in particular by preventing, investigating and prosecuting operations in breach of that
legislation.
2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall apply to any
administrative authority of the Parties which is competent for the application of this Protocol. It
shall not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in criminal matters. Nor shall it cover
information obtained under powers exercised at the request of a judicial authority, except where
communication of such information is authorised by that authority.
3. Assistance to recover duties, taxes or fines is not covered by this Protocol.
ARTICLE 3
Assistance on request
1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall provide it with all
relevant information which may enable it to ensure that customs legislation is correctly applied,
including information regarding activities noted or planned which are or could be operations in
breach of customs legislation. 


CE/CI/P/en 4
2. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall inform it:
(a) whether goods exported from the territory of one of the Parties have been properly imported
into the territory of another Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure
applied to the goods;
(b) whether goods imported into the territory of one of the Parties have been properly exported
from the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure
applied to the goods.
3. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, within the framework
of its legal or regulatory provisions, take the necessary steps to ensure surveillance of:
(a) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that
they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;
(b) places where stocks of goods have been or may be assembled in such a way that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that these goods are intended to be used in operations in
breach of customs legislation;
(c) goods that are or may be transported in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation;
(d) means of transport that are or may be used in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation. 


CE/CI/P/en 5
ARTICLE 4
Spontaneous assistance
The Parties shall assist each other, at their own initiative and in accordance with their legal or
regulatory provisions, if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs
legislation, particularly by providing information obtained pertaining to:
(a) activities which are or appear to be operations in breach of customs legislation and which may
be of interest to another Party;
(b) new means or methods employed in carrying out operations in breach of customs legislation;
(c) goods known to be subject to operations in breach of customs legislation;
(d) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that
they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;
(e) means of transport in respect of which there are reasonable grounds for believing that they
have been, are, or may be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.


CE/CI/P/en 6
ARTICLE 5
Delivery/Notification
1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, in accordance with
legal or regulatory provisions applicable to the latter, take all necessary measures to:
– deliver any documents or
– notify all decisions
emanating from the applicant authority and falling within the scope of this Protocol, to an addressee
residing or established in the territory of the requested authority.
2. Requests for delivery of documents and notification of decisions shall be made in writing in
an official language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to that authority.
ARTICLE 6
Form and substance of requests for assistance
1. Requests pursuant to this Protocol shall be made in writing. They shall be accompanied by the
documents necessary to enable compliance with the request. When required because of the urgency
of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in writing immediately. 


CE/CI/P/en 7
2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include the following information:
(a) the applicant authority;
(b) the action requested;
(c) the object of and the reason for the request;
(d) the legal or regulatory provisions and other legal elements involved;
(e) indications, as exact and comprehensive as possible, on the natural or legal persons who are
the target of the investigations;
(f) a summary of the relevant facts and of the enquiries already carried out.
3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the requested authority or in a language
acceptable to that authority. This requirement shall not apply to any documents which accompany
the request under paragraph 1.
4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements set out above, its correction or completion
may be requested; in the meantime, precautionary measures may be ordered. 


CE/CI/P/en 8
ARTICLE 7
Execution of requests
1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority shall proceed, within
the limits of its competence and available resources, as though it were acting on its own account or
at the request of other authorities of that same Party, by supplying information already possessed,
by carrying out appropriate enquiries or by arranging for them to be carried out. This provision shall
also apply to any other authority to which the request has been addressed by the requested authority
in application of this Protocol when the latter cannot act on its own.
2. Requests for assistance shall be executed in accordance with the legal or regulatory provisions
of the requested Party.
3. Duly authorised officials of one of the Parties may, with the agreement of the other Party
involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present to obtain in the offices of
the requested authority or any other authority concerned in accordance with paragraph 1,
information relating to activities that are or may be operations in breach of customs legislation
which the applicant authority needs for the purposes of this Protocol.
4. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party involved and
within the conditions laid down by the latter, be present at enquiries carried out in the latter's
territory. 


CE/CI/P/en 9
ARTICLE 8
Form in which information is to be communicated
1. The requested authority shall communicate results of enquiries to the applicant authority in
writing together with relevant documents, certified copies or other items.
2. This information may be in computerised form.
3. Original documents shall be transmitted only upon request in cases where certified copies
would be insufficient. These originals shall be returned at the earliest opportunity.
ARTICLE 9
Exceptions to the obligation to provide assistance
1. Assistance may be refused or may be subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions or
requirements in cases where a Party is of the opinion that assistance under this Protocol would:
(a) be likely to prejudice the sovereignty of Côte d'Ivoire or that of a Member State whose
assistance has been requested pursuant to this Protocol; or
(b) be likely to prejudice public policy, security or other essential interests, in particular in the
cases referred to under Article 10(2); or
(c) be likely to disclose an industrial, commercial or professional secret. 


CE/CI/P/en 10
2. Assistance may be postponed by the requested authority on the ground that it will interfere
with an ongoing investigation, prosecution or proceeding. In such a case, the requested authority
shall consult with the applicant authority to determine whether assistance can be given subject to
such terms or conditions as the requested authority may require.
3. Where the applicant authority seeks assistance which it would itself be unable to provide if so
requested, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. It shall then be for the requested authority
to decide how to respond to such a request.
4. For the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the decision of the requested authority and the
reasons therefore must be communicated to the applicant authority without delay.
ARTICLE 10
Exchange of information and confidentiality
1. Any information communicated in whatever form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of a
confidential or restricted nature, depending on the rules applicable in each of the Parties. It shall be
covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shall enjoy the protection extended to similar
information under the relevant laws of the Party that received it and the corresponding provisions
applying to the Community authorities. 


CE/CI/P/en 11
2. Personal data may be exchanged only where the Party which may receive it undertakes to
protect such data in at least an equivalent way to that applicable to that particular case in the Party
which may supply it. To that end, the Parties shall inform each other of their applicable rules,
including, where appropriate, legal provisions in force in the Member States of the Community.
3. The use, in judicial or administrative proceedings instituted in respect of operations in breach
of customs legislation, of information obtained under this Protocol, is considered to be for the
purposes of this Protocol. Therefore, the Parties may, in their records of evidence, reports and
testimonies and in proceedings and charges brought before the courts, use as evidence information
obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. The
competent authority which supplied that information or gave access to those documents shall be
notified of such use.
4. Information obtained shall be used solely for the purposes of this Protocol. Where one of the
Parties wishes to use such information for other purposes, it shall obtain the prior written consent of
the authority which provided the information. Such use shall then be subject to any restrictions laid
down by that authority. 


CE/CI/P/en 12
ARTICLE 11
Experts and witnesses
An official of a requested authority may be authorised to appear, within the limitations of the
authorisation granted, as an expert or witness in judicial or administrative proceedings regarding the
matters covered by this Protocol, and produce such objects, documents or certified copies thereof,
as may be needed for the proceedings. The request for appearance must indicate specifically before
which judicial or administrative authority the official must appear, on what matters and by virtue of
what capacity or qualification he/she will be questioned.
ARTICLE 12
Assistance expenses
The Parties shall waive all claims on each other for the reimbursement of expenses incurred
pursuant to this Protocol, except, as appropriate, for the expenses of experts and witnesses, and
those for interpreters and translators who are not public service employees. 


CE/CI/P/en 13
ARTICLE 13
Implementation
1. The implementation of this Protocol shall be entrusted, on the one hand, to the customs
authorities of Côte d'Ivoire and, on the other hand, to the competent departments of the Commission
of the European Communities and, where appropriate, the customs authorities of the Member States
of the European Community. They shall decide on all practical measures and arrangements
necessary for its application, taking into consideration the rules in force in particular in the field of
data protection. They may recommend to the competent bodies amendments which they consider
should be made to this Protocol.
2. The Parties shall consult each other and keep each other informed of the detailed rules of
implementation which are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.
ARTICLE 14
Other agreements
1. Taking into account the respective competencies of the European Community and the
Member States, the provisions of this Protocol shall:
– not affect the obligations of the Parties under any other international agreement or convention, 


CE/CI/P/en 14
– be deemed complementary to agreements on mutual assistance which have been or may be
concluded between individual Member States of the European Community and Côte d'Ivoire,
– not affect the Community provisions governing the communication between the competent
services of the Commission of the European Communities and the customs authorities of the
Member States of any information obtained in the fields covered by this Protocol which could
be of interest to the Community.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the provisions of this Protocol shall take
precedence over the provisions of any bilateral agreement on mutual assistance which has been or
may be concluded between individual Member States and Côte d'Ivoire insofar as the provisions of
the latter are incompatible with those of this Protocol.
3. In respect of questions relating to the applicability of this Protocol, the Parties shall consult
each other to resolve the matter in the framework of the EPA Committee set up under Article 73 of
the stepping stone Economic Partnership Agreement between Cote d'Ivoire and the
European Community and its Member States. 