AGREEMENT REGARDING COMMON FISHERY RIGHTS IN THE FLENSBURG FJORD.
Article 1.
1. Nationals of the two States who, on the coming into force of this Agreement, may be domiciled
in the Communes lying on the German and Danish sides of the Fjord, shall have the right to carry on
fishing within the Flensburg Fjord, which is bounded on the east by the line Birknack-Kekenis Beacon.
Fishermen who take up their residence in these Communes after the above date shall only acquire
the right to fish within the territorial limits of the other country after they have carried on fishing in
the fjord continuously for one year.
Outside the area specified in paragraph I, only nationals resident in the two countries shall be
entitled to carry on fishing within the territorial waters of their respective States.
2. The following places shall, however, be exluded from the common fisheries:
(a) The Nybol Nor up to the point at its mouth marked by the two sea marks,
(b) The northern section of Sonderborg Bay, including Horuphav which is bounded by the line Lille
Borrishoved (southern point of the Koppelshoven) - Vesterby - (Vestermark) Mill on
Kegnoes.
(c) The coastal waters along the Kegnoes peninsula within the 10 metre sounding.
3. The provisions laid down in No. 1. shall not affect special rights based upon ownership or privileges.
Article 2.
Fishermen specified in Article 1 who use the common fisheries within the Flensburg Fjord will,
provided they observe the legal regulations in force and especially the customs regulations and passport
formalities, be entitled to land and sell their catch at the fishing villages on the fjord which belong
to the other Contracting Party and may also purchase and complete in these villages their fishing tackle
and implements and their supplies of provisions.
Article 3.
(1) As regards fishing in the waters in which common fishing rights are recognised, an Agreement
will be prepared containing special regulations in respect of the minimum measurements and close seasons
and also in respect of the various kinds of fishing which are permitted.
(2) Draft regulations on these lines shall be framed jointly by a Commission consisting of six members.
Each of the two States will send three members to this Commission ; of the three members one
shall be a fisheries official and two members shall be fishermen who are taking part in the common fisheries.
(3) Unless otherwise provided for in special regulations issued by the Governments, the general
fishery laws and regulations of each of the respective countries shall, within its territorial limits, apply
to the carrying on of fishing within the area covered by the Agreement.
Article 4.
In addition to the usual mark, with number, indicating the port of registry, fishing boats, whose
port of registry is situated within the territory covered by this Agreement, shall bear the special mark
"FF". Both marks shall be clearly displayed on the hull of the vessel and the mainsail and so long
as the vessels are actually in use these marks must be distinct and visible.
(2) Moreover, the competent authorities of the respective countries will issue a special pass to
the fishermen mentioned in Article 1 who share in the common fisheries in the Flensburg Fjord, and
such fishermen must carry this pass with them when fishing within the territorial waters of the other
High Contracting Party.
(3) More detailed provisions regarding the marking of fishing-boats and tackle and also regarding
the contents, making out and supervision of the passes shall be drawn up by the Commission mentioned
in Article 3, No. 2.
Article 5.
(1) Persons contravening the regulations issued in accordance with Articles 3 and 4 will be prosecuted
and punished by the State in which the home port of the fishing boat is situated. The fishermen
concerned are bound to comply with the instructions of the competent authorities.
(2 a) Unauthorised fishing within the areas excluded under Article 1, Nos. 2 and 3 from the common
fisheries on the part of the persons who are entitled under Article 1 to share in the common fishing rights,
may only be punished with a fine which must, not exceed the maximum amount imposed in the case of a
contravention of the same nature under the laws of the other Contracting Party and with the confiscation
of the catch. The penalty may in no case exceed the maximum which may be inflicted for the offence
within the country which passes the sentence. When judgment is entered the amount of the fine shall
be determined, in the currency of both Contracting Parties, the conversion being at the rate of the day
which precedes the date on which judgment is given. The costs of the proceedings may not exceed
one-fifth of the amount of the fine; in fixing the costs, the rate of conversion which served as a basis
in reckoning the fine shall also apply in converting the costs.
The provisions of the foregoing paragraph shall not apply to intentional contravention of the regulations.
(b) In all cases of unauthorised fishing within the territorial waters of one of the Contracting Parties
within the Flensburg Fjord, the right of punishment may be handed over to the State of which the
offender is a national.
(c) If, in the case of unauthorised fishing as discribet under No. 2 (a) paragraph 1, the authorities
of the one Contracting Party have merely imposed a fine, and if such fine does not exceed the amount
of 6,ooo marks or a corresponding sum in Danish crowns, the judgment being valid in law, which, on
the application of the Supreme judicial administrative authority of the one Contracting Party is to be
transferred to the corresponding authority of the other High Contracting Party, shall be recognised as
valid and executed free of costs. A declaration to the effect that the judgment is valid and executable,
made by the competent authority of the Contracting Party preferring the request, shall be attached
to the application for execution. That part of the judgment which contains the actual verdict must
be accompanied by an officially authenticated translation in the language of the Contracting Party
to whom application is made.
(3) The two Contracting Parties shall issue such penal regulations as may be necessary to carry
out the obligations arising out of this Agreement.
(4) The result of any penal proceedings and the amount of the fine imposed will, in the cases specified
in Nos. 1 to 3, be communicated within reasonable time to the State within whose territorial waters
the breach of the law occured.
(5) Contraventions of the nature mentioned in Nos. 1 to 3, as a result of which penal proceedings
have been instituted in one of the two countries, may not be made a subject of penal proceedings in
the other country.
(6) If a breach of the fishing laws has occurred within the territorial waters of one of the countries,
the officials of that country entrusted with the supervision of the fisheries are authorised, if any danger
may occur as a result of delay, to examine the offenders within that part of the territorial waters of
the other country where the nationals of both countries are entitled to carry on fishing. The examination
will be limited to enquiries with regard to the markings by which the vessels may be recognised
and the investigation of the passes.
On the arrival of the competent authorities of the other country, the officials entrusted with the
supervision of the fisheries are bound to hand over further investigations to the competent authorities
and shall return to the territorial limits of their own country.
Article 6.
The Governments of both countries undertake to communicate to each other such supervisory
measures as they have adopted for the purpose of guaranteeing the observance of the provisions of this
Agreement.
Article 7.
This Agreement shall remain in force in the first instance for a period of five years. Thereafter
it shall be continued for successive periods of one year, provided it has not been denounced by one of
the Parties at one year's notice,
Each of the two Contracting Parties shall reserve to itself the right temporarily to suspend the application
of the whole or part of the foregoing Agreement if considerations connected with international
complications should necessitate such a step.
