TREATY ESTABLISHING THE ECONOMIC AND MONETARY COMMUNITY

FROM CENTRAL AFRICA

The Government of the Republic of Cameroon;
The Government of the Central African Republic;
The Government of the Republic of Congo;
The Government of the Gabonese Republic;
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea;
The Government of the Republic of Chad;
Aware of the need to jointly develop all human resources and
of their States and to place these at the service of the general well-being of their peoples in
all the domains;
Determined to give a new and decisive impetus to the process of integration in Africa
Central through increased harmonization of the policies and legislation of their States;
Taking note of the integration approach proposed in UDEAC as inspired by the Chiefs
of State of the OAU at the Abuja Conference in July 1991;
Considering the new dynamics underway in the Franc Zone, which is moreover necessary for the
given the changes and refocusing of cooperation and development strategies observed in
Africa and other continents including Europe;
Wishing to strengthen solidarity between their peoples while respecting their identities
respective nationals;
Reaffirming their attachment to the principles of freedom, democracy and respect for human rights
human rights and the rule of law;
Decide to create an "Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa", in
CEMAC abbreviation.
First article
The essential mission of the Community is to promote a harmonious development
of the Member States within the framework of the establishment of two Unions: an Economic Union and a Union
Monetary. In each of these two areas, the Member States intend to move from a situation of
cooperation, which already exists between them, to a situation of union, capable of completing the process
economic and monetary integration.
Section 2
The signatory parties decide on the principle of creating four institutions attached to the
Community and constituting it:
- the Economic Union of Central Africa;
- the Central African Monetary Union;
- the Community Parliament;
- the Community Court of Justice, comprising a Judicial Chamber and a
Chamber of Accounts.
The main organs of the Community are:
WT/COMTD/24
Page 2
- the Conference of Heads of State;

- the Council of Ministers;

- the Ministerial Committee;

- the Executive Secretariat;

- the Interstate Committee;

- the Bank of Central African States;

- the Banking Commission of Central Africa;

- the Development Finance Institution.

Section 3
The four Institutions mentioned in article 2 above will be the subject of separate Agreements,
annex respectively to this Treaty and of which they shall form an integral part.1
The status of the bodies mentioned above and already existing will be subject, if necessary, to
amendments by separate agreements with a view to their harmonization with the provisions of the Acts
governing the community.
Section 4
The Community Parliament, which will be created later by a separate Convention, will have
essential role of legislating by means of directives.
Section 5
The Community Court of Justice has two Chambers: A Judicial Chamber and a
Chamber of Accounts.
The Judicial Chamber ensures respect for the law in the interpretation and application of the
this Treaty and subsequent Conventions.
The Audit Bench ensures the control of the accounts of the Union.
The composition, functioning and scope of competence of each of the two
Chambers are contained in the Convention establishing the Economic Union of Central Africa.
Section 6
Any other African State, sharing the same ideals as those to which the founding States
solemnly declare themselves attached, may apply for membership of the Economic Community and
Central African currency.
This membership can only take place after the unanimous agreement of the founding members.
Any subsequent accession of a new State will be subject to the unanimous agreement of the members
from the community.
1 The text of the Convention governing the Economic Union of Central Africa is annexed to this
document.
WT/COMTD/24
Page 3
Section 7
This Treaty drawn up in a single copy in the French, Spanish and English languages,
the French text being authentic in case of divergence of interpretation, will enter into force as soon as it is ratified
by all the signatory States to the Republic of Chad, designated as the depositary State of
all Acts relating to the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa.
Done in N'Djamena, March 16, 1994
WT/COMTD/24
Page 4
ANNEX
CONVENTION GOVERNING THE ECONOMIC UNION
OF CENTRAL AFRICA (UEAC)
PREAMBLE
The Government of the Republic of Cameroon;
The Government of the Central African Republic;
The Government of the Republic of Congo;
The Government of the Gabonese Republic;
The GB
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea;
The Government of the Republic of Chad;
- having regard to the Treaty establishing the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa;
- aware of the advantages that Member States derive from belonging to the same
monetary community and the need to complement it with an Economic Union;
- aware of the handicaps resulting from the isolation and insularity of certain States
Member States and the need to support, in a spirit of solidarity, the efforts of these States
aimed at reducing their handicaps with a view to the harmonious development of the Community;
- affirming the need to promote the economic development of Member States through
harmonization of their legislation, the unification of their internal markets and the implementation
implementation of common policies in the essential sectors of their economy;
- affirming their desire to comply with the principles of an open market economy,
competitive and favoring the optimal allocation of resources;
- taking into account the achievements made within the framework of African regional organizations
in which Member States participate;
agree to the following;
TITLE I: FOUNDATIONS OF ECONOMIC UNION
CHAPTER I: OBJECTIVES
First article
By this Convention, the High Contracting Parties establish among themselves the Union
Economic Union of Central Africa, hereinafter referred to as the Economic Union, in order to jointly establish
the conditions for harmonious economic and social development within the framework of an open market
and an appropriate legal environment.
WT/COMTD/24
page 5
Section 2
For the purposes set out in Article 1 and under the conditions provided for by this
Convention, the Economic Union intends to achieve the following objectives:
(a) strengthen the competitiveness of economic and financial activities by harmonizing the
rules that govern their operation;
(b) ensuring convergence towards sustainable performance through the coordination of
economic policies and the consistency of national budgetary policies
with the common monetary policy;
(c) create a common market based on the free movement of goods, services,
capital and people;
(d) establish coordination of national sectoral policies, implement
common actions and adopt common policies, particularly in the areas of
following areas: agriculture, stockbreeding, fishing, industry, commerce,
tourism, transport, telecommunications, energy, environment,
research, education and professional training.
Section 3
The achievement of the objectives of the Economic Union will take into account the achievements of the Union
Customs and Economic Affairs of Central Africa (UDEAC) and will be undertaken during a process
in three steps.
Section 4
During the first stage, lasting five years from the entry into force of the
this Convention and under the conditions provided for therein, the Economic Union:
(a) harmonises, to the extent necessary for the functioning of the common market, the
rules governing economic and financial activities and draws up for this purpose
common regulations;
b) engage in a process of coordination of national policies, in the sectors
following: agriculture, livestock, fishing, industry, commerce, tourism,
transport and telecommunications;
c) initiates the process of putting in place instruments for the free movement of goods,
services, capital and people, in particular by harmonizing the
taxation of productive activities and taxation of savings;
d) develops the coordination of trade policies and economic relations
with other regions;
e) prepare joint actions in the fields of education, training
professional and research.
WT/COMTD/24
page 6
Section 5
During the second stage, lasting five years from the end of the first
stage, and under the conditions provided for in this Convention, the Economic Union:
(f) establishes, between its Member States, the free movement of goods, services,
capital and people;
g) implements joint actions in the areas mentioned in Article 4 paragraph b) of
this Agreement;
h) engage in a process of coordination of national sectoral policies in terms of
environment and energy;
(i) strengthen and improve, with a view to their interconnection, transport infrastructure and
telecommunications of the Member States.
Section 6
At the start of the third stage, the Conference of Heads of State observes, in view of the report of the
Executive Secretary, and on the proposal of the Council of Ministers provided for in Title IV of this
Convention, the state of progress of the economic integration process and decides, where appropriate, on the
actions to be carried out with a view to completing the program of the first two
st steps. Measures
corresponding are implemented as necessary by means of additional acts to the
Convention.
During the third stage, the Conference of Heads of State also decides, in view of the
report of the Executive Secretariat and on the proposal of the Council of Ministers, the establishment of
common policies in the areas listed in Article 2d) of this Convention. In this
case, the Conference of Heads of State sets, by means of an additional act to the Convention, the objectives and
the guidelines of these policies as well as the powers of action conferred on the Board and the
Executive Secretariat for their implementation.
Section 7
The Conference of Heads of State establishes, at regular intervals and in any case at the beginning
of each of the first two stages of the construction of the Economic Union, the program of
work of the institutions, taking into account the priorities and methods of Union action
Economic. During each of these stages, it may set, where appropriate, on the basis of a report
of execution presented by the Executive Secretariat, the date of the early transition to the next stage.
CHAPTER II: PRINCIPLES
Section 8
The Economic Union acts within the limits of the objectives that the CEMAC Treaty and the
this Convention assign to it. It respects the national identity of its Member States.
The bodies of the Economic Union and its specialized institutions shall enact, in
the exercise of the normative powers attributed to them by this Convention, of the requirements
minimum standards and framework regulations, which it is up to the Member States to complete as
necessary, in accordance with their respective constitutional rules.
WT/COMTD/24
Page 7
Section 9
Legal acts taken by the bodies of the Economic Union and the specialized institutions
thereof for the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement, in accordance with the rules and
procedures established by this same Convention, are applied in each Member State.
Section 10
The Member States shall contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the Union
Economic by adopting all internal measures to ensure the fulfillment of obligations
arising from this Agreement. They shall refrain from any measure likely to impede
the application of this Convention and of the legal acts adopted for its implementation.
TITLE II: THE ACTIONS OF THE ECONOMIC UNION
CHAPTER I: COMMON POLICIES
Section I: General economic policy
Section 11
Member States regard their economic policies as a matter of interest
and ensure their coordination within the Board with a view to achieving the objectives defined
in Article 2 paragraph b) of this Convention.
The coordination of economic policies is ensured in accordance with the provisions
provided for in Title III of this Agreement.
Section II: Taxation
Section 12
With a view to implementing Article 4 c) of this Convention, the Economic Union
harmonises the tax laws that govern economic and financial activities.
The regulations necessary for the development of common tax legislation are
adopted, on the proposal of the Executive Secretariat, by the Board acting unanimously.
Section III: The common market
Section 13
The common market of the Economic Union, provided for in article 2 c) of this Convention
includes, according to the rhythm provided for by the program mentioned in article 7, and subject to the
exceptions set out in Article 16:
j) the elimination of internal customs duties, quantitative restrictions on entry
and on the exit of the goods, charges having equivalent effect, any other measure
having equivalent effect which may affect transactions between Member States;
WT/COMTD/24
page 8
(k) the establishment of a common commercial policy towards third States;
(l) the establishment of common competition rules applicable to undertakings and
state aid;
m) implementation of the principle of freedom of movement for workers, freedom
of establishment, freedom to provide services, freedom of investment and
capital movements;
(n) harmonization and mutual recognition of technical standards as well as
approval and certification procedures.
The realization of the common market will be completed at the end of the second stage at the latest
of the construction of the Economic Union.
Section 14
With a view to achieving the objective defined in Article 13, paragraph a), and taking into account the
acquired in this area, the Member States shall abstain, from the entry into force of this
Agreement:
o) to introduce between them any new import and export customs duties,
any tax having equivalent effect, and to increase those which they apply in their relations
mutual business;
p) to introduce between them new
quantitative restrictions on the export or
importation or measure having equivalent effect, not justified by an exception provided for in
article 16, as well as to make more restrictive the quotas and standards of effect
existing equivalent;
q) to introduce any provision in favor of a company located on their territory aimed at
to derogations or exemptions likely to affect competition between
companies in the Economic Union.
Section 15
The Council of Ministers, acting by qualified majority, determines in view of the program
mentioned in Article 7 of this Agreement and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, the rate
and the modalities for the elimination of customs duties and adopts the necessary regulations for this purpose.
The Council of Ministers takes into account the effects that the dismantling of the protections
customs could have on the economy of certain Member States, and takes as necessary the
appropriate measures.
Section 16
Subject to measures for the approximation of laws implemented by the Union
Economic, Member States may prohibit or restrict the import, export, or
transit of goods, when these prohibitions or restrictions are justified by reasons of morality
public order, public order, public security, protection of the health or life of persons and
animals, plant preservation, protection of cultural, historical or
archaeological, protection of industrial and commercial property.
WT/COMTD/24
page 9
The prohibitions or restrictions applied on the basis of the preceding paragraph must not
constitute neither a means of arbitrary discrimination nor a disguised restriction on trade between
Member States.
Section 17
During the first stage of the construction of the Economic Union, the Council of
Ministers, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, decide by simple majority on the harmonization and
mutual recognition of technical and health standards as well as procedures
approval and certification at the level of the Economic Union.
Section 18
With a view to achieving the objectives defined in Article 13 paragraph b) of this
Convention, the Council of Ministers adopts, by a qualified majority, on the proposal of the Secretary
Executive, the regulations setting the regime for trade relations with third countries.
Section 19
The achievement of the objectives defined in Article 13 paragraph b) of this Convention depends
account of the need to contribute to the harmonious development of regional trade and
worldwide, to promote the development of productive capacities within the Economic Union,
to defend the productions of the Economic Union against policies of dumping and/or
subsidies practiced in third countries.
Rule 20
If agreements with third countries are to be concluded within the framework of the policy
commercial commons, the Executive Secretary presents recommendations to the Council of
Ministers who authorizes it, by qualified majority, to open the necessary negotiations.
The Executive Secretary conducts the negotiations in consultation with a committee appointed by the
Council of Ministers and within the framework of the directives drawn up by it.
The agreements mentioned in the first paragraph are concluded by the Council of Ministers, deciding
qualified majority of its members.
Section 21
Member States harmonize their position on all issues affecting
functioning of the common market dealt with within the framework of international organizations of a
economic.
If the questions mentioned in the preceding paragraph concern the operation of the policy
commercial commons, the Member States shall bring their position into line with the guidelines
defined by the Council of Ministers by a qualified majority of its members, on the proposal of the
Executive Secretary.
WT/COMTD/24
page 10
Section 22
At the request of a Member State, the Council of Ministers, acting by qualified majority,
may authorize that State, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, to take, for a limited period and by
derogation from the general rules of the Economic Union and the common commercial policy,
protection measures intended to deal with serious difficulties in one or more sectors
economic.
In the event of a sudden economic crisis affecting in particular the Balance of Payments, the State
member may take the necessary protective measures as a precaution. The measures of
safeguards adopted in this way must cause only a minimum of disturbance to the
functioning of the common market. They cannot exceed a period of six months, possibly
renewable. They must be approved, both in their duration and in their content, by the Board
Ministers acting by qualified majority.
The Council of Ministers, ruling on the same con
conditions, may decide that the State concerned
must modify, suspend or remove said safeguard and/or protection measures.
Section 23
With a view to achieving the objectives defined in Article 13 paragraph c) of this
Convention, the Council of Ministers shall, within one year of the entry into force of
the latter, by qualified majority and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, the regulations relating to:
a) the prohibition of agreements, associations and concerted practices between undertakings, having
for the purpose or effect of restricting or distorting competition
within the Economic Union;
b) the prohibition of any practice by one or more undertakings constituting an abuse of
dominant position in the common market or in a significant part of
this one;
(c) the prohibition of public aid likely to distort competition by favoring
certain companies or certain productions.
These regulations specify prohibitions and may provide for limited exceptions to
take specific situations into account.
At the end of the period mentioned in the first paragraph, any natural or legal person
interested party may rely on the principles listed in paragraphs a, b and c, before the courts
competent national authorities and subject to the jurisdiction of the Community Court of Justice.
Section 24
The regulations mentioned in article 23 above establish the procedure to be followed by the
Executive Secretary and set the system of fines and penalty payments intended to sanction violations
and the prohibitions contained in the same article.
Section 25
The Executive Secretary is responsible for applying the competition rules defined on the
basis of Articles 23 and 24 of this Convention. As part of this mission, he can
request the opinion of the Judicial Chamber.
WT/COMTD/24
page 11
Section 26
The Council of Ministers decides unanimously, on the proposal of the Executive Secretariat, the
regulations relating to the implementation of the objectives defined in Article 13 paragraph d) of this
Convention.
Section 27
In the exercise of the powers defined in article 26 above, the Council of Ministers sees to the
compliance with the following rules:
(a) The free movement of workers or labour;
− involves prior harmonization within a maximum period of five years:
− rules on immigration in each Member State;
− relevant provisions of national labor codes;
− legislative and regulatory provisions applicable to plans
and social welfare organizations.
− implies the abolition, within a maximum period of five years, of all
discrimination on the basis of nationality between workers of the States
members, with regard to the search for and exercise of a job,
the exception of jobs in the public, parapublic and strategic sectors;
− implies the right of entry, movement and residence in the territory of the
Member States subject to limitations for reasons of public order,
public safety and public health;
− implies the right to remain established in the territory of a Member State,
condition either of having held one or more jobs there for a period
of at least fifteen years, or to be able to justify means of subsistence of which
the nature and consistency will be determined by a regulation of the Council of
Ministers;
b) the right of establishment
− includes access for investors in the sub-region to activities not
employees and their exercise, as well as the acquisition, constitution and management
companies, under the conditions defined by the legislation of the country
establishment;
− includes progressive harmonization of national provisions
regulating access to self-employed activities and the exercise thereof;
WT/COMTD/24
page 12
c) freedom to provide services
− is applied as a priority to services that intervene directly in the
production costs or the release of which helps to facilitate trade
merchandise;
− benefits the natural and legal persons referred to in paragraph b)
above.
Section 28
The free movement of capital is governed by the provisions of the Convention relating to
the Central African Monetary Union and subsequent texts.
CHAPTER II: SECTORAL POLICIES
Section I: Teaching, research and professional training
Section 29
The joint actions to be taken pursuant to Article 4 paragraph e) of this
Convention are intended to rationalize and improve the performance of teaching
in particular higher education, research and vocational training; these actions can
include:
a) the creation or development of common institutions of higher education,
of research and professional training allowing in certain fields the
gather
ent of the means implemented by the Member States;
b) the opening, under the same conditions of access as nationals, of establishments
teaching to all nationals of the Economic Union;
c) coordination of teaching, research and training programs
professional;
d) the evaluation of the results of higher education and training
vocational training provided by the Member States;
e) mutual recognition of diplomas attesting to training provided in
these institutions;
f) the harmonization of the conditions and standards of equivalence of the diplomas obtained
in third countries.
Section 30
The Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary decides, by qualified majority,
the regulations, directives or recommendations necessary for the implementation of Article 29
above.
WT/COMTD/24
page 13
Section II: Transport and telecommunications
Section 31
Within the framework of the work program mentioned in Article 7 of this Convention, the
Council of Ministers adopts, by qualified majority and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, the
measures aimed at reinforcing and improving, with a view to their interconnection, the infrastructures of
transport and telecommunications of the Member States as well as the methods of their implementation.
Section 32
The provisions relating to the liberalization of the provision of services in the field of
transport and telecommunications are taken in accordance with the principles and procedures
defined in Articles 13 d), 25 and 26 of this Convention, and taking into account the achievements in
matter.
Section III: Agriculture, livestock and fishing
Section 33
Within the framework of the work program mentioned in Article 7 of this Convention, the
Council of Ministers:
(a) define by regulation the mutual information systems to which
the Member States participate with a view to coordinating their agricultural policies,
pastoral and fish farming;
(b) defines by means of recommendations the guidelines which the Member States are
invited to implement simultaneously with a view to improving the efficiency
economic and social aspects of agriculture, livestock and fishing;
(c) has the power to initiate, by means of regulations, actions relating in particular to
the common organization of research.
Section 34
The Council of Ministers decides, by simple majority and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary,
the regulations and recommendations mentioned in article 33 above. He delegates to the Secretary
Executive, under the same conditions of majority, any power of execution necessary for the coordination
agricultural, pastoral or fisheries policies of the Member States.
Section 35
1. In exercising the power defined in Article 6 paragraph 2 of this Convention, the
Conference of Heads of State monitors, in compliance with the financial balances of the Economic Union and
of its Member States, taking into account the following objectives:
WT/COMTD/24
Page 14
a) increase the productivity of agriculture, livestock and fishing, by developing the
technical progress, ensuring the rational development of production and a
optimum use of the factors of production, in particular of labour, and thus
improve the standard of living of the populations;
(b) ensure the profitability of the sectors;

(c) stabilize markets;

(d) guarantee the security of supplies;

e) ensure reasonable prices in the delivery of products to consumers;

2. In the elaboration of agricultural, pastoral and fish farming policy guidelines
municipality, the Conference of Heads of State takes into account:
(a) the importance of those sectors in the economy of the Member States;
(b) structural and natural disparities between the various regions;

c) the need to make the appropriate adjustments gradually.

Section IV: Energy
Section 36
Within the framework of the work program mentioned in Article 7 of this Convention, the
Council of Ministers:
(a) define by regulation the mutual information systems to which
involve the Member States with a view to coordinating their policies
energy;
(b) defines by means of recommendations the guidelines which the Member States are
invited to implement simultaneously with a view in particular to safeguarding and
development of energy resources.
Section 37
The Council of Ministers decides, by simple majority and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary,
the regulations and recommendations mentioned in article 36 above. He delegates to the Secretary
Executive, under the same conditions of majority, any power of execution necessary for the coordination
Member States' energy policies.
Section 38
In exercising the power defined in Article 6 paragraph 2 of this Convention, the
Conference of Heads of State ensures optimal management and development of resources
energy sources of the Member States, as well as the security of energy supplies.
WT/COMTD/24
page 15
Section V: Protection of the environment
Rule 39
Within the framework of the work program mentioned in Article 7 of this Convention, the
Council of Ministers:
(a) define by regulation the mutual information systems to which
involve the Member States with a view to coordinating their policies on
environmental protection;
(b) defines by means of recommendations the guidelines which the Member States are
invited to implement, with a view to the preservation, protection,
restoration and improvement of the quality of the environment;
(c) has the option of initiating, by means of regulations, joint pilot actions with effect
training in this area.
Section 40
The Council of Ministers decides, by simple majority and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary,
the regulations and recommendations mentioned in Article 39 above. He delegates to the Secretary
Executive, under the same conditions of majority, any power of execution necessary for the coordination
Member States' policies on environmental protection.
Section 41
In exercising the power defined in Article 6 paragraph 2 of this Agreement, the
Conference of Heads of State, in compliance with the missions assigned in this area to the
specialized regional organizations, ensure that the following objectives are taken into account:
(a) combating desertification, floods and other natural disasters;

(b) preservation of the quality of the environment in rural and urban areas;

(c) the protection of biological diversity;

(d) environmentally sound exploitation of forests and fishery resources;

(e) the environmentally sound management of hazardous waste and the prohibition of

the import of such waste;
f) the exploitation of renewable energies and particularly solar energy.
Section VI: Industry
Section 42
Within the framework of the work program mentioned in Article 7 of this Convention, the
Council of Ministers defined by means of regulations on the proposal of the Executive Secretary and at the
simple majority of its members:
WT/COMTD/24
page 16
(a) the mutual information systems in which the Member States participate with a view to
the coordination of their industrial policies;
b) the conditions under which derogation may be made, in certain sectors of
the economy, to the competition law of the Economic Union.
The Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, sets the duration of the provisions
derogations taken pursuant to paragraph b) of this article. Member States are required
to inform the Executive Secretary of the execution measures taken at the national level, with a view to
facilitate the exercise of its mission to ensure the application of this Convention.
Section 43
In exercising the power defined in Articles 6 paragraph 2 and 42 of this Agreement, the
Conference of Heads of State and the Council of Ministers ensure the compatibility of objectives and
methods of the common industrial policy with the gradual construction of an open market and
competitive. In particular, the following objectives will be taken into account:
a) institutional strengthening relating in particular to the Consular Chambers, the
bodies for standardization, quality certification, protection of the
industrial property;
(b) increasing domestic value addition and promoting the use and
enhancement of local resources;
c) the search for specialization and complementarity by strengthening
inter and intra-sectoral relations, rehabilitation, restructuring of certain
industrial sectors;
(d) support for export industries and sub-sectors deemed to be priorities or
strategic;
(e) technology development and acquisition;
f) harmonization of regulatory frameworks for industrial and mining activities,
in particular the drafting of a Community investment code.
Section VII: Tourism
Section 44
Within the framework of the work program mentioned in Article 7 of this Convention, the
Council of Ministers:
(a) define by regulation the mutual information systems to which
involve the Member States with a view to coordinating their policies
tourism;
(b) define by way of recommendations the orientations which the Member States are
invited to implement simultaneously for the development of tourism;
WT/COMTD/24
page 17
c) has the ability to initiate, by means of regulations, joint actions involving
including the promotion of interstate tourist circuits and the alleviation of
border controls.
Rule 45
The Council of Ministers decides, by simple majority and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary,
the regulations
s or recommendations mentioned in the previous article. He delegates to the Secretary
Executive, under the same conditions of majority, any power of execution necessary for the coordination
Member States' tourism policies.
Section 46
In exercising the power defined in Article 6 paragraph 2 of this Convention, the
Conference of Heads of State and the Council of Ministers, in compliance with the missions assigned in
this field to the specialized regional organizations, ensure that the objectives
following:
(a) the protection of national cultural values and the artistic heritage of States;
(b) protection of the quality of the environment in tourist sites;
c) the protection of populations against international delinquency.
CHAPTER III: COMMON RULES
Section 47
Within the framework of the work program mentioned in Article 7 of this Convention, and
without prejudice to the specific attributions of jurisdiction provided for in this Agreement or
that establishing the Monetary Union of Central Africa (UMAC), the Council of Ministers adopts,
unanimously, and on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, the common regulations mentioned in
Article 4 paragraph a) of this Convention.
These regulations may take the form of regulations, framework regulations or
guidelines. In the latter two cases, the Member States supplement their provisions and take
the necessary implementing acts, in accordance with their respective constitutional rules.
Section 48
As necessary, the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, adopts
by qualified majority, by way of regulation or directive, the implementing provisions
required.
TITLE III: THE MULTILATERAL SURVEILLANCE MECHANISM
Rule 49
The Economic Union ensures the convergence of economic performance and policies
with a view to achieving the objectives defined in Article 2 (b) of this Convention by means of
the multilateral surveillance system, the terms of which are set out in Articles 55 and 61.
WT/COMTD/24
page 18
The Member States agree within the Council of Ministers on the main guidelines
of economic policy which they undertake to respect by harmonizing and coordinating their
national policies.
The monitoring exercise by the Council of Ministers consists in verifying, on the one hand, the
compliance of economic policies with these broad guidelines and, on the other hand, the consistency of
national policies with the common monetary policy.
The multilateral surveillance system is structured around the following four bodies:
(a) one national cell per Member State;
(b) a community cell;
(c) a Supervisory College;
d) the Council of Ministers.
Section 50
The Executive Secretary ensures the implementation and compliance with the monitoring procedure
multilateral agreement referred to in Article 49 of this Convention. It performs this task by
regular consultation with the Governor of the Bank of Central African States (BEAC).
The documentation and analyzes intended for the exercise of multilateral surveillance by the
Council of Ministers, are prepared by the national cells and the community cell.
Each national unit includes at least one representative of the administration in charge
formulation of macro-economic policy, a representative of the administration responsible for
statistics and a local BEAC representative. The members of the national cells are designated
by the States concerned and by the BEAC as far as its representative is concerned. Their mandate is to
three years renewable. Within the exclusive framework of their mandate, they are authorized to communicate between
them, with the members of the other national cells and the community cell. The states
members undertake to provide them with the stability and independence necessary for the proper exercise of their
assignment.
The community unit is chaired by the Executive Secretary and includes at least one
representative of BEAC, appointed by the Governor and a macro-economist from UEAC, appointed by
the Executive Secretary.
Section 51
The national units are responsible for collecting and making consistent the data
national statistics on the basis of which monitoring is carried out, to transmit them to the unit
regional in the forms and frequencies set by the Supervisory College, to verify their
coverage and relevance. They follow the evolution of the economy and economic policies.
They inform the regional unit of any decision or event relating to economic policy
of their state. They write periodic analysis reports for their authorities and the cell
community. They examine for their authorities the periodic report of the unit
community.
WT/COMTD/24
page 19
The community unit is responsible for gathering
and environment data
international and of Community interest relevant to the exercise of supervision,
transmit to the national cells in the forms and frequencies set by the College of
Surveillance. It periodically writes the execution report of the surveillance on the state of the
convergence in the Economic Union. This report analyzes the economies and policies of the States
members of the Economic Union from the point of view of convergence and their compliance with the major
guidance and community discipline.
It takes into account any adjustment programs in force at Union level
Economic and Member States. It is communicated to the national cells for examination in
Supervisory College and forwarded to the Council of Ministers.
Section 52
The Supervisory College meets at least twice a year when convened by the Secretary
Executive in order to prepare the meetings of the Council of Ministers relating to the exercise of the
multilateral surveillance. The Supervisory College ensures the proper functioning of the cell
community and national cells.
It is made up of two representatives per national unit appointed in a personal capacity and two
representatives of the community unit, including one from the BEAC and another from the UEAC. It is chaired
by the Executive Secretary.
Section 53
On the report of the Executive Secretary, the Council of Ministers, after consulting the College of
Monitoring, pronouncing at least once a year on the main orientations of the policies
economies of the Member States and of the Economic Union. To this end, it addresses, on the proposal of the
Executive Secretary, recommendations to Member States.
These recommendations aim in particular to ensure the compatibility of these policies with
level of the Economic Union with the objectives of growth and employment, price stability and
viability of Member States' balances of payments.
The Governments of the Member States of the Economic Union inform the Secretary
Executive of any national decision likely to modify the fundamental data of their
economies or those of the Economic Union.
Section 54
Within the framework of the Economic Union, and for the purposes of multilateral surveillance, the
budgetary laws of the Member States are harmonized during the first stage of the
construction of the Economic Union.
Also harmonized are national accounts and macro-economic data
necessary for the exercise of multilateral surveillance. To this end, a particular priority is
assigned to the standardization of the statistical field of the public sector according to the methodologies
internationally accepted in this field.
The Council of Ministers, acting by qualified majority and on the proposal of the Secretary
Executive, adopts the regulations and directives necessary for the implementation of the provisions of the
previous paragraphs. It determines an application schedule.
WT/COMTD/24
page 20
Section 55
To ensure the coordination of the economic policies of the Member States, the procedure for
multilateral surveillance is based on surveillance indicators and a set of variables
included in a macro-economic dashboard to monitor and interpret developments
States and the Economic Union.
Member States refrain from any excessive public deficit. They stick to this area
to observe budgetary discipline.
A budget deficit is qualified as excessive in particular when it is not compatible with the
objectives of monetary policy, in particular with regard to its financing and the rate of
outer cover of the monetary issue.
The deficit may also be qualified as excessive when one of the following monitoring criteria
is not respected:
- a positive primary budget balance;
- a negative or zero change in the stock of domestic and external arrears;
- an annual percentage change in the public service payroll
equal to or less than the percentage change in budget revenue.
The Council of Ministers adopts, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary and after consultation
of the Supervisory College, other supervision criteria which reflect the excessive nature of the
deficit to strengthen fiscal discipline.
With a view to clarifying Community discipline and the convergence of policies, the Council
of Ministers, on a proposal from the Supervisory College, may assign certain indicators of
monitoring a critical value used to trigger the specific procedures defined in article 59.
The choice of monitoring indicators and that of the variables that make up the table of
edge is operated collectively by the national cells and the community cell, under the
presidency of the Executive Secretary.
Section 56
Member States limit disparities in the structure
e of their tax deductions. the
Council of Ministers, acting by a simple majority, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, adopts
recommendations to this effect.
Member States shall ensure that their internal and external debt is under control and notify
BEAC and the Executive Secretary with information relating to their internal and external debt. The
BEAC lends its assistance to the Member States, which so wish, in the negotiation or for the
manage their debt.
Member States are reviewing their price and income policies with a view to
coordinate and harmonize them and prevent them from harming the development of the offer and
the economic environment. On the proposal of the Executive Secretary, the Council of Ministers
examine in particular to what extent, within one or more Member States, the actions of
economic, social or professional groups are likely to thwart the achievement of
WT/COMTD/24
page 21
economic policy objectives of the Union. It adopts, acting by a simple majority, and on
proposal of the Executive Secretary, recommendations and opinions to this effect.
Section 57
In order to accomplish their tasks, the national cells are provided, from the resources
budgets of the Economic Union, means of communication allowing them to exchange
freely among themselves and with the community cell their respective information and analyses.
The authentic statistical data for the Union's multilateral surveillance exercise
Economic are those adopted by the Supervisory Board.
Section 58
Where a Member State is experiencing difficulties or a serious threat of serious difficulties in
due to exceptional events, the Council of Ministers, acting unanimously on the proposal of the
Executive Secretary, may exempt for a maximum period of six months that Member State from compliance
all or part of the requirements set out in the context of the monitoring procedure
multilateral.
The Council of Ministers may address to the Member State concerned directives relating to the
measures to be implemented.
Before the end of the six-month period mentioned in the first paragraph of this article, the
Executive Secretary reports to the Council of Ministers on the evolution of the situation in the State
member and on the implementation of the directives addressed to him. In the light of this report, the Council
of Ministers may decide unanimously, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, to extend the period
exemption by setting a new deadline.
Section 59
When a Member State conducts economic policies which do not respect the major
guidelines referred to in Article 49, or which ignore the recommendations of the Council of Ministers, or
which result in exceeding the critical values of the standardized monitoring indicators, or
through non-compliance with the commitments made under the adjustment programs, the Council of
Ministers, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary, adopts by a qualified majority of its members a
directive to that Member State.
If the Council of Ministers has not been able to meet the majority conditions
necessary for the adoption of a directive, the Executive Secretary makes his proposal public.
Section 60
The Member State to which a directive from the Council of Ministers is addressed draws up in consultation
with the Executive Secretary and within 45 days an appropriate adjustment program.
The Executive Secretary verifies the conformity of this program with the directive of the Council of
Ministers as well as with the economic policy of the Economic Union and ensure that it takes into account
other adjustment programs that may be in force.
The effective implementation of a program recognized as compliant opens up to the Member State
concerned the benefit of positive measures. These include in particular:
WT/COMTD/24
page 22
- publication of a press release from the Executive Secretariat;
- the support of the Economic Union in the mobilization of additional resources
necessary to finance the recommended adjustment measures.
To carry out this last task, the Executive Secretary puts in place a framework of
negotiation with the international financial community and uses all the means at its disposal
available to support the Member State concerned in the consultations and negotiations which are
businesses.
Section 61
If a Member State has not been able to draw up an appropriate adjustment program within the prescribed period
to Article 60 above, if the Executive Secretary has not recognized the compliance of the program
of adjustment with the directive of the Council of Ministers and with the economic policy of the Union, if
finally, the Executive Secretary notes the unsatisfactory non-execution of the corrective program, he transmits
within a maximum period of 30 days to the Council of Ministers a report possibly accompanied by
penalty proposals.
Consideration of proposals for
penalties mentioned below is registered as of right in
the agenda of a session of the Council of Ministers by the Executive Secretary.
The principle and the nature of the sanctions are the subject of separate deliberations. The penalties are
taken and modified by a simple majority of the members of the Council of Ministers.
Sanctions that may be adopted include:
- the publication by the Council of Ministers of a press release, possibly accompanied
information on the situation in the Member State concerned;
- the publicly announced withdrawal of support from which the State may have benefited
member.
The Council of Ministers, acting by a simple majority on the proposal of the Executive Secretary,
may supplement the positive or negative sanctions with additional provisions deemed
necessary to enhance the effectiveness of the monitoring process.
TITLE IV: INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS OF THE ECONOMIC UNION
CHAPTER I: DECISION-MAKING BODIES
Section I: The Conference of Heads of State
Section 62
The Conference of Heads of State, instituted by the CEMAC Treaty and governed by articles 3
et seq. of the Addendum to the said Treaty relating to the institutional and legal system of the Community,
adopt the acts for which this Convention confers upon it the competence.
WT/COMTD/24
page 23
Section II: The UEAC Council of Ministers
Section 63
The UEAC Council of Ministers, established by the CEMAC Treaty and governed by the
articles 8 et seq. of the above-mentioned Addendum, ensures the management of the Economic Union, through the exercise of
powers conferred on it by this Convention.
Section 64
At their request or on the initiative of the President of the Council of Ministers, representatives
duly accredited international organizations and States with which Member States have
entered into cooperation agreements or agreements concerning the management of their economic policy and
financial, may be heard by the Board during the examination of questions relating to the missions
devolved to the Economic Union.
Section 65
At each meeting of the Council of Ministers, the President strives to reach a
consensus on the decisions that the Council of Ministers is called upon to take.
When the President finds that a consensus is not achievable, he decides to proceed with a
vote according to the applicable rules for the subject to which the deliberation relates. In this case, each
Member State may request that the vote be postponed to the next meeting of the Council of Ministers.
At this second meeting, the vote can only be postponed by a simple majority of States
members.
Section 66
When the Convention provides that the Council of Ministers decides by a simple majority, the
deliberations of the Board are acquired by the majority of its members, in compliance
of the provisions of Article 65 above. Each Member State has one vote.
When the Convention provides that the Council of Ministers decides by qualified majority, the
deliberations of the Board are acquired by a majority of five-sixths of its members, in compliance
of the provisions of Article 65 above. Each Member State has one vote.
Where the Convention provides that the Council of Ministers shall act unanimously, the
Abstentions by members of the Board present are not taken into consideration.
Section 67
Between meetings of the Council of Ministers and in case of emergency, a procedure
written consultation at home can be implemented by its President.
Section 68
For matters not primarily relating to economic and financial policy, and
by way of derogation from article 9 of the Addendum to the Treaty, the Council of Ministers may convene in formation
ad hoc the competent ministers. In this case, the acquired deliberations become final after
that the Council of Ministers has noted its compatibility with the economic and financial policy
of the Economic Union.
WT/COMTD/24
page 24
Section 69
The Council of Ministers may delegate part of its powers to its President or to the
Executive Secretary.
Section III: The Interstate Committee
Section 70
The deliberations of the Council of Ministers are prepared by an Inter-State committee.
The Interstate Committee examines and gives opinions on the proposals on the agenda
of the Council of Ministers.
The Inter-State Committee is composed of a titular representative and a substitute appointed by
each Member State for a term of three years. Officials of the Executive Secretariat and
representatives of CEMAC specialized organizations may attend Committee meetings.
The Inter-State Committee may, as needed, call on experts chosen because of
of their competence.
The Inter-State Committee is chaired by the representative of the Member State holding the presidency.
of the Council of Ministers. It can only deliberate validly if at least four States are
represented. The secret
Executive and representatives of specialized organizations do not take
take part in the vote.
Section IV: The executive body of UEAC
Section 71
The functioning of the Economic Union is placed under the responsibility of the Secretary
Executive in accordance with Articles 16 to 19 of the Addendum to the CEMAC Treaty.
The Executive Secretary:
- exercises, with a view to the proper functioning of the Economic Union, the powers
conferred on it by this Convention;
- transmits to the Conference of Heads of State and to the Council of Ministers
proposals, recommendations and opinions necessary or useful for the application of the
this Convention and the functioning of the Economic Union;
- exercises, under the control of the Council of Ministers, the power to execute acts
adopted by it;
- executes the budget of the Economic Union;
- ensure the application by the Member States or their nationals of the provisions of
this Convention and of the acts adopted by the organs of the Economic Union in
virtue thereof;
- represents the Economic Union vis-à-vis third parties;
WT/COMTD/24
page 25
- draws up a report on the functioning of the Economic Union which it submits, together with
in the opinion of the Council of Ministers, to the Community Parliament;
- ensures the publication of the Official Bulletin of the Community.
Section 72
The Executive Secretary proposes for adoption by the Council of Ministers the organization chart of the
Economic Union services. He recruits and appoints to the various jobs within the limits of the positions
open budgets.
CHAPTER II: CONTROL OF THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ECONOMIC UNION
Section 73
Jurisdictional and budgetary control of activities falling within the scope of the Economic Union is
provided by the Community Court of Justice; this comprises a Judicial Chamber and a
Chamber of Accounts.
The Community Court of Justice is governed by a specific Convention.
Section 74
The Judicial Chamber of the Community hears disputes related to the implementation of the
Convention governing the Economic Union of Central Africa.
Section 75
The Community Accounts Chamber examines the accounts of the Economic Union,
in accordance with the procedures provided for in its statute.
Section 76
In order to ensure the reliability of the budgetary data necessary for the organization of the
multilateral surveillance of budgetary policies, each Member State takes the necessary
necessary arrangements so that, no later than one year after the entry into force of this
Convention, all of its accounts can be audited according to procedures offering the guarantees
transparency and independence required. These procedures must in particular make it possible to check
the reliability of the data appearing in the initial and amending Finance Laws as well as in the
Settlement Laws.
The procedures open for this purpose, at the choice of each Member State, are as follows:
- have recourse to the control of the Chamber of Accounts of the Community;
- establish a national Court of Auditors which may, if necessary, call upon a
external audit system. This Court will transmit its observations to the Chamber of
Community Accounts.
WT/COMTD/24
page 26
Member States shall keep the Council of Ministers and the Executive Secretariat informed of
steps they have taken to comply without delay with this obligation. The Executive Secretariat
verifies that the guarantees of effectiveness of the chosen procedures are met.
The Council of Ministers adopts by qualified majority, on the proposal of the Executive Secretary
and after consulting the Audit Bench, the regulations and directives necessary for the implementation
of these provisions.
TITLE V: SPECIAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Section I: Special Provisions
Section 77
With a view to promoting the harmonious development of all Member States, within the framework
of the achievements of UDEAC, and to overcome the handicaps to economic and social integration
region constituted by being landlocked or insular, the Member States undertake to put in place
a development fund.
All the countries of the Union participate in the financing of the development fund.
The amount, contributions and use of the development fund are
determined by the Conference of Heads of State, on the proposal of the Council of Ministers.
Section 78
For the application of this Convention, the regime of legal acts is that laid down
Articles 20 et seq. of the Addendum to the CEMAC Treaty
Section 79
The budget of the Economic Union is integrated into the budget of the Community; It is
drawn up, adopted and executed in accordance with the provisions of articles 27 and following of the Addendum to the
Treaty.
Section 80
The status of civil servants of the Economic Union and the regime applicable to its other agents
are those defined in Article 40 of the Addendum to the CEMAC Treaty
Section 81
The provisions of this Convention shall not preclude any measures which a State may
be required to take in the event of
serious internal disturbances affecting public order, as well as in the event of
war or serious international tension constituting a threat of war.
In this case, the Member States shall consult each other as a matter of urgency with a view to taking joint
provisions necessary to prevent the functioning of the Economic Union from being affected by
such measures.
__________
WT/COMTD/24
page 27
Section II: Final Provisions
Section 82
This Convention shall be ratified on the initiative of the High Contracting Parties, in
accordance with their respective constitutional rules. The instruments of ratification will be
deposited with the Government of the Republic of Chad, which will inform the other States and their
will issue a certified true copy.
This Convention shall enter into force and apply in the territory of each of the States
signatories from the first day of the month following the deposit of the instrument of ratification of the State
signatory who will carry out this formality last. However, if the deposit takes place less than 15 days
before the beginning of the following month, the entry into force of the Addendum will be postponed to the first day of
second month following the date of this filing.

