FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE EUROPEAN UNION
AND THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
The European Union, hereinafter referred to as "the Union",
and
the Republic of Singapore, hereinafter referred to as "Singapore",
hereinafter jointly referred to as the "Parties" or individually referred to as a "Party",
RECOGNISING their longstanding and strong partnership based on the common principles and
values reflected in the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, and their important economic, trade
and investment relationship;
DESIRING to further strengthen their relationship as part of and in a manner coherent with their
overall relations, and convinced that this Agreement will create a new climate for the development
of trade and investment between the Parties;
RECOGNISING that this Agreement will complement and promote regional economic integration
efforts;
DETERMINED to strengthen their economic, trade, and investment relations in accordance with
the objective of sustainable development, in its economic, social and environmental dimensions,
and to promote trade and investment in a manner mindful of high levels of environmental and
labour protection and relevant internationally-recognised standards and agreements to which they
are party;
EU/SG/en 3
DESIRING to raise living standards, promote economic growth and stability, create new
employment opportunities and improve the general welfare and, to this end, reaffirming their
commitment to promoting trade and investment liberalisation;
CONVINCED that this Agreement will create an expanded and secure market for goods and
services, thus enhancing the competitiveness of their firms in global markets;
REAFFIRMING each Party's right to adopt and enforce measures necessary to pursue legitimate
policy objectives such as social, environmental, security, public health and safety, promotion and
protection of cultural diversity;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to the Charter of the United Nations signed in San Francisco on
26 June 1945 and having regard to the principles articulated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December 1948;
RECOGNISING the importance of transparency in international trade to the benefit of all
stakeholders;
SEEKING to establish clear and mutually advantageous rules governing their trade and investment
and to reduce or eliminate the barriers to mutual trade and investment;
EU/SG/en 4
RESOLVED to contribute to the harmonious development and expansion of international trade by
removing obstacles to trade through this Agreement and to avoid creating new barriers to trade or
investment between the Parties that could reduce the benefits of this Agreement;
BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement and other
multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements and arrangements to which they are party,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
EU/SG/en 5
CHAPTER ONE
OBJECTIVES AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 1.1
Establishment of a Free Trade Area
The Parties to this Agreement hereby establish a free trade area, consistent with Article XXIV of
GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS.
ARTICLE 1.2
Objectives
The objectives of this Agreement are to liberalise and facilitate trade and investment between the
Parties in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 6
ARTICLE 1.3
Definitions of General Application
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:
"Agreement on Agriculture" means the Agreement on Agriculture contained in Annex 1A of the
WTO Agreement;
"Agreement on Government Procurement" means the Agreement on Government Procurement
contained in Annex 4 of the WTO Agreement;
"Agreement on Preshipment Inspection" means the Agreement on Preshipment Inspection
contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;
"Anti-Dumping Agreement" means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;
"Customs Valuation Agreement" means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;
"day" means a calendar day;
EU/SG/en 7
"DSU" means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes
contained in Annex 2 of the WTO Agreement;
"GATS" means the General Agreement on Trade in Services contained in Annex 1B of the WTO
Agreement;
"GATT 1994" means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 contained in Annex 1A of
the WTO Agreement;
"Harmonized System" means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System,
including all legal notes and amendments thereto (hereinafter also referred to as the "HS");
"IMF" means the International Monetary Fund;
"Import Licensing Agreement" means the Agreement on Import Licencing Procedures contained in
Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;
"measure" means any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice;
"natural person of a Party" means a national of Singapore, or of one of the Member States of the
Union1, according to their respective legislation;
 1 The term "natural person" includes natural persons permanently residing in Latvia who are
not citizens of Latvia or any other state but who are entitled, under the laws and regulations of
Latvia, to receive a non-citizen's passport (Alien's Passport).
EU/SG/en 8
"Partnership and Cooperation Agreement" means the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement
between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Singapore,
of the other part, signed in Brussels, Belgium on 19 October 2018;
"person" means a natural person or a juridical person;
"Safeguards Agreement" means the Agreement on Safeguards contained in Annex 1A of the WTO
Agreement;
"SCM Agreement" means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures contained in
Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;
"SPS Agreement" means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;
"TBT Agreement" means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade contained in Annex 1A of
the WTO Agreement;
"TRIPS Agreement" means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights contained in Annex 1C of the WTO Agreement;
"WIPO" means the World Intellectual Property Organization;
"WTO" means the World Trade Organization; and
"WTO Agreement" means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.
EU/SG/en 9
CHAPTER TWO
NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS FOR GOODS
SECTION A
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 2.1
Objective
The Parties shall progressively and reciprocally liberalise trade in goods over a transitional period
starting from the entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with this Agreement and in
conformity with Article XXIV of GATT 1994.
ARTICLE 2.2
Scope
This Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties.
EU/SG/en 10
ARTICLE 2.3
National Treatment
Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with
Article III of GATT 1994, including its Notes and Supplementary Provisions. To this end, the
obligations contained in Article III of GATT 1994, including its Notes and Supplementary
Provisions, are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 2.4
Customs Duty
For the purposes of this Chapter, a customs duty includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed
on or in connection with the importation or exportation of a good, including any form of surtax or
surcharge imposed on or in connection with such importation or exportation.
A customs duty does not include any:
(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with Article 2.3 (National
Treatment);
(b) duty imposed consistently with Chapter Three (Trade Remedies);
EU/SG/en 11
(c) duties applied consistently with Article VI, Article XVI, Article XIX of GATT 1994, the
Anti-Dumping Agreement, the SCM Agreement, Article 5 of the Agreement on Agriculture
and the DSU; and
(d) fee or other charge imposed consistently with Article 2.10 (Fees and Formalities Connected
with Importation and Exportation).
ARTICLE 2.5
Classification of Goods
The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be governed by each Party's respective
tariff nomenclature in conformity with the HS and its amendments.
SECTION B
REDUCTION OR ELIMINATION OF CUSTOMS DUTIES
ARTICLE 2.6
Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties on Imports
1. Each Party shall reduce or eliminate its customs duties on imported goods originating in the
other Party in accordance with the Schedules set out in Annex 2-A. For the purposes of this
Chapter, "originating" means the origin of a good as determined in accordance with the rules of
origin and the other requirements set out in Protocol 1.
EU/SG/en 12
2. The base rate of customs duties on imports, to which the successive reductions are to be
applied under paragraph 1, shall be that specified in the Schedules in Annex 2-A.
3. If at any moment a Party reduces its applied most favoured nation (hereinafter referred to as
"MFN") customs duty rates on imports after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, that duty
rate shall apply if and for as long as it is lower than the customs duty rate on imports calculated in
accordance with its Schedule in Annex 2-A.
4. Three years after the entry into force of this Agreement, at the request of either Party, the
Parties shall consult to consider accelerating and broadening the scope of the reduction and
elimination of customs duties on imports. A decision by the Parties in the Committee on Trade in
Goods on such acceleration or broadening shall supersede any duty rate or staging category
determined pursuant to their Schedules for that good.
ARTICLE 2.7
Elimination of Customs Duties and Taxes on Exports
Neither Party shall maintain or institute any customs duty or tax on, or in connection with the
exportation or sale for export of, goods to the other Party, or any internal taxes on goods exported to
the other Party that are in excess of those imposed on like goods destined for internal sale.
EU/SG/en 13
ARTICLE 2.8
Standstill
Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party shall increase any existing customs duty,
or introduce any new customs duty, on the importation of a good originating in the other Party. This
shall not preclude either Party from raising a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule in
Annex 2-A following a unilateral reduction.
SECTION C
NON-TARIFF MEASURES
ARTICLE 2.9
Import and Export Restrictions
1. Neither Party shall adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any
good of the other Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory
of the other Party, in accordance with Article XI of GATT 1994, including its Notes and
Supplementary Provisions. To that end, Article XI of GATT 1994, including its Notes and
Supplementary Provisions are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
EU/SG/en 14
2. The Parties understand that, before taking any measures provided for in subparagraphs 2(a)
and 2(c) of Article XI of GATT 1994, the Party intending to take the measures shall supply the
other Party with all relevant information, with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties.
The Parties may agree on any means needed to put an end to the difficulties. If no agreement is
reached within 30 days of supplying such information, the exporting Party may apply measures
under this Article on the exportation of the good concerned. Where exceptional and critical
circumstances requiring immediate action make prior information or examination impossible, the
Party intending to take the measures may apply forthwith the precautionary measures necessary to
deal with the situation, and shall inform the other Party immediately thereof.
ARTICLE 2.10
Fees and Formalities Connected with Importation and Exportation
1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII of GATT 1994, including its Notes
and Supplementary Provisions, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than customs
duties, and measures listed in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article 2.4 (Customs Duty)) imposed
on, or in connection with the importation or exportation of, goods are limited in amount to the
approximate cost of services rendered, which shall not be calculated on an ad valorem basis, and
shall not represent an indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for
fiscal purposes.
EU/SG/en 15
2. Each Party shall make available, via an officially designated medium, including through the
internet, the fees and charges it imposes in connection with importation and exportation.
3. No Party shall require consular transactions1, including the payment of related fees and
charges, in connection with the importation of any good of the other Party.
ARTICLE 2.11
Import and Export Licensing Procedures
1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations under the Import Licensing Agreement.
2. The Parties shall introduce and administer any import or export licensing procedures2 in
accordance with:
(a) Paragraphs 1 to 9 of Article 1 of the Import Licensing Agreement;
 1 "Consular transactions" means the procedure of obtaining from a consul of the importing
Party in the territory of the exporting Party, or in the territory of a third party, a consular
invoice or a consular visa for a commercial invoice, certificate of origin, manifest, shippers'
export declaration or any other customs documentation in connection with the importation of
the good.
2 For the purposes of this Article, "non-automatic licensing procedures" means licensing
procedures where approval of the application is not granted for all legal and natural persons
who fulfil the requirements of the Party concerned for engaging in import or export operations
involving the goods subject to licensing procedures.
EU/SG/en 16
(b) Article 2 of the Import Licensing Agreement;
(c) Article 3 of the Import Licensing Agreement.
To that end, the provisions referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this paragraph are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement. The Parties shall apply those provisions,
mutatis mutandis, to any export licensing procedures.
3. Each Party shall ensure that all export licensing procedures are neutral in application and are
administered in a fair, equitable, non-discriminatory and transparent manner.
4. Each Party shall only adopt or maintain licensing procedures as a condition for the
importation into its territory or the exportation from its territory to the other Party where other
appropriate procedures to achieve an administrative purpose are not reasonably available.
5. Neither Party shall adopt or maintain non-automatic import or export licensing procedures
unless necessary to implement a measure that is consistent with this Agreement. A Party adopting
non-automatic licensing procedures shall clearly indicate the measure being implemented through
such licensing procedure.
6. A Party introducing export licensing procedures or changes in these procedures shall notify
the Committee on Trade in Goods 60 days in advance of the publication of those procedures. This
notification shall contain the information required under Article 5 of the Import Licensing
Agreement.
EU/SG/en 17
7. A Party shall respond within 60 days to enquiries from the other Party regarding any licensing
procedures which the Party to which the request is addressed intends to adopt or has adopted or
maintained, as well as the criteria for granting or allocating import or export licences.
ARTICLE 2.12
State Trading Enterprises
1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations under Article XVII of GATT 1994,
including its Notes and Supplementary Provisions, and the Understanding on the Interpretation of
Article XVII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1-A to the
WTO Agreement, which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.
2. Each Party may request information from the other Party as provided for in
subparagraphs 4(c) and 4(d) of Article XVII of GATT 1994.
EU/SG/en 18
ARTICLE 2.13
Elimination of Sectoral Non-Tariff Measures
1. The Parties shall undertake further commitments on sector-specific non-tariff measures on
goods as set out in Annex 2-B and Annex 2-C (hereinafter referred to as "Sectoral Annexes"). To
that end, the Parties may, by decision in the Committee on Trade in Goods, amend the Sectoral
Annexes.
2. At the request of a Party, the Parties shall enter into negotiations with the aim of broadening
the scope of their commitments on sector-specific non-tariff measures on goods.
SECTION D
SPECIFIC EXCEPTIONS RELATED TO GOODS
ARTICLE 2.14
General Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the taking of measures in accordance with Article XX of
GATT 1994, including its Notes and Supplementary Provisions, which are hereby incorporated into
and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
EU/SG/en 19
2. The Parties understand that, before taking any measures provided for in paragraphs (i) and (j)
of Article XX of GATT 1994, the exporting Party intending to take the measures shall provide the
other Party with all relevant information, with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties.
The Parties may agree on any means needed to put an end to the difficulties. If no agreement is
reached within 30 days, the exporting Party may apply measures under this Article on the
exportation of the good concerned. Where exceptional and critical circumstances requiring
immediate action make prior information or examination impossible, the Party intending to take the
measures may apply forthwith the precautionary measures necessary to deal with the situation and
shall inform the other Party immediately thereof.
SECTION E
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 2.15
Committee on Trade in Goods
1. The Committee on Trade in Goods established pursuant to Article 16.2 (Specialised
Committees) shall meet at the request of a Party or the Trade Committee to consider any matter
arising under this Chapter and comprise representatives of the Parties.
EU/SG/en 20
2. The Committee's functions shall include:
(a) monitoring the implementation of this Chapter and Annexes 2-A, 2-B and 2-C;
(b) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through consultations on accelerating
and broadening the scope of tariff elimination and broadening of the scope of commitments
on non-tariff measures under this Agreement, and on other issues as appropriate; as a result of
these consultations, the Committee may, by decision, amend or expand the Annexes 2-A, 2-B
and 2-C as required; and
(c) addressing tariff and non-tariff measures to trade in goods between the Parties, and, if
appropriate, referring such matters to the Trade Committee for its consideration.
EU/SG/en 21
CHAPTER THREE
TRADE REMEDIES
SECTION A
ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING MEASURES
ARTICLE 3.1
General Provisions
1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations arising under Article VI of GATT 1994, the
Anti-Dumping Agreement and the SCM Agreement, and shall apply anti-dumping and
countervailing measures in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. The Parties, recognising that anti-dumping and countervailing measures can be abused to
obstruct trade, agree that:
(a) such measures should be used in full compliance with the relevant WTO requirements, and
should be based on a fair and transparent system; and
(b) careful consideration should be given to the interests of the Party against which such a
measure is to be imposed.
EU/SG/en 22
3. For the purpose of this Section, the origin of the goods shall be determined in accordance with
the non-preferential rules of origin of the Parties.
ARTICLE 3.2
Transparency and Information Exchange
1. After receipt by a Party's competent authorities of a properly documented anti-dumping
application with respect to imports from the other Party, and no later than 15 days before initiating
an investigation, that Party shall provide written notification to the other Party of its receipt of the
application.
2. After receipt by a Party's competent authorities of a properly documented countervailing duty
application with respect to imports from the other Party, and no later than 15 days before initiating
an investigation, that Party shall provide written notification to the other Party of its receipt of the
application and shall afford the other Party the possibility to consult with its competent authorities
regarding the application, with a view to clarifying the factual situation and to arriving at a mutually
agreed solution. The Parties shall endeavour to hold these consultations as soon as possible
thereafter.
EU/SG/en 23
3. Both Parties shall ensure, immediately after any imposition of provisional measures, and in
any case before the final determination is made, full and meaningful disclosure of all essential facts
and considerations which form the basis for the decision to apply those measures. This is without
prejudice to Article 6.5 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement.
Any disclosure shall be made in writing, and shall allow interested parties sufficient time to make
their comments.
4. Each interested party shall be granted the possibility to be heard in order to express their
views during trade remedies investigations.
ARTICLE 3.3
Lesser Duty Rule
Should a Party decide to impose any anti-dumping or countervailing duty, the amount of such duty
shall not exceed the margin of dumping or countervailable subsidies, and it should be less than the
margin if such lesser duty would be adequate to remove the injury to the domestic industry.
EU/SG/en 24
ARTICLE 3.4
Consideration of Public Interest
Neither Party shall apply anti-dumping or countervailing measures where, on the basis of the
information made available during the investigation, it can clearly be concluded that it is not in the
public interest to apply such measures. Public interest shall take into account the situation of the
domestic industry, importers and their representative associations, representative users and
representative consumer organisations, to the extent they have provided relevant information to the
investigating authorities.
ARTICLE 3.5
Exclusion from Bilateral Dispute Settlement and Mediation Mechanism
The provisions of this Section shall not be subject to Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) and
Chapter Fifteen (Mediation Mechanism).
EU/SG/en 25
SECTION B
GLOBAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES
ARTICLE 3.6
General Provisions
1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994, the Safeguards
Agreement and Article 5 of the Agreement on Agriculture. Unless otherwise provided for in this
Section, this Agreement does not confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with
regard to actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.
2. No Party shall apply at the same time with respect to the same good both:
(a) a bilateral safeguard measure; and
(b) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.
3. For the purposes of this Section, the origin of the goods shall be determined in accordance
with the non-preferential rules of origin of the Parties.
EU/SG/en 26
ARTICLE 3.7
Transparency
1. Notwithstanding Article 3.6 (General Provisions), at the request of the other Party, and
provided that the latter has a substantial interest, a Party, when initiating a safeguard investigation
or when intending to take safeguard measures, shall immediately provide, at least seven days in
advance of the date of such initiation or imposition, ad hoc written notification of all pertinent
information leading to the initiation of a safeguard investigation or the imposition of safeguard
measures, including on the provisional findings and the final findings of the investigation, where
relevant. This is without prejudice to Article 3.2 of the Safeguards Agreement.
2. When imposing safeguard measures, the Parties shall endeavour to impose them in a way that
least affects their bilateral trade.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, if a Party considers that the legal requirements are met for
the imposition of definitive safeguard measures, and it intends to apply such measures, it shall
notify the other Party and give that Party the possibility of holding bilateral consultations. If no
satisfactory solution has been reached within 30 days of the notification, the importing Party may
adopt the definitive safeguard measures. The possibility of consultations should also be offered to
the other Party in order to exchange views on the information referred to in paragraph 1.
EU/SG/en 27
ARTICLE 3.8
Exclusion from Bilateral Dispute Settlement and Mediation Mechanism
The provisions of this Section shall not be subject to Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) and
Chapter Fifteen (Mediation Mechanism).
SECTION C
BILATERAL SAFEGUARD CLAUSE
ARTICLE 3.9
Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:
(a) "serious injury" and "threat of serious injury" shall be understood in accordance with
subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(b) of Article 4 of the Safeguards Agreement and to that end,
subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(b) of Article 4 of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into
and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis; and
(b) "transition period" means a period of ten years from the entry into force of this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 28
ARTICLE 3.10
Application of Bilateral Safeguard Measure
1. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement,
originating goods of a Party are being imported into the territory of the other Party in such increased
quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such conditions as to
cause or threaten to cause serious injury to a domestic industry producing like or directly
competitive goods, the importing Party may, during the transition period only, adopt measures
provided for in paragraph 2 in accordance with the conditions and procedures laid down in this
Section.
2. The importing Party may take a bilateral safeguard measure which:
(a) suspends further reductions of the rate of customs duty on the good concerned provided for
under Annex 2-A; or
(b) increases the rate of customs duty on the good concerned to a level which does not exceed the
lesser of:
(i) the MFN applied rate of customs duty on the good in effect at the time the measure is
taken; or
(ii) the base rate of customs duty specified in the Schedules included in Annex 2-A pursuant
to paragraph 2 of Article 2.6 (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties on Imports).
EU/SG/en 29
ARTICLE 3.11
Conditions and Limitations
1. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing of the initiation of an investigation described in
paragraph 2 and consult with the other Party as far in advance of applying a bilateral safeguard
measure as practicable, with a view to:
(a) reviewing the information arising from the investigation and whether the conditions laid out
in this Article are met;
(b) exchanging views on the measure and its appropriateness in light of the objectives of this
Section to remove serious injury or threat thereof to domestic industry caused by an increase
in imports as set out in paragraph 1 of Article 3.10 (Application of Bilateral Safeguard
Measure); and
(c) exchanging preliminary views on compensation as set out in Article 3.13 (Compensation).
2. A Party shall only apply a bilateral safeguard measure following an investigation by its
competent authorities in accordance with Articles 3, 4.2(a) and 4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement.
To that end, Articles 3, 4.2(a) and 4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
EU/SG/en 30
3. The determination referred to in Article 3.10 (Application of Bilateral Safeguard Measure)
shall not be made unless the investigation demonstrates on the basis of objective evidence the
existence of a causal link between increased imports from the other party and serious injury or the
threat thereof. In this respect, due consideration shall be given to other factors, including imports of
the same product from other countries.
4. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete any such investigation within
one year of the date of its initiation.
5. Neither Party shall apply a bilateral safeguard measure as set out in paragraph 1 of
Article 3.10 (Application of Bilateral Safeguard Measure):
(a) except to the extent, and for such time, as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious
injury and to facilitate adjustment;
(b) for a period exceeding two years, except that that period may be extended by up to two years
if the competent authorities of the importing Party determine, in conformity with the
procedures specified in this Article, that the measure continues to be necessary to prevent or
remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment and that there is evidence that the industry
is adjusting, provided that the total period of application of a safeguard measure, including the
period of initial application and any extension thereof, shall not exceed four years; or
(c) beyond the expiration of the transition period, except with the consent of the other Party.
EU/SG/en 31
6. No measure shall be applied again to the import of the same good during the transition period,
unless a period of time equal to half of the period during which the safeguard measure was applied
previously has elapsed. In this case, paragraph 3 of Article 3.13 (Compensation) shall not apply.
7. When a Party terminates a bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of customs duty shall be the
rate that, according to its Schedule included in Annex 2-A, would have been in effect but for the
measure.
ARTICLE 3.12
Provisional Measures
1. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that would be difficult to repair, a
Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a provisional basis pursuant to a preliminary
determination that there is clear evidence that imports of an originating good from the other Party
have increased as the result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement,
and that such imports cause serious injury, or the threat thereof, to the domestic industry. The
duration of any provisional measure shall not exceed 200 days, during which time the Party shall
comply with the requirements of paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 3.11 (Conditions and Limitations).
The Party shall promptly refund any tariff increases if the investigation described in paragraph 2 of
Article 3.11 (Conditions and Limitations) does not result in a finding that the requirements of
Article 3.10 (Application of Bilateral Safeguard Measure) are met. The duration of any provisional
measure shall be counted as part of the period prescribed by subparagraph 5(b) of Article 3.11
(Conditions and Limitations).
EU/SG/en 32
2. If a Party takes a provisional measure pursuant to this Article, that Party shall notify the other
Party in writing prior to taking such measure, and shall initiate consultations with the other Party
immediately after such measure is taken.
ARTICLE 3.13
Compensation
1. A Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall consult with the other Party in order to
mutually agree on appropriate trade liberalising compensation in the form of concessions having
substantially equivalent trade effects or in the form of concessions equivalent to the value of the
additional duties expected to result from the safeguard measure. The Party applying a bilateral
safeguard measure shall provide an opportunity for such consultations no later than 30 days after
the application of the bilateral safeguard measure.
2. If the consultations under paragraph 1 do not result in an agreement on trade liberalising
compensation within 30 days after the consultations begin, the Party whose goods are subject to the
safeguard measure may suspend the application of substantially equivalent concessions to the Party
applying the safeguard measure. The exporting Party shall notify the other Party in writing at least
30 days before suspending concessions under this paragraph.
3. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be exercised for the first
24 months during which a bilateral safeguard measure is in effect, provided that the safeguard
measure conforms to the provisions of this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 33
CHAPTER FOUR
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE
ARTICLE 4.1
Objectives
The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate and increase trade in goods between the Parties, by
providing a framework to prevent, identify and eliminate unnecessary barriers to trade within the
scope of the TBT Agreement.
ARTICLE 4.2
Scope and Definitions
1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of all standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures, as defined in Annex 1 of the TBT Agreement,
which may affect trade in goods between the Parties, regardless of the origin of those goods.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Chapter does not apply to:
(a) purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies for production or consumption
requirements of such bodies; or
EU/SG/en 34
(b) sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as defined in Annex A of the SPS Agreement, which are
covered by Chapter Five of this Agreement.
3. For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of Annex 1 to the TBT Agreement shall
apply.
ARTICLE 4.3
Affirmation of the TBT Agreement
The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under the TBT
Agreement, which is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 4.4
Joint Cooperation
1. The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field of standards, technical regulations
and conformity assessment procedures, with a view to increasing the mutual understanding of their
respective systems and to facilitating access to their respective markets.
EU/SG/en 35
2. The Parties shall seek to identify and develop regulatory cooperation initiatives appropriate
for the particular issues or sectors, which may include but are not limited to:
(a) exchanging information and experiences on the preparation and application of their technical
regulations and the use of good regulatory practice;
(b) simplifying, where appropriate, technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment
procedures;
(c) avoiding unnecessary divergence in their approaches to technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures, and working towards the possibility of convergence or alignment of
technical regulations with international standards;
(d) encouraging cooperation between their respective bodies, whether public or private, that are
responsible for metrology, standardisation, testing, certification and accreditation;
(e) ensuring efficient interaction of regulatory authorities at national, regional and international
levels, for instance, by referring enquiries from a Party to the appropriate regulatory
authorities; and
(f) exchanging information on developments in relevant regional and multilateral fora related to
standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.
3. Upon request, a Party shall give appropriate consideration to proposals that the other Party
makes for cooperation under the terms of this Chapter.
EU/SG/en 36
ARTICLE 4.5
Standards
1. The Parties affirm their obligations under Article 4.1 of the TBT Agreement to ensure that
their standardising bodies accept and comply with the Code of Good Practice for the Preparation,
Adoption and Application of Standards in Annex 3 to the TBT Agreement.
2. With a view to harmonising standards on as wide a basis as possible, each Party shall
encourage its standardising bodies, as well as the regional standardising bodies of which they or
their standardising bodies are Members, to cooperate with the relevant standardisation bodies of the
other Party in international standardisation activities.
3. The Parties undertake to exchange information on:
(a) their use of standards in support of technical regulations;
(b) each other's standardisation processes, and the extent of use of international standards or
regional standards as a base for their national standards; and
(c) cooperation agreements implemented by either Party on standardisation, provided the
information can be made available to the public.
EU/SG/en 37
ARTICLE 4.6
Technical Regulations
The Parties agree to make best use of good regulatory practice with regard to the preparation,
adoption and application of technical regulations, as provided for in the TBT Agreement including:
(a) considering, when developing a technical regulation, inter alia, the impact of the envisaged
technical regulation and the available regulatory and non-regulatory alternatives to the
proposed technical regulation which may fulfil the Party's legitimate objectives;
(b) using, consistent with Article 2.4 of the TBT Agreement and to the maximum extent possible,
relevant international standards as a basis for their technical regulations, except when such
international standards would be an ineffective or inappropriate means for the fulfilment of
the legitimate objectives pursued; where international standards have not been used as a basis,
to explain upon request to the other Party the reasons why such standards have been
considered inappropriate or ineffective for the aim pursued; and
(c) specifying, consistent with Article 2.8 of the TBT Agreement and wherever appropriate,
technical regulations based on product requirements in terms of performance rather than in
terms of design or descriptive characteristics.
EU/SG/en 38
ARTICLE 4.7
Conformity Assessment Procedures
1. The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exist to facilitate the acceptance of
the results of conformity assessment procedures, including:
(a) the importing Party's reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity;
(b) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures with
respect to specific technical regulations conducted by bodies located in the territory of the
other Party;
(c) the use of accreditation procedures to qualify conformity assessment bodies;
(d) government designation of conformity assessment bodies, including bodies located in the
territory of the other Party;
(e) unilateral recognition by a Party of the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted
in the territory of the other Party;
(f) voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies in the respective territories of
each Party; and
EU/SG/en 39
(g) the use of regional or international multilateral recognition agreements and arrangements of
which the Parties are parties.
2. Having regard, in particular, to those considerations, the Parties shall:
(a) intensify their exchange of information regarding these and other mechanisms, with a view to
facilitating the acceptance of conformity assessment results;
(b) exchange information on the criteria used to select appropriate conformity assessment
procedures for specific products and, in line with Article 5.1.2 of the TBT Agreement, require
that conformity assessment procedures shall not be more strict or be applied more strictly than
is necessary to give the importing Party adequate confidence that products conform with the
applicable technical regulations or standards, taking account of the risks non-conformity
would create;
(c) exchange information on accreditation policies and consider how to make the best use of
international standards for accreditation and the best use of international agreements involving
the Parties' accreditation bodies, for example through the mechanisms of the International
Laboratory Accreditation Co-operation and the International Accreditation Forum; and
(d) ensure that, insofar as two or more conformity assessment bodies are authorised by a Party to
carry out conformity assessment procedures required for placing the product on the market,
economic operators may choose among them.
EU/SG/en 40
3. The Parties reaffirm their obligation under Article 5.2.5 of the TBT Agreement that fees
imposed for mandatory conformity assessment of imported products shall be equitable in relation to
any fees chargeable for assessing the conformity of like products of national origin or originating in
any other country, taking into account communication, transportation and other costs arising from
differences between location of facilities of the applicant and the conformity assessment body.
4. Upon request by either Party, the Parties may decide to engage in consultations with a view to
defining sectoral initiatives regarding the use of conformity assessment procedures or the
facilitation of acceptance of conformity assessment results that are appropriate for the respective
sectors. The Party making the request should substantiate it with relevant information on how this
sectoral initiative would facilitate trade between the Parties. In these consultations, all mechanisms
described in paragraph 1 may be considered. Where a Party declines such a request from the other
Party, it shall, upon request, explain its reasons.
ARTICLE 4.8
Transparency
The Parties reaffirm their transparency obligations under the TBT Agreement with regard to the
preparation, adoption and application of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures, and agree:
(a) where a part of the process of developing a technical regulation is open to public consultation,
to take the other Party's views into account and, without discrimination, to provide reasonable
opportunities for the other Party and its interested persons to make comments;
EU/SG/en 41
(b) when making notifications in accordance with Article 2.9 of the TBT Agreement, to allow at
least 60 days following the notification for the other Party to provide comments in writing on
the proposal and where practicable, to give appropriate consideration to reasonable requests
for extending the comment period;
(c) to allow sufficient time between the publication of technical regulations and their entry into
force for economic operators of the other Party to adapt, except where urgent problems of
safety, health, environmental protection or national security arise or threaten to arise; and
(d) to make available to the other Party or its economic operators relevant information (for
example through a public website, if available) on technical regulations, standards and
conformity assessment procedures in force and, as appropriate and available, written guidance
on compliance with its technical regulations, upon request and without undue delay.
ARTICLE 4.9
Market Surveillance
The Parties undertake to exchange information on market surveillance and enforcement activities.
EU/SG/en 42
ARTICLE 4.10
Marking and Labelling
1. The Parties note that, according to paragraph 1 of Annex 1 of the TBT Agreement, a technical
regulation may include or deal exclusively with marking or labelling requirements, and they agree,
where their technical regulations contain mandatory marking or labelling, to ensure that such
regulations are not prepared with a view to, or with the effect of, creating unnecessary obstacles to
international trade, and that such regulations are not more trade restrictive than necessary to fulfil a
legitimate objective, as referred to under Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement.
2. The Parties agree that where a Party requires the mandatory marking or labelling of products:
(a) that Party shall endeavour to restrict its requirements only to those which are relevant for
consumers or users of the product or are relevant to indicate the product's conformity with the
mandatory requirements;
(b) that Party may specify the information to be provided on the label, and may require
compliance with certain regulatory requirements for the affixing of the label, but shall not
require any prior approval or certification of labels and markings as a precondition for sale of
the products on its market, unless this is deemed necessary in the light of the risk of the
product to human, animal or plant health or life;
EU/SG/en 43
(c) where that Party requires the use of a unique identification number by economic operators,
that Party shall ensure that such numbers are issued to the relevant economic operators
without undue delay and on a non-discriminatory basis;
(d) provided it is not misleading, contradictory or confusing in relation to the information
required in the importing Party of the goods, that Party shall permit the following to be used
in the marking or labelling of products:
(i) information in other languages in addition to the information in the language required
by the importing Party of the goods;
(ii) internationally-accepted nomenclatures, pictograms, symbols or graphics; and
(iii) additional information to that required in the importing Party of the goods;
(e) that Party shall accept that labelling, including re-labelling and corrections to labelling, may
take place, where relevant, in authorised premises (for example, in customs warehouses at the
point of import) in the territory of the importing Party prior to the distribution and sale of the
product, as an alternative to labelling in the place of origin, unless such labelling in the place
of origin is required for reasons of public health or safety; and
(f) that Party shall endeavour, in cases where it considers that legitimate objectives under the
TBT Agreement are not compromised thereby, to accept non-permanent or detachable labels,
or marking or labelling in the accompanying documentation rather than physically attached to
the product.
EU/SG/en 44
3. Without prejudice to the Parties' rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement,
paragraph 2 shall apply to agricultural products, industrial products, and processed agricultural food
products, including beverages and spirits.
ARTICLE 4.11
Contact Points
The functions of the contact points designated in accordance with Article 13.4 (Enquiries and
Contact Points) shall include:
(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this Chapter;
(b) promptly addressing any issue that the other Party raises related to the development, adoption,
application or enforcement of standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment
procedures;
(c) enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement of standards, technical
regulations, and conformity assessment procedures;
(d) exchanging information on standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment
procedures;
EU/SG/en 45
(e) facilitating cooperation activities, as appropriate, in accordance with paragraph 2 of
Article 4.4 (Joint Cooperation); and
(f) arranging the establishment of ad hoc working groups at the request of either Party, in order
to explore ways to facilitate trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 4.12
Final Provisions
1. The Parties may discuss, in the Committee on Trade in Goods established pursuant to
Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees), any implementing arrangements arising from this Chapter.
The Parties may adopt, by decision in that Committee, any implementing measure required to this
effect.
2. The Parties have undertaken further commitments on sector-specific non-tariff measures on
goods as set out in Annex 4-A and the Appendices pertaining thereto.
EU/SG/en 46
CHAPTER FIVE
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
ARTICLE 5.1
Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are:
(a) to protect human, animal or plant life or health in the respective territories of the Parties while
facilitating trade between the Parties in the area of sanitary and phytosanitary measures
(hereinafter referred to as "SPS measures");
(b) to collaborate on the further implementation of the SPS Agreement; and
(c) to provide a means to improve communication, cooperation and resolution of issues related to
the implementation of SPS measures affecting trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 5.2
Scope
1. This Chapter applies to all SPS measures of a Party that may directly or indirectly affect trade
between the Parties.
EU/SG/en 47
2. This Chapter shall also apply to collaboration between the Parties on animal welfare matters
of mutual interest to the Parties.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of the Parties under the TBT Agreement with
respect to measures not within the scope of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 5.3
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) the definitions contained in Annex A of the SPS Agreement shall apply; and
(b) the Parties may agree on other definitions to be used in the application of this Chapter, taking
into consideration the glossaries and definitions of relevant international organisations, such
as the CODEX Alimentarius Commission (hereinafter referred to as "Codex Alimentarius"),
the World Organisation for Animal Health (hereinafter referred to as "OIE") and under the
International Plant Protection Convention (hereinafter referred to as "IPPC").
EU/SG/en 48
ARTICLE 5.4
Rights and Obligations
The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the SPS Agreement.
ARTICLE 5.5
Competent Authorities
The competent authorities of the Parties responsible for the implementation of this Chapter are set
out in Annex 5-A. The Parties shall notify each other of any changes to those competent authorities.
ARTICLE 5.6
General Principles
When implementing this Chapter, the Parties:
(a) shall ensure the consistency of SPS measures with the principles established by Article 3 of
the SPS Agreement;
(b) shall not use SPS measures to create unjustified barriers to trade;
EU/SG/en 49
(c) shall ensure that procedures established under this Chapter are undertaken and completed
without undue delay, and that such procedures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute an arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against the other Party, where identical
or similar conditions exist; and
(d) shall use neither the procedures referred to in subparagraph (c), nor any requests for additional
information, to delay access to their respective markets without scientific and technical
justification.
ARTICLE 5.7
Import Requirements
1. The import requirements of a Party shall apply to the entire territory of the other Party.
2. The exporting Party shall ensure that products exported to the importing Party meet the
sanitary and phytosanitary requirements of the importing Party.
3. The importing Party shall ensure that its import requirements are applied to products imported
from the exporting Party in a proportionate and non-discriminatory manner.
4. Any fees imposed for the procedures for products imported from the exporting Party shall be
equitable in relation to any fees charged for like domestic products and shall not be higher than the
actual cost of the service.
EU/SG/en 50
5. The importing Party shall have the right to carry out import checks on products imported from
the exporting Party for the purpose of implementing SPS measures.
6. The import checks carried out on products imported from the exporting Party shall be based
on the sanitary and phytosanitary risk associated with such imports. They shall be carried out
without undue delay and with minimum effect on trade between the Parties.
7. The importing Party shall make available to the exporting Party, upon request by the
exporting Party, information about the frequency of import checks carried out on products from the
exporting Party. The importing Party may change the frequency of physical checks on
consignments, where appropriate, as a consequence of (i) verifications, (ii) import checks, or (iii) a
mutual agreement between the Parties, including following the consultations provided for in this
Chapter.
8. In the event that the import checks demonstrate that products do not comply with the relevant
import requirements of the importing Party, any action taken by the importing Party should be
proportionate to the sanitary and phytosanitary risk associated with the importation of the noncompliant product.
EU/SG/en 51
ARTICLE 5.8
Verifications
1. In order to build and maintain confidence in the effective implementation of this Chapter, the
importing Party shall have the right to carry out verifications at any time, including:
(a) through verification visits to the exporting Party, to verify all or part of the inspection and
certification system of the exporting Party's competent authorities, in accordance with the
relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations of the Codex Alimentarius,
OIE and IPPC; and
(b) by requiring the exporting Party to provide information about its inspection and certification
system and by obtaining the results of the controls carried out thereunder.
2. The importing Party shall share with the exporting Party the results and conclusions of the
verifications carried out pursuant to paragraph 1. The importing Party may make those results
publicly available.
3. If the importing Party decides to carry out a verification visit to the exporting Party, the
importing Party shall notify the exporting Party of this verification visit at least 60 calendar days
before the verification visit is to be carried out, except in emergency cases or where the Parties
agree otherwise. Any modification to such a visit shall be agreed by the Parties.
EU/SG/en 52
4. The costs incurred in carrying out the verification of all or part of the exporting Party's
competent authorities' inspection and certification systems and the costs incurred in carrying out
any inspections of individual establishments shall be borne by the importing Party.
5. The importing Party shall provide information in writing of a verification to the exporting
Party within 60 calendar days. The exporting Party shall have 45 calendar days to comment on such
information. The exporting Party's comments shall be attached to and, where appropriate, included
in the final outcome document.
6. Notwithstanding paragraph 5, where a significant risk to human, animal or plant life or health
has been identified during a verification, the importing Party shall inform the exporting Party as
quickly as possible, and in any case within ten calendar days following the end of the verification.
ARTICLE 5.9
Trade Facilitation
1. In cases where the importing Party requires an on-the-spot verification to authorise imports of
a certain category or categories of products of animal origin from the exporting Party, the following
shall apply:
(a) The verification shall evaluate the exporting Party's inspection and certification system in
accordance with Article 5.8 (Verifications) and shall take into consideration, upon request,
any relevant written information provided by the exporting Party.
EU/SG/en 53
(b) In case of a satisfactory outcome of the verification of the inspection and certification system,
the importing Party shall inform the exporting Party in writing of the positive outcome of the
verification. In such case, the information provided may include the fact that the importing
Party has authorised, or will authorise, imports of specific category or categories of products.
(c) If the outcome of the verification of the inspection and certification systems is not
satisfactory, the importing Party shall inform, in writing, the exporting Party of the result of
the verification. In such case, the information shall include one of the following:
(i) a statement of the conditions, including those related to the inspection and certification
system of the exporting Party, that still need to be put in place by the exporting Party to
allow the importing Party to authorise imports of a specific category or categories of
products of animal origin;
(ii) a reference to the fact that specific establishments of products of animal origin may be
allowed to export to the importing Party upon compliance with the relevant import
requirements of Article 5.7 (Import Requirements); or
(iii) a statement that the importing Party has not authorised the importation of the specific
category or categories of products from the exporting Party.
EU/SG/en 54
2. In cases where the importing Party has authorised the importation of a specific category or
categories of products of animal origin referred to in paragraph 1(b), the exporting Party shall
inform the importing Party of the list of individual establishments that meet the importing Party's
requirements in accordance with, in particular, Article 5.7 (Import Requirements) and
Article 5.8 (Verifications). Furthermore the following applies:
(a) At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall approve individual
establishments as referred to in paragraph 3 of Annex 5-B which are situated in the territory
of the exporting Party, without prior inspection of those individual establishments. When
requesting the approval by the importing Party, the exporting Party shall provide any
information required by the importing Party to guarantee the compliance with the relevant
requirements, including those of Article 5.7 (Import Requirements). The approval by the
importing Party shall be consistent with the conditions set out in Annex 5-B, and shall be
limited to those categories of products for which imports are authorised.
(b) Upon the approval of the individual establishments referred to in subparagraph 2(a), the
importing Party shall take the necessary legislative or administrative measures, in accordance
with its applicable legal and administrative procedures, to allow imports within 40 calendar
days of the receipt of the request of the exporting Party and, if applicable, the information
required by the importing Party to guarantee the compliance with the relevant requirements,
including those of Article 5.7 (Import Requirements).
(c) The importing Party shall notify the exporting Party of its acceptance or rejection of any
individual establishments referred to in paragraph 2(a) and, if applicable, the reasons for any
rejection.
EU/SG/en 55
ARTICLE 5.10
Measures Linked to Animal and Plant Health
1. The Parties recognise the concepts of pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low pest or
disease prevalence, in accordance with the SPS Agreement, OIE and IPPC standards, guidelines and
recommendations. The SPS Committee referred to in Article 5.15 (Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures) may define further details for the procedure for the recognition of such
areas, including procedures for the recognition of such areas in cases where there has been an
outbreak, taking into account any relevant SPS Agreement, OIE and IPPC standards, guidelines or
recommendations.
2. When determining pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low pest or disease prevalence, the
Parties shall consider factors such as geographical location, ecosystems, epidemiological
surveillance, and the effectiveness of sanitary or phytosanitary controls in such areas.
3. The Parties shall establish close cooperation on the determination of pest- or disease-free
areas and areas of low pest and disease prevalence, with the objective of attaining confidence in the
procedures followed by the other Party for the determination of such areas. When accepting the
determination of such areas made by the exporting Party, the importing Party shall, in principle,
base its determination of the animal or plant health status of the exporting Party or parts thereof on
the information provided by the exporting Party in accordance with the SPS Agreement, OIE and
IPPC standards, guidelines and recommendations.
EU/SG/en 56
4. If the importing Party does not accept the determination made by the exporting Party, it shall
explain the reasons and shall be ready to enter into consultations.
5. Where the exporting Party claims that areas within its territory are pest- or disease-free areas
or areas of low pest or disease prevalence, it shall provide relevant evidence in order to objectively
demonstrate to the importing Party that such areas are, and are likely to remain, pest- or disease-free
areas or areas of low pest or disease prevalence, as the case may be. For this purpose, reasonable
access shall be given, upon request, to the importing Party for inspection, testing and other relevant
procedures.
6. The Parties recognise the principle of compartmentalisation of the OIE and pest-free
production sites of the IPPC. The SPS Committee referred to in Article 5.15 (Committee on
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) will assess any OIE and IPPC recommendations that may be
issued on this matter in the future and may issue recommendations accordingly.
ARTICLE 5.11
Transparency and Exchange of Information
1. The Parties shall:
(a) pursue transparency as regards SPS measures applicable to trade and, in particular, to those of
Article 5.7 (Import Requirements) applied to imports from the other Party;
EU/SG/en 57
(b) enhance mutual understanding of each Party's SPS measures and their application;
(c) exchange information on matters related to the development and application of SPS measures,
including the progress on new available scientific evidence, that affect, or may affect, trade
between the Parties with a view to minimising their negative trade effects;
(d) communicate, upon the request of a Party, the import requirements that apply to the
importation of specific products within 15 calendar days; and
(e) communicate, upon the request of a Party, progress on the application for the authorisation of
specific products within 15 calendar days.
2. The contact points responsible for the information pursuant to paragraph 1 are those that are
designated by the Parties in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 13.4 (Enquiries and Contact
Points). Information shall be sent by post, fax or e-mail. Information by e-mail may be signed
electronically and shall only be sent between the contact points.
3. Where the information pursuant to subparagraph 1(c) has been made available by notification
to the WTO in accordance with its relevant rules and procedures, or where the above information
has been made available on the official, publicly accessible and fee-free websites of the Parties, the
information exchange referred to in that subparagraph shall be deemed to have taken place.
4. All notifications under this Chapter shall be made to the contact points referred to under
paragraph 2.
EU/SG/en 58
ARTICLE 5.12
Consultations
1. Each Party shall notify the other Party in writing, within two calendar days, of any serious or
significant risk to human, animal or plant life or health, including any food emergencies.
2. Where a Party has serious concerns regarding a risk to human, animal or plant life or health,
affecting commodities for which trade takes place, consultations regarding the situation shall, upon
request, take place as soon as possible. In such case, each Party shall endeavour to provide all
necessary information in due time to avoid disruption in trade.
3. Consultations referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article may be held by e-mail, video or
telephone conference. The requesting Party shall ensure the preparation of the minutes of the
consultation.
ARTICLE 5.13
Emergency Measures
1. In case of serious risk to human, animal or plant life or health, the importing Party may,
without previous notification, take measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or
health. For consignments in transport between the Parties, the importing Party shall consider the
most suitable and proportionate solution in order to avoid unnecessary disruptions to trade.
EU/SG/en 59
2. The Party taking the measures shall inform the other Party as soon as possible, and in any
case no later than 24 hours after the adoption of the measure. Either Party may request any
information related to the sanitary and phytosanitary situation or to any such measures that have
been adopted. The other Party shall reply as soon as the requested information is available.
3. Upon the request of either Party, and in accordance with the provisions of
Article 5.12 (Consultations), the Parties shall hold consultations regarding the situation
within 15 calendar days of the notification. These consultations shall be carried out in order to avoid
unnecessary disruptions to trade. The Parties may consider options for the facilitation of the
implementation or the replacement of the measures.
ARTICLE 5.14
Equivalence
1. The Parties may recognise the equivalence of an individual measure, groups of measures or
systems applicable to a sector or to a part of a sector in accordance with paragraphs 4 to 7. The
recognition of equivalence shall be applied to trade between the Parties in animals and animal
products, plants and plant products, or, as appropriate, to related goods.
2. Where equivalence has not been recognised, trade shall take place under the conditions
required by the importing Party to meet its appropriate level of protection.
EU/SG/en 60
3. The recognition of equivalence requires an assessment and acceptance of:
(a) existing SPS measures in legislation, standards and procedures, including controls related to
inspection and certification systems to ensure that the SPS measures of both the exporting
Party and the importing Party are met;
(b) the documented structure of the competent authorities, their powers, their chain of command,
their modus operandi and the resources available to them; and
(c) the performance of the competent authority in relation to the control programmes and
assurances.
4. In their assessments, the Parties shall take account of experience already acquired.
5. The importing Party shall accept a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the exporting Party as
equivalent if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates that its measure achieves the importing
Party's appropriate level of protection. For this purpose, reasonable access shall be given, upon
request, to the importing Party for inspection, testing and other relevant procedures.
6. The Parties will take into account guidance of the Codex Alimentarius, OIE, IPPC and the
WTO SPS Committee in recognising equivalence.
EU/SG/en 61
7. Furthermore, where equivalence has been recognised, the Parties may agree on a simplified
model for the official sanitary or phytosanitary certificates that are necessary for each consignment
of animals or animal products, plants or plant products, or other related goods intended for
importation.
ARTICLE 5.15
Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (hereinafter referred to as the "SPS
Committee") established pursuant to Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees) shall include
representatives of the competent authorities of the Parties.
2. The SPS Committee shall meet within one year of the entry into force of this Agreement.
Thereafter it shall meet at least once a year or as agreed by the Parties. The SPS Committee shall
establish its rules of procedure at its first meeting. It shall meet in person, by telephone conference,
by video-conference, or through any other means, as agreed by the Parties.
3. The SPS Committee may agree to establish technical working groups consisting of experts of
the Parties, which shall identify and address technical and scientific issues arising under this
Chapter and shall explore opportunities for further collaboration on SPS matters of mutual interest.
When additional expertise is needed, persons other than representatives of the Parties may
participate in the work of a technical working group.
EU/SG/en 62
4. The SPS Committee may address any matter related to the effective functioning of this
Chapter. In particular, it shall have the following responsibilities and functions:
(a) developing the necessary procedures or arrangements for the implementation of this Chapter,
including Annexes 5-A and 5-B;
(b) monitoring the implementation of this Chapter; and
(c) providing a forum for discussion of problems arising from the application of certain SPS
measures with a view to reaching mutually acceptable solutions. In this connection, the SPS
Committee shall be convened as a matter of urgency, at the request of a Party, so as to carry
out consultations. Such consultations are without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the
Parties under Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) and Chapter Fifteen (Mediation
Mechanism).
5. The SPS Committee shall exchange information, expertise and experiences in the field of
animal welfare in order to promote the collaboration on animal welfare between the Parties.
6. The Parties may, by decision in the SPS Committee, adopt recommendations and decisions
related to the authorisation of imports, exchange of information, transparency, recognition of
regionalisation, equivalency and alternative measures, and any other matter referred to under
paragraphs 4 and 5.
EU/SG/en 63
ARTICLE 5.16
Technical Consultations
1. Where a Party considers that a measure of the other Party is or might be contrary to the
obligations under this Chapter, and considers that the measure causes or may cause an unjustified
disruption to trade, it may request technical consultations in the SPS Committee with a view to
reaching mutually acceptable solutions. The competent authorities set out in Annex 5-A shall
facilitate these consultations.
2. Technical consultations in the SPS Committee shall be deemed concluded within 30 days
following the date of submission of the request for technical consultations, unless the consulting
Parties agree to continue with the consultations. The technical consultations may be made via
telephone conference, video-conference, or any other mechanism agreed by the Parties.
EU/SG/en 64
CHAPTER SIX
CUSTOMS AND TRADE FACILITATION
ARTICLE 6.1
Objectives
1. The Parties recognise the importance of customs and trade facilitation matters in the evolving
global trading environment. The Parties agree to reinforce cooperation in this area, with a view to
ensuring that the relevant legislation and procedures, as well as the administrative capacity of the
relevant administrations, fulfil the objectives of promoting trade facilitation while ensuring effective
customs control.
2. To that end, the Parties agree that legislation shall be non-discriminatory, and that customs
procedures shall be based upon the use of modern methods and effective controls to combat fraud
and to protect legitimate trade.
3. The Parties recognise that legitimate public policy objectives, including in relation to security,
safety and combating fraud, shall not be compromised in any way.
EU/SG/en 65
ARTICLE 6.2
Principles
1. The Parties agree that their respective customs provisions and procedures shall be based upon:
(a) international instruments and standards applicable in the area of customs and trade which the
respective Parties have accepted, including the substantive elements of the Revised Kyoto
Convention on the Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs Procedures, the
International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System,
and the Framework of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade (hereinafter referred to
as "SAFE Framework") of the World Customs Organization (hereinafter referred to as
"WCO");
(b) the protection of legitimate trade through the effective enforcement and compliance of
legislative requirements;
(c) legislation that avoids unnecessary or discriminatory burdens on economic operators, that
provides for further trade facilitation for economic operators with high levels of compliance,
and that ensures safeguards against fraud and illicit or damageable activities; and
(d) rules that ensure that any penalty imposed for breaches of customs regulations or procedural
requirements is proportionate and non-discriminatory, and that their application shall not
unduly delay the release of goods.
EU/SG/en 66
2. In order to improve working methods, as well as to ensure non-discrimination, transparency,
efficiency, integrity and accountability of operations, the Parties shall:
(a) simplify requirements and formalities wherever possible with respect to the rapid release and
clearance of goods; and
(b) work towards the further simplification and standardisation of the data and documentation
required by customs and other agencies.
ARTICLE 6.3
Customs Cooperation
1. The Parties shall cooperate on customs matters between their respective authorities in order to
ensure that the objectives set out in Article 6.1 (Objectives) are attained.
2. In order to enhance cooperation on customs matters, the Parties shall, inter alia:
(a) exchange information concerning their respective customs legislation, the implementation
thereof, and their customs procedures, particularly in relation to the following areas:
(i) simplification and modernisation of customs procedures;
(ii) border enforcement of intellectual property rights by the customs authorities;
EU/SG/en 67
(iii) transit movements and transhipment; and
(iv) relations with the business community;
(b) consider developing joint initiatives relating to import, export and other customs procedures,
as well as towards ensuring an effective service to the business community;
(c) work together on customs-related aspects of securing and facilitating the international trade
supply chain in accordance with the SAFE Framework;
(d) establish, where appropriate, mutual recognition of their respective risk management
techniques, risk standards, security controls and trade partnership programmes, including
aspects such as data transmission and mutually agreed benefits; and
(e) strengthen coordination in international organisations such as the WTO and the WCO.
ARTICLE 6.4
Transit and Transhipment
1. Each Party shall ensure the facilitation and effective control of transhipment operations and
transit movements through its territory.
2. The Parties shall promote and implement regional transit arrangements with a view to
facilitating trade.
EU/SG/en 68
3. The Parties shall ensure cooperation and coordination between all concerned authorities and
agencies in their respective territories to facilitate traffic in transit.
ARTICLE 6.5
Advance Rulings
Prior to the importation of goods into its territory, and in accordance with its legislation and
procedures, each Party shall issue to traders established in its territory, through its customs
authorities or other competent authorities, written advance rulings concerning tariff classification,
origin, and any other matters as the Party may decide.
ARTICLE 6.6
Simplified Customs Procedure
1. Each Party shall provide simplified import and export procedures that are transparent and
efficient, in order to reduce costs and increase predictability for economic operators, including
small and medium sized enterprises. Easier access to customs simplifications shall also be provided
for authorised traders, according to objective and non-discriminatory criteria.
2. A single customs declaration document or its electronic equivalent shall be used for the
purpose of completing the formalities required for placing the goods under a customs procedure.
EU/SG/en 69
3. The Parties shall apply modern customs techniques, including risk assessment and
post-clearance audit methods, in order to simplify and facilitate the entry and the release of goods.
4. The Parties shall promote the progressive development and use of systems, including those
based upon information technology, to facilitate the electronic exchange of data among their
respective traders, customs authorities and other related agencies.
ARTICLE 6.7
Release of Goods
Each Party shall ensure that its customs authorities, border agencies or other competent authorities
shall apply requirements and procedures that:
(a) provide for the prompt release of goods within a period no greater than that required to ensure
compliance with its customs and other trade-related laws and formalities;
(b) provide for pre-arrival processing (i.e. advance electronic submission and eventual processing
of information before physical arrival of goods) to enable the release of goods on arrival; and
(c) provide for the release of goods without the payment of customs duties, subject to the
provision of a guarantee, if required according to the legislation of the Party concerned, in
order to secure the final payment of customs duties.
EU/SG/en 70
ARTICLE 6.8
Fees and Charges
1. Fees and charges shall only be imposed for services provided in connection with the
importation or exportation in question and for any formality required for undertaking such
importation or exportation. They shall not exceed the approximate cost of the service provided, and
shall not be calculated on an ad valorem basis.
2. The information on fees and charges shall be published via an officially designated medium,
which may include the internet. This information shall include the reason for the fee or charge for
the service provided, the responsible authority, the fee or charge that will be applied, and when and
how payment is to be made.
3. New or amended fees and charges shall not be imposed until information in accordance with
paragraph 2 is published and made readily available.
ARTICLE 6.9
Customs Brokers
The Parties agree that their respective customs provisions and procedures shall not require the
mandatory use of customs brokers. The Parties shall apply transparent, non-discriminatory and
proportionate rules when licensing customs brokers.
EU/SG/en 71
ARTICLE 6.10
Preshipment Inspections
The Parties agree that their respective customs provisions and procedures shall not require the
mandatory use of preshipment inspections as defined in the Agreement on Preshipment Inspection,
or any other inspection activity performed by private companies at the destination, before customs
clearance.
ARTICLE 6.11
Customs Valuations
1. The Parties shall determine the customs value of goods in accordance with the Customs
Valuation Agreement.
2. The Parties shall cooperate with a view to reaching a common approach to issues relating to
customs valuation.
ARTICLE 6.12
Risk Management
1. Each Party shall base its examination and release procedures and its post-entry verification
procedures on risk assessment principles and the use of audits, rather than examining each shipment
in a comprehensive manner for compliance with all import requirements.
EU/SG/en 72
2. The Parties agree to adopt and apply their control requirements and procedures for the
importation, exportation, transit and transhipment of goods on the basis of risk management
principles which shall be applied to focus compliance measures on transactions that merit attention.
ARTICLE 6.13
Single Window
Each Party shall endeavour to develop or maintain single window systems to facilitate a single,
electronic submission of all information required by customs and other legislation for the
exportation, importation and transit of goods.
ARTICLE 6.14
Appeal Procedures
1. Each Party shall provide effective, prompt, non-discriminatory and easily accessible
procedures to guarantee the right of appeal against the administrative actions, rulings and decisions
by customs and other competent authorities that affect the importation or exportation of goods or
that affect goods in transit.
2. Appeal procedures may include administrative review by the supervising authority and the
judicial review of decisions taken at the administrative level in accordance with the legislation of
the Parties.
EU/SG/en 73
ARTICLE 6.15
Transparency
1. Each Party shall publish or otherwise make available, including through electronic means,
their legislation, regulations, and administrative procedures and other requirements relating to
customs and trade facilitation.
2. Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more inquiry or information points to address
inquiries by interested persons concerning customs and trade facilitation matters.
ARTICLE 6.16
Relations with the Business Community
The Parties agree:
(a) on the importance of timely consultations with trade representatives when formulating
legislative proposals and general procedures related to customs and trade facilitation issues; to
that end, consultations shall be held between customs authorities and the business community,
as appropriate;
EU/SG/en 74
(b) to publish or otherwise make available, as far as possible through electronic means, new
legislation and general procedures related to customs and trade facilitation issues prior to the
application of any such legislation and procedures, as well as changes to and interpretations of
such legislation and procedures; they shall also make publicly available relevant notices of an
administrative nature, including agency requirements and entry procedures, hours of operation
and operating procedures for customs offices at ports and border crossing points, and points of
contact for information enquiries;
(c) on the need for a reasonable time period between the publication of new or amended
legislation, procedures and fees or charges and their entry into force, without prejudice to
legitimate public policy objectives (e.g. changes in duty rates); and
(d) to ensure that their respective customs and related requirements and procedures continue to
meet the needs of the trading community, follow best practices, and that they remain the least
trade-restrictive requirements and procedures possible.
ARTICLE 6.17
Committee on Customs
1. The Committee on Customs established by Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees) shall
consist of representatives of the customs and other competent authorities of the Parties. The
Committee on Customs shall ensure the proper functioning of this Chapter, Protocol 1 and any
additional provisions relating to customs that the Parties may agree on. The Parties may examine
and take decisions in the Committee on Customs on all issues arising thereunder.
EU/SG/en 75
2. The Parties may adopt recommendations and take decisions in the Committee on Customs on
the mutual recognition of risk management techniques, risk standards, security controls and trade
partnership programmes, including aspects such as data transmission and mutually agreed benefits,
and any other issue covered by paragraph 1.
3. The Parties may agree to hold ad hoc meetings for any customs matter, including rules of
origin, and any additional customs-related provisions as agreed between the Parties. They may also
establish sub-groups for specific issues, where appropriate.
CHAPTER SEVEN
NON-TARIFF BARRIERS TO TRADE AND INVESTMENT
IN RENEWABLE ENERGY GENERATION
ARTICLE 7.1
Objectives
In line with global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the Parties share the objective of
promoting, developing and increasing the generation of energy from renewable and sustainable
non-fossil sources, particularly through facilitating trade and investment. To this effect, the Parties
shall cooperate towards removing or reducing tariffs as well as non-tariff barriers, and shall
cooperate on fostering regulatory convergence with or towards regional and international standards.
ARTICLE 7.2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) "local content requirement" means
(i) with respect to goods, a requirement for an enterprise to purchase or use goods of
domestic origin or goods from a domestic source, whether that requirement is specified
in terms of particular products, in terms of volume or value of products, or in terms of a
proportion of volume or value of its local production;
(ii) with respect to services, a requirement which restricts the choice of the service supplier
or the service supplied, to the detriment of services or service suppliers from the other
Party;
(b) "measure" means any measure within the scope of this Chapter that is taken by a Party,
whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or
any other form;
(c) "measures requiring the formation of partnerships with local companies" means any
requirements to jointly establish or operate with local companies or other businesses any legal
entity such as a corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture or to enter into other contractual
relations;
EU/SG/en 77
(d) "offset" means any condition that encourages local development, such as the unjustified
licensing of technology, investment, obligation to contract with a particular financial
institution, counter-trade, and similar requirements; and
(e) "service supplier" means as defined in paragraph (l) of Article 8.2 (Definitions).
ARTICLE 7.3
Scope
1. This Chapter applies to measures which may affect trade and investment between the Parties
related to the generation of energy from renewable and sustainable non-fossil sources, namely wind,
solar, aerothermal, geothermal, hydrothermal and ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, landfill gas,
sewage treatment plant gas and biogases, but not to the products from which energy is generated.
2. This Chapter does not apply to research and development projects and to demonstration
projects carried out on a non-commercial scale.
3. This Chapter is without prejudice to the application of any other relevant provisions of this
Agreement, including any exceptions, reservations or restrictions to those provisions, to the
measures mentioned in paragraph 1, mutatis mutandis. For greater certainty, in the event of any
inconsistency between this Chapter and any other provisions of this Agreement, the other provisions
of this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
EU/SG/en 78
ARTICLE 7.4
Principles
Each Party shall:
(a) refrain from adopting measures providing for local content requirements or any other offset
affecting the other Party's products, service suppliers, entrepreneurs or establishments;
(b) refrain from adopting measures requiring the formation of partnerships with local companies,
unless such partnerships are deemed necessary for technical reasons and the Party can
demonstrate such technical reasons upon request by the other Party;
(c) ensure that any rules concerning the authorisation, certification and licensing procedures that
are applied, in particular to equipment, plants and associated transmission network
infrastructures, are objective, transparent, and non-arbitrary, and do not discriminate against
applicants from the other Party;
(d) ensure that administrative charges imposed on or in connection with the:
(i) importation and use of goods originating in the other Party, or affecting the provision of
goods by the other Party's suppliers, are subject to Article 2.10 (Fees and Formalities
Connected with Importation and Exportation); and
EU/SG/en 79
(ii) provision of services by the other Party's suppliers are subject to Article 8.18 (Scope
and Definitions), Article 8.19 (Conditions for Licensing and Qualification) and
Article 8.20 (Licensing and Qualification Procedures); and
(e) ensure that the terms, conditions and procedures for the connection and access to electricity
transmission grids are transparent and do not discriminate against suppliers of the other Party.
ARTICLE 7.5
Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment
1. Where international or regional standards exist with respect to products for the generation of
energy from renewable and sustainable non-fossil sources, the Parties shall use those standards, or
the relevant parts of those standards, as a basis for their technical regulations except when such
international standards or relevant parts would be an ineffective or inappropriate means for the
fulfilment of the legitimate objectives pursued. For the purpose of applying this paragraph, the
International Organization for Standardization (hereinafter referred to as "ISO") and the
International Electrotechnical Commission (hereinafter referred to as "IEC"), in particular, shall be
considered relevant international standard-setting bodies.
2. Where appropriate, the Parties shall specify technical regulations based on product
requirements in terms of performance, including environmental performance, rather than in terms of
design or descriptive characteristics.
EU/SG/en 80
3. With respect to products listed in Chapter 84 of the Harmonized System (except 8401) as well
as in HS 850231 and 854140:
(a) the Union will accept declarations of conformity from Singapore suppliers under the same
terms as from Union suppliers and without any further requirements, for the purpose of
placing such products on the market; and
(b) Singapore will accept EU declarations of conformity or test reports without any further
requirements, for the purpose of placing such products on the market. Singapore may require
mandatory third party testing or certification under the conditions set out in Article 5
(Safeguard Measures) of Annex 4-A.
For greater certainty, this paragraph is without prejudice to either Party applying requirements not
related to the products referred to in this paragraph, such as zoning laws or building codes.
ARTICLE 7.6
Exceptions
1. This Chapter is subject to the exceptions provided for in Article 2.14 (General Exceptions),
Article 8.62 (General Exceptions), Article 9.3 (Security and General Exceptions) and, for greater
certainty, to the relevant provisions of Chapter Sixteen (Institutional, General and Final Provisions).
EU/SG/en 81
2. For greater certainty, subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a
manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the
Parties' products, service suppliers or investors where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised
restriction on trade and investment between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as
preventing a Party from the adoption or enforcement of measures necessary for the safe operation of
the energy networks concerned, or the safety of energy supply.
ARTICLE 7.7
Implementation and Cooperation
1. The Parties shall cooperate and exchange information on any issues relevant for the
implementation of this Chapter in the Trade Committee established pursuant to Article 16.1 (Trade
Committee). The Parties may, by decision of the Trade Committee, adopt appropriate implementing
measures to this effect and update this Chapter as appropriate.
2. The cooperation may include:
(a) exchanging information, regulatory experiences and best practices in areas such as:
(i) the design and non-discriminatory implementation of measures promoting the uptake of
energy from renewable sources;
(ii) carbon capture and storage;
(iii) smart grids;
EU/SG/en 82
(iv) energy efficiency; and
(v) technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures, such as those
relating to grid code requirements; and
(b) promoting, also in relevant regional fora, the convergence of their domestic or regional
technical regulations, regulatory concepts, standards, requirements and conformity assessment
procedures with international standards.
CHAPTER EIGHT
SERVICES, ESTABLISHMENT AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
SECTION A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 8.1
Objective and Scope
1. The Parties, affirming their respective commitments under the WTO Agreement, hereby lay
down the necessary arrangements for the progressive reciprocal liberalisation of trade in services,
establishment and electric commerce.
EU/SG/en 83
2. Except as otherwise provided, this Chapter shall not:
(a) apply to subsidies granted or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported
loans, guarantees, and insurance;
(b) apply to services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority within the respective
territories of the Parties;
(c) require the privatisation of public undertakings; and
(d) apply to laws, regulations or requirements governing the procurement by governmental
agencies of services purchased for governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial
resale or with a view to use in the supply of services for commercial sale.
3. Each Party retains the right to regulate and to introduce new regulations to meet legitimate
policy objectives in a manner consistent with this Chapter.
EU/SG/en 84
4. This Chapter does not apply to measures that affect natural persons seeking access to the
employment market of a Party, or to measures regarding citizenship, residence or employment on a
permanent basis. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate
the entry of natural persons of the other Party into, or their temporary stay in, its territory, including
measures that are necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of
natural persons across its borders, provided that such measures are not applied in such a manner as
to nullify or impair the benefits1 accruing to the other Party under the terms of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 8.2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) "direct taxes" comprises all taxes on total income, on total capital or on elements of income or
of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation of property, taxes on estates,
inheritances and gifts, and taxes on the total amounts of wages or salaries paid by enterprises,
as well as taxes on capital appreciation;
(b) "juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole
proprietorship, or association;
 1 The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of certain countries and not for those of
others shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a specific commitment.
EU/SG/en 85
(c) "Union juridical person" or "Singapore juridical person" means:
(i) a juridical person set up in accordance with the laws of the Union and/or the
Member States of the Union, or Singapore, respectively, and having its registered office,
central administration1, or principal place of business in the territory of the Union or
Singapore, respectively; or
(ii) in the case of establishment in accordance with paragraph (d) of
Article 8.8 (Definitions), a juridical person owned or controlled by natural persons of
the Member States of the Union or of Singapore respectively, or by Union juridical
persons or Singapore juridical persons respectively;
should the juridical person have only its registered office or central administration in the
territory of the Union or of Singapore, respectively, it shall not be considered as a Union or
Singapore juridical person, respectively, unless it engages in substantive business operations2
in the territory of the Union or of Singapore respectively;
 1 "Central administration" means the head office where ultimate decision-making takes place.
2 The Union understands that the concept of "effective and continuous link" with the economy
of a Member State of the Union enshrined in Article 54 of the Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union (hereinafter referred to as "TFEU") is equivalent to the concept of
"substantive business operations". Accordingly, for a juridical person set up in accordance
with the laws of Singapore and having only its registered office or central administration in
the territory of Singapore, the Union shall only extend the benefits of this Agreement if that
juridical person possesses an effective and continuous economic link with the economy of
Singapore.
EU/SG/en 86
a juridical person is:
(i) "owned" by natural or juridical persons of the Union and/or any Member State of the
Union, or of Singapore, if more than 50 per cent of the equity interest in it is
beneficially owned by persons of the Union and/or any Member State of the Union, or
of Singapore, respectively;
(ii) "controlled" by natural or juridical persons of the Union and/or any Member State of the
Union, or of Singapore, if such persons have the power to name a majority of its
directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions;
(iii) "affiliated" with another person when it controls, or is controlled by, that other person;
or when it and the other person are both controlled by the same person;
(d) notwithstanding subparagraph (c), shipping companies established outside the Union and
controlled by nationals of a Member State of the Union shall also be covered by this
Agreement if their vessels are registered in accordance with the respective legislation of a
Member State of the Union and fly the flag of that Member State of the Union;
(e) "measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;
(f) "measures adopted or maintained by a Party" means measures taken by:
(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities; or
EU/SG/en 87
(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or
local governments or authorities;
(g) "measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting trade in services" include measures in
respect of:
(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;
(ii) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service, services which are
required by a Party to be offered to the public generally; and
(iii) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a Party for the supply of a
service in the territory of the other Party;
(h) "Schedule of Specific Commitments" refers to, in the case of the Union, Annex 8-A and the
Appendices thereto, and, in the case of Singapore, Annex 8-B and the Appendices thereto;
(i) "service consumer" means any person that receives or uses a service;
(j) "supply of a service" includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of a
service;
EU/SG/en 88
(k) "service of the other Party" means a service which is supplied:
(i) from or in the territory of the other Party, or in the case of maritime transport, by a
vessel registered under the laws of the other Party, or by a person of the other Party
which supplies the service through the operation of a vessel and/or its use in whole or in
part; or
(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence or through the
presence of natural persons, by a service supplier of the other Party;
(l) "service supplier" means any person that supplies or seeks to supply a service, including
through establishment;
(m) service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service, except a service
which is supplied on a commercial basis or in competition with one or more service suppliers;
and
(n) "trade in services" means the supply of a service:
(i) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party (cross-border);
(ii) in the territory of a Party to a service consumer of the other Party (consumption abroad);
(iii) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence, in the territory of the
other Party (commercial presence); or
(iv) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural persons of that Party, in the
territory of the other Party (presence of natural persons).
EU/SG/en 89
SECTION B
CROSS-BORDER SUPPLY OF SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.3
Scope
This Section applies to measures of the Parties affecting the cross-border supply of all service
sectors except:
(a) audio-visual services;
(b) national maritime cabotage1; and
(c) domestic and international air transport services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and
services directly related to the exercise of traffic rights, other than:
(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is withdrawn from
service;
 1 Without prejudice to the scope of activities which may be considered as cabotage under the
relevant national legislation, national maritime cabotage under this Chapter covers
transportation of passengers or goods between a port or point located in a Member State of the
Union and another port or point located in the same Member State of the Union, including on
its continental shelf, as provided in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(hereinafter referred to as "UNCLOS"), and traffic originating and terminating in the same
port or point located in a Member State of the Union.
EU/SG/en 90
(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services; and
(iii) computer reservation system services.
ARTICLE 8.4
Definitions
For the purposes of this Section, "cross-border supply of services" means the supply of a service:
(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party; and
(b) in the territory of a Party to a service consumer of the other Party.
ARTICLE 8.5
Market Access
1. With respect to market access through the cross-border supply of services, each Party shall
accord services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that
provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its Schedule of
Specific Commitments.
EU/SG/en 91
2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures which each Party
shall not adopt or maintain either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire
territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, are defined as:
(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas,
monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;1
(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas
or the requirement of an economic needs test; and
(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity of service output
expressed in the terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement
of an economic needs test.2
 1 Subparagraph 2(a) includes measures which require a service supplier of the other Party to
have an establishment within the meaning of paragraph (d) of Article 8.8 (Definitions) or to
be resident in a Party's territory as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.
2 This subparagraph does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of
services.
EU/SG/en 92
ARTICLE 8.6
National Treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments and subject to any
conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the cross-border supply of services,
treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.
2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to
that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less favourable if
it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service suppliers of a Party
compared to like services or service suppliers of the other Party.
4. Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed as requiring a Party
to compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character
of the relevant services or service suppliers.
EU/SG/en 93
ARTICLE 8.7
Schedule of Specific Commitments
1. The sectors liberalised by a Party pursuant to this Section and, by means of reservations, the
market access and national treatment limitations applicable to services and service suppliers of the
other Party in those sectors are set out in its Schedule of Specific Commitments.
2. Neither Party may adopt new or more discriminatory measures with regard to services or
service suppliers of the other Party in relation to the specific commitments undertaken in
conformity with paragraph 1.
SECTION C
ESTABLISHMENT
ARTICLE 8.8
Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:
(a) "branch" of a juridical person means a place of business or a juridical person not having
distinct legal personality and is the extension of a parent body;
EU/SG/en 94
(b) "economic activity" includes any activities of an economic nature, except activities carried out
in the exercise of governmental authority, i.e., activities not carried out on a commercial basis
or in competition with one or more economic operators;
(c) "entrepreneur" means any person of a Party that seeks to perform or performs an economic
activity through establishment1;
(d) "establishment" means:
(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person; or
(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or representative office,
with a view to establishing or maintaining lasting economic links within the territory of a
Party for the purpose of performing an economic activity including, but not limited to,
supplying a service; and
 1 Where the economic activity is not performed directly by a juridical person but through other
forms of establishment such as a branch or a representative office, the entrepreneur (i.e. the
juridical person) shall, nonetheless, through such establishment be accorded the treatment
provided for entrepreneurs under this Agreement. Such treatment shall be extended to the
establishment through which the economic activity is performed and need not be extended to
any other parts of the entrepreneur located outside the territory where the economic activity is
performed.
EU/SG/en 95
(e) "subsidiary" of a juridical person of a Party means a juridical person which is controlled by
another juridical person of that Party, in accordance with its domestic law.1
ARTICLE 8.9
Scope
This Section applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Parties affecting establishment in all
economic activities with the exception of:
(a) mining, manufacturing and processing2 of nuclear materials;
(b) production of, or trade in, arms, munitions and war material;
(c) audio-visual services;
 1 For further clarity, a subsidiary of a juridical person of a Party may also refer to a juridical
person which is a subsidiary of another subsidiary of a juridical person of that Party.
2 For greater certainty, processing of nuclear materials includes all the activities contained in
the International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities, as set out in
Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, N 4, ISIC REV 3.1, 2002
code 2330.
EU/SG/en 96
(d) national maritime cabotage;1 and
(e) domestic and international air transport services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and
services directly related to the exercise of traffic rights, other than:
(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is withdrawn from
service;
(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services; and
(iii) computer reservation system services.
ARTICLE 8.10
Market Access
1. With respect to market access through establishment, each Party shall accord establishments
and entrepreneurs of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the
terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments.
 1 Without prejudice to the scope of activities which may be considered as cabotage under the
relevant national legislation, national maritime cabotage under this Chapter covers
transportation of passengers or goods between a port or point located in a Member State of the
Union and another port or point located in the same Member State of the Union, including on
its continental shelf, as provided in the UNCLOS, and traffic originating and terminating in
the same port or point located in a Member State of the Union.
EU/SG/en 97
2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures which each Party
shall not adopt or maintain either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire
territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, are defined as:
(a) limitations on the number of establishments whether in the form of numerical quotas,
monopolies, exclusive rights or other establishment requirements such as an economic needs
tests;
(b) limitations on the total value of transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test;
(c) limitations on the total number of operations or on the total quantity of output expressed in
terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic
needs test;1
(d) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage limit on
foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment;
(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which
an entrepreneur of the other Party may perform an economic activity; and
 1 Subparagraphs 2(a), 2(b) and 2(c) do not cover measures taken in order to limit the production
of an agricultural product.
EU/SG/en 98
(f) limitations on the total number of natural persons, other than key personnel and graduate
trainees as defined in Article 8.13 (Scope and Definitions)1, who may be employed in a
particular sector or who an entrepreneur may employ and who are necessary for, and directly
related to, the performance of the economic activity in the form of numerical quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test.
ARTICLE 8.11
National Treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments and subject to any
conditions and qualifications set out therein, with respect to all measures affecting establishment2,
each Party shall accord to establishments and entrepreneurs of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to its own like establishments and entrepreneurs.
2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to establishments and
entrepreneurs of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment
to that it accords to its own like establishments and entrepreneurs.
 1 For greater certainty, measures or limitations relating specifically to key personnel and
graduate trainees shall be subject to Article 8.14 (Key Personnel and Graduate Trainees).
2 The obligations in this Article apply also to measures governing the composition of boards of
directors of an establishment, such as nationality and residency requirements.
EU/SG/en 99
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less favourable if
it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of establishments and entrepreneurs of the Party
compared to like establishments and entrepreneurs of the other Party.
4. Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require a Party to
compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of
the relevant establishments or entrepreneurs.
ARTICLE 8.12
Schedule of Specific Commitments
1. The sectors liberalised by a Party pursuant to this Section and, by means of reservations, the
market access and national treatment limitations applicable to establishments and entrepreneurs of
the other Party in those sectors are set out in the former Party's Schedule of Specific Commitments.
2. Neither Party may adopt new or more discriminatory measures with regard to establishments
and entrepreneurs of the other Party in relation to the specific commitments undertaken in
conformity with paragraph 1.
EU/SG/en 100
SECTION D
TEMPORARY PRESENCE OF NATURAL PERSONS
FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES
ARTICLE 8.13
Scope and Definitions
1. This Section applies to measures of the Parties concerning the entry into, and temporary stay
in, their respective territories of key personnel, graduate trainees and business service sellers in
accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 8.1 (Objective and Scope).
2. For the purposes of this Section:
(a) "key personnel" means natural persons employed within a juridical person of one Party, other
than a non-profit organisation, and who are responsible for the setting up or the proper
control, administration and operation of an establishment;
EU/SG/en 101
key personnel comprises business visitors for establishment purposes responsible for setting
up an establishment and intra-corporate transferees:
(i) "business visitors for establishment purposes" means natural persons working in a
senior position who are responsible for setting up an establishment and who do not
engage in direct transactions with the general public and do not receive remuneration
from a source located within the host Party; and
(ii) "intra-corporate transferees" means natural persons who have been employed by a
juridical person of one Party or, in the case of professionals providing business services,
have been partners in it for at least one year and who are temporarily transferred to an
establishment (that may be a subsidiary, branch or head company of the enterprise) in
the territory of the other Party and who must belong to one of the following categories:
(1) "executives", meaning natural persons within a juridical person who direct the
management of the establishment, exercise wide latitude in decision-making, and
receive general supervision or direction from the board of directors, or
stockholders of the business or their equivalent, and who do not directly perform
tasks related to the actual provision of the service or services of the juridical
person;
EU/SG/en 102
(2) "managers", meaning natural persons working in a senior position within a
juridical person, who primarily direct the management of the establishment,
receiving general supervision or direction from high-level executives, the board of
directors or stockholders of the business or their equivalent, including:
(aa) directing the establishment or a department or sub-division thereof;
(bb) supervising and controlling the work of other supervisory, professional or
managerial employees; and
(cc) having the authority personally to recruit and dismiss or recommend
recruiting, dismissing or other personnel actions; or
(3) "specialists", meaning natural persons working within a juridical person, who
possess uncommon knowledge or expertise essential to the establishment's
production, research equipment, techniques or management; in assessing such
knowledge, account will be taken not only of knowledge specific to the
establishment, but also, where relevant, of whether the person has a high level of
qualification referring to a type of work or trade requiring specific technical
knowledge, including membership of an accredited profession;
EU/SG/en 103
(b) "graduate trainees" means natural persons who have been employed by a juridical person of a
Party for at least one year, who possess a university degree and who are temporarily
transferred to an establishment in the territory of the other Party for career development
purposes or to obtain training in business techniques or methods;1 and
(c) "business services sellers" means natural persons who are representatives of a service supplier
of a Party seeking temporary entry into the territory of the other Party for the purpose of
negotiating the sale of services or entering into agreements to sell services for that service
supplier and who do not engage in making direct sales to the general public and do not receive
remuneration from a source located within the host Party.
ARTICLE 8.14
Key Personnel and Graduate Trainees
1. For every sector liberalised in accordance with Section C (Establishment) and subject to any
reservations listed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, each Party shall allow entrepreneurs of
the other Party to temporarily employ in their establishment natural persons of that other Party,
provided that such employees are key personnel or graduate trainees as defined in
Article 8.13 (Scope and Definitions). Their temporary entry and stay shall be permitted for a period
of up to three years for intra-corporate transferees, 90 days in any twelve-month period for business
visitors for establishment purposes, and one year for graduate trainees. For intra-corporate
transferees, this period may be extended for up to two additional years, subject to domestic law.1
2. For every sector liberalised in accordance with Section C (Establishment), the measures
which a Party shall not maintain or adopt, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule of Specific
Commitments, are defined as limitations on the total number of natural persons that an entrepreneur
may transfer as key personnel or graduate trainees in a specific sector in the form of numerical
quotas or a requirement of an economic needs test and as discriminatory limitations.
 1 For greater certainty and without prejudice to paragraph 4 of Article 8.1 (Objective and
Scope), the stay in the territory of a Party under these provisions does not entitle the
intra-corporate transferee to apply for permanent residency or citizenship in that Party.
EU/SG/en 105
ARTICLE 8.15
Business Services Sellers
For every sector liberalised in accordance with Section B (Cross-border Supply of Services) or
Section C (Establishment) and subject to any reservations listed in its Schedule of Specific
Commitments, each Party shall allow the temporary entry and stay of business service sellers for a
period of up to 90 days in any twelve-month period.1
SECTION E
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
SUB-SECTION 1
PROVISIONS OF GENERAL APPLICATION
ARTICLE 8.16
Mutual Recognition of Professional Qualifications
1. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from requiring that natural persons possess the
necessary qualifications and/or professional experience specified in the territory where the service is
supplied, for the sector of activity concerned.
 1 This Article is without prejudice to the rights and obligations deriving from bilateral visa
waiver agreements between Singapore and one of the Member States of the Union.
EU/SG/en 106
2. The Parties shall encourage the relevant professional bodies in their respective territories to
develop and provide a joint recommendation on mutual recognition to the Committee on Trade in
Services, Investment and Government Procurement established pursuant to Article 16.2
(Specialised Committees). Such a recommendation shall be supported by evidence on:
(a) the economic value of an envisaged an agreement on mutual recognition of professional
qualifications (hereinafter referred to as "Mutual Recognition Agreement"); and
(b) the compatibility of the respective regimes, i.e., the extent to which the criteria applied by
each Party for the authorisation, licensing, operation and certification of entrepreneurs and
service suppliers are compatible.
3. On receipt of a joint recommendation, the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and
Government Procurement shall, within a reasonable time, review the joint recommendation with a
view to determining whether it is consistent with this Agreement.
4. Where, on the basis of the information provided for in paragraph 2, the recommendation has
been found to be consistent with this Agreement, the Parties shall take necessary steps to negotiate a
Mutual Recognition Agreement through their competent authorities or authorised designees.
EU/SG/en 107
ARTICLE 8.17
Transparency
Each Party shall respond promptly to all requests by the other Party for specific information on any
of its measures of general application or international agreements which pertain to or affect this
Chapter. Each Party shall also establish one or more enquiry points pursuant to Article 13.4
(Enquiries and Contact Points) to provide specific information on all such matters upon request to
entrepreneurs and service suppliers of the other Party.
SUB-SECTION 2
DOMESTIC REGULATION
ARTICLE 8.18
Scope and Definitions
1. This Sub-Section applies to measures of the Parties relating to licensing requirements and
procedures or qualification requirements and procedures that affect:
(a) cross-border supply of services as defined in Article 8.4 (Definitions);
EU/SG/en 108
(b) establishment in their territory of juridical and natural persons as defined in Article 8.8
(Definitions); or
(c) temporary stay of natural persons in their territory as referred to in Article 8.13 (Scope and
Definitions).
2. This Sub-Section shall only apply to sectors for which a Party has undertaken specific
commitments and to the extent that these specific commitments apply.
3. This Sub-Section does not apply to measures to the extent that the measures constitute
limitations as scheduled in Articles 8.5 (Market Access) and 8.10 (Market Access) or
Articles 8.6 (National Treatment) and 8.11 (National Treatment).
4. For the purposes of this Sub-Section:
(a) "competent authorities" means any central, regional or local government or authority, or any
non-governmental body exercising powers delegated by central or regional or local
governments or authorities, which takes a decision concerning the authorisation to supply a
service, including through establishment, or concerning the authorisation to establish an
economic activity other than services;
(b) "licensing procedures" means administrative or procedural rules to which a natural or a
juridical person must adhere, in order to demonstrate compliance with licensing requirements
when seeking authorisation to supply a service or establish an economic activity other than
services, including the amendment or renewal of a license;
EU/SG/en 109
(c) "licensing requirements" means substantive requirements, other than qualification
requirements, with which a natural or a juridical person is required to comply in order to
obtain, amend or renew authorisation to supply a service or establish in an economic activity
other than services;
(d) "qualification procedures" means administrative or procedural rules to which a natural person
must adhere in order to demonstrate compliance with qualification requirements for the
purpose of obtaining authorisation to supply a service; and
(e) "qualification requirements" means substantive requirements relating to the competence of a
natural person to supply a service, compliance with which is required to be demonstrated for
the purpose of obtaining authorisation to supply a service.
ARTICLE 8.19
Conditions for Licensing and Qualification
1. Each Party shall ensure that measures relating to licensing requirements and procedures as
well as qualification requirements and procedures are based on criteria which are:
(a) clear;
(b) objective and transparent; and
(c) pre-established and accessible to the public and interested persons.
EU/SG/en 110
2. An authorisation or a licence shall, subject to availability, be granted as soon as it has been
established, on the basis of an appropriate examination, that the conditions have been met.
3. Each Party shall maintain or institute judicial, arbitral or administrative tribunals or
procedures which provide, at the request of an affected entrepreneur or service supplier, for a
prompt review, of and where justified, appropriate remedies for administrative decisions affecting
establishment, cross-border supply of services or temporary stay of natural persons for business
purposes. Where such procedures are not independent of the agency entrusted with the
administrative decision concerned, each Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an
objective and impartial review.
This paragraph shall not be construed as requiring a Party to institute such tribunals or procedures
where this would be inconsistent with its constitutional structure or the nature of its legal system.
ARTICLE 8.20
Licensing and Qualification Procedures
1. Each Party shall ensure that licensing and qualification procedures and formalities are as
simple as possible and do not unduly complicate or delay the supply of the service. Any licensing or
authorisation fees1 which the applicants may incur from their application should be reasonable and
should not in themselves restrict the supply of the service.
 1 Licensing or authorisation fees do not include payments for auction, tendering or other nondiscriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal service
provision.
EU/SG/en 111
2. Each Party shall ensure that the competent authority uses procedures and takes decisions in
the licensing or authorisation process that are impartial with respect to all applicants. The competent
authority should reach its decisions in an independent manner and should not be accountable to any
supplier of the services for which the licence or authorisation is required.
3. Where specific time periods for applications exist, an applicant shall be allowed a reasonable
period of time for the submission of an application. The competent authority shall initiate the
processing of such applications without undue delay. Where possible, applications should be
accepted in electronic format under the same conditions of authenticity as for paper submissions.
4. Each Party shall ensure that the processing of an application, including the reaching of a final
decision, is completed within a reasonable timeframe from the submission of a complete
application. Each Party shall endeavour to establish a normal timeframe for the processing of an
application.
5. Where the competent authority considers that an application is incomplete, it shall, within a
reasonable period of time after the receipt of that application inform the applicant that the
application is incomplete and, to the extent feasible, specify the additional information required to
complete the application, and shall provide the applicant with the opportunity to correct
deficiencies.
6. Where possible, authenticated copies should be accepted in place of original documents.
EU/SG/en 112
7. Where the competent authority rejects an application, it shall inform the applicant in writing
without undue delay. In principle, the applicant should, where it so requests, also be informed of the
reasons for rejection of the application and of the timeframe for an appeal against the decision.
Where applicable, an applicant should be permitted, within reasonable time limits, to resubmit an
application.
8. Each Party shall ensure that a licence or an authorisation, once granted, enters into effect
without undue delay in accordance with the terms and conditions specified therein.
SUB-SECTION 3
COMPUTER SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.21
Computer Services
1. The Parties subscribe to the understanding set out in the following paragraphs in respect of
computer services liberalised in accordance with Section B (Cross-border Supply of Services),
Section C (Establishment) and Section D (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business
Purposes).
EU/SG/en 113
2. The Parties understand that CPC1 84, the United Nations code used for describing computer
and related services, covers all computer and related services. Technological developments have led
to the increased offering of these services as a bundle or package of related services that can include
some or all of the basic functions listed in paragraph 3. For example, services such as web or
domain hosting, data mining services and grid computing each consist of a combination of basic
computer services functions.
3. Computer and related services, regardless of whether they are delivered via a network,
including the Internet, include all services that provide any of the following or any combination
thereof:
(a) consulting, adaptation, strategy, analysis, planning, specification, design, development,
installation, implementation, integration, testing, debugging, updating, support, technical
assistance or management of or for computers or computer systems;
(b) consulting, strategy, analysis, planning, specification, design, development, installation,
implementation, integration, testing, debugging, updating, adaptation, maintenance, support,
technical assistance, management or use of or for software2;
 1 "CPC" means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United
Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, N 77, CPC prov, 1991.
2 The term "software" means the sets of instructions required to make computers work and
communicate. A number of different programmes may be developed for specific applications
(application software), and the customer may have a choice of using ready-made programmes
off the shelf (packaged software), developing specific programmes for particular requirements
(customised software) or using a combination of the two.
EU/SG/en 114
(c) data processing, data storage, data hosting or database services;
(d) maintenance and repair services for office machinery and equipment, including computers;
and
(e) training services for staff of clients, related to software, computers or computer systems, and
not elsewhere classified.
4. The Parties understand that, in many cases, computer and related services enable the provision
of other services1 by both electronic and other means. However, in such cases, there is an important
distinction between the computer and related service (e.g., web-hosting or application hosting) and
the other service2 enabled by the computer and related service. The other service, regardless of
whether it is enabled by a computer and related service, is not covered by CPC 84.
 1 E.g.,W/120.1.A.b. (accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services), W/120.1.A.d.
(architectural services), W/120.1.A.h. (medical and dental services), W/120.2.D (audiovisual
services), W/120.5. (educational services).
2 See previous footnote.
EU/SG/en 115
SUB-SECTION 4
POSTAL SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.22
Prevention of Anti-Competitive Practices in the Postal Sector1
Each Party shall introduce or maintain appropriate measures2 for the purpose of preventing
suppliers of postal services who, alone or together, are a major supplier in the relevant market for
postal services, from engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices.
ARTICLE 8.23
Independence of Regulatory Bodies
Regulatory bodies shall be separate from, and shall not be accountable to, any supplier of postal
services. The decisions of and the procedures used by regulatory bodies shall be impartial with
respect to all market participants.
 1 For greater certainty, only measures relating to basic letter services shall be subject to
Article 8.22 (Prevention of Anti-Competitive Practices in the Postal Sector).
2 The maintenance of appropriate measures includes the effective enforcement of such
measures.
EU/SG/en 116
SUB-SECTION 5
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.24
Scope
1. This Sub-Section applies to measures that affect trade in telecommunications services and sets
out the principles of the regulatory framework for telecommunications services, liberalised pursuant
to Section B to Section D.
2. This Sub-Section does not apply to any measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to
cable or broadcast distribution of radio or television programming.
3. Nothing in this Sub-Section shall be construed as requiring a Party:
(a) to authorise a service supplier of the other Party to establish, construct, acquire, lease, operate,
or provide telecommunications transport networks or services, other than as provided for in its
Schedule of Specific Commitments; or
(b) to establish, construct, acquire, lease, operate, or provide telecommunications transport
networks or services where such networks or services are not offered to the public generally,
or to compel any service supplier to do so.
EU/SG/en 117
4. Each Party shall impose, maintain, amend or withdraw the rights and obligations of service
suppliers provided for in the Article 8.26 (Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications
Networks and Services), Article 8.28 (Interconnection), Article 8.29 (Interconnection with Major
Suppliers), Article 8.30 (Conduct of Major Suppliers), Article 8.32 (Unbundled Network Elements),
Article 8.33 (Co-location), Article 8.34 (Resale), Article 8.35 (Facility Sharing), Article
8.36 (Provisioning of Leased Circuits Services) and Article 8.38 (Submarine Cable Landing
Stations) in a manner consistent with its domestic law and internal procedures for the regulation of
its telecommunications markets. For the Union, such procedures entail the analysis by the Union
regulators of the relevant product and service markets provided for in the relevant Union legislation,
of the designation of a service supplier as having significant market power and the decision of
regulators, based upon such analysis, to impose, maintain, amend or withdraw such rights and
obligations.
ARTICLE 8.25
Definitions
For the purposes of this Sub-Section:
(a) "broadcasting service" refers to the uninterrupted chain of transmission via wired or wireless
means, regardless of the location of the originating transmission, required for the reception or
display of aural or visual programme signals by all or any part of the public, but does not
cover contribution links between operators;
EU/SG/en 118
(b) "end-user" means a service consumer or a service supplier to whom a public
telecommunications network or service is supplied other than for use in the further supply of a
public telecommunications network or service;
(c) "essential facilities" mean facilities of a public telecommunications transport network or
service that:
(i) are exclusively or predominantly provided by a single or limited number of suppliers;
and
(ii) cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order to provide a service;
(d) "interconnection" means linking with suppliers providing public telecommunications
transport networks or services in order to allow the users of one supplier to communicate with
users of another supplier and to access services provided by another supplier;
(e) "major supplier" means a supplier of public telecommunications networks or services that has
the ability to materially affect the terms of participation in the relevant market for public
telecommunications networks or services, having regard to price and supply, as a result of:
(i) control over essential facilities; or
(ii) use of its position in the market;
EU/SG/en 119
(f) "non-discriminatory" means treatment that is no less favourable than that accorded to any
other user of like public telecommunications transport networks or services in like
circumstances;
(g) "number portability" means the ability of end-users of public telecommunications networks or
services to retain existing telephone numbers at the same location, without impairment of
quality, reliability or convenience when switching between like suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services;
(h) "public telecommunications network" means a telecommunications network which a Party
requires to provide telecommunications services between defined network termination points;
(i) "public telecommunications service" means any telecommunications service that a Party
requires, explicitly or in effect, to be offered to the public generally;
(j) "submarine cable landing station" means the premises and buildings where international
submarine cables arrive and terminate and are connected to backhaul links;
(k) "telecommunications" means the transmission and reception of signals by any
electromagnetic means;
EU/SG/en 120
(l) "telecommunications services" means all services consisting of the transmission and reception
of electro-magnetic signals, but excludes broadcasting services and economic activities
consisting of the provision of content which requires telecommunications for its transport; and
(m) "telecommunications regulatory body" means the national body or bodies charged with the
regulation of telecommunications.
ARTICLE 8.26
Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Networks and Services
1. Each Party shall ensure that all service suppliers of the other Party have access to and use of
any public telecommunications network and service offered in its territory or across its borders,
including private leased circuits, on reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent terms and
conditions, including as set out in paragraphs 2 and 3.
2. Each Party shall ensure that such service suppliers are permitted to:
(a) purchase or lease, and attach terminal or other equipment which interfaces with the public
telecommunications network;
EU/SG/en 121
(b) interconnect private leased or owned circuits with public telecommunications networks and
services in its territory, or across its borders, or with circuits leased or owned by other service
suppliers; and
(c) use operating protocols of their choice, other than as necessary to ensure the availability of
telecommunications networks and services to the public generally.
3. Each Party shall ensure that all service suppliers of the other Party may use public
telecommunications networks and services for the movement of information in its territory or across
its borders, including for intra-corporate communications of such service suppliers and for access to
information contained in databases or otherwise stored in machine-readable form in the territory of
either Party. Any new or amended measures of a Party significantly affecting such use shall be
notified to the other Party and shall be subject to consultations.
ARTICLE 8.27
Confidentiality of Information
Each Party shall ensure the confidentiality of telecommunications and related traffic data by means
of any public telecommunications network or service, without restricting trade in services.
EU/SG/en 122
ARTICLE 8.28
Interconnection1
1. Each Party shall ensure that any service supplier authorised to provide public
telecommunications networks or services has the right and obligation to negotiate interconnection
with other suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services. Interconnection should be
agreed on the basis of commercial negotiations between the parties concerned.
2. Regulatory authorities shall ensure that suppliers that acquire information from another
undertaking during the process of negotiating interconnection arrangements use that information
solely for the purpose for which it was supplied, and at all times respect the confidentiality of
information transmitted or stored.
 1 For the purposes of this Article and Article 8.30 (Conduct of Major Suppliers), designation of
a supplier of public telecommunications networks and services as a major supplier shall be in
accordance with the domestic law and procedures of each Party.
EU/SG/en 123
ARTICLE 8.29
Interconnection with Major Suppliers
1. Each Party shall ensure that any major supplier in its territory provides interconnection for the
facilities and equipment of suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services of the other
Party at any technically feasible point in the major supplier's network. Such interconnection shall be
provided:
(a) under non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications)
and rates, and of a quality no less favourable than that provided for the own like services of
such major supplier, or for like services of non-affiliated suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services, or for its subsidiaries or other affiliates;
(b) in a timely fashion, on terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications),
and cost-oriented rates that are transparent, are reasonable, having regard to economic
feasibility, and are sufficiently unbundled so that the supplier need not pay for network
components or facilities that it does not require for the service to be provided; and
(c) upon request, at points in addition to the network termination points offered to the majority of
suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services, subject to charges that reflect
the cost of construction of necessary additional facilities.
EU/SG/en 124
2. Each Party shall ensure that major suppliers in its territory make publicly available their
interconnection agreements or a reference interconnection offer.
3. The procedures applicable for interconnection to a major supplier shall be made publicly
available.
4. When suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services are unable to resolve
disputes regarding the terms, conditions and rates on which interconnection is to be provided by a
major supplier, they shall have recourse to the regulatory authority, which shall aim to resolve the
disputes in the shortest possible timeframe and in any case within 180 days of the referral to it,
provided that the resolution of complex disputes may take longer than 180 days.
ARTICLE 8.30
Conduct of Major Suppliers
1. Each Party may impose obligations of non-discrimination on major suppliers in relation to
interconnection or access.
2. Obligations of non-discrimination shall ensure, in particular, that the major supplier applies
equivalent conditions in equivalent circumstances to other suppliers providing equivalent services
and provides services and information to others under equivalent conditions and of the same quality
as it provides for its own services or for the services of its subsidiaries or partners.
EU/SG/en 125
ARTICLE 8.31
Competitive Safeguards on Major Suppliers
Each Party shall introduce or maintain appropriate measures1 for the purpose of preventing
suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services who, alone or together, are a major
supplier in its territory from engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices. These
anti-competitive practices shall include in particular:
(a) engaging in anti-competitive cross-subsidisation or margin squeeze;
(b) using information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive results;
(c) not making available to suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services, on a
timely basis, technical information about essential facilities and commercially relevant
information which are necessary for them to provide public telecommunications services;
(d) pricing services in a manner that is likely to unreasonably restrict competition, such as
predatory pricing.
 1 The maintenance of appropriate measures includes the effective enforcement of such
measures.
EU/SG/en 126
ARTICLE 8.32
Unbundled Network Elements
1. Each Party shall impose obligations on major suppliers to meet reasonable requests for access
to, and use of, specific network elements and associated facilities at any technically feasible point,
on an unbundled basis, in a timely fashion and on terms and conditions that are reasonable,
transparent, and non-discriminatory, and in particular:
(a) to give access to specified network elements and/or facilities, including access to network
elements which are not active, and/or unbundled access to the local loop to, inter alia, allow
subscriber line resale offers;
(b) to grant open access to technical interfaces, protocols or other key technologies that are
indispensable for the interoperability of services or virtual network services;
(c) to provide co-location; and
(d) to provide services required to ensure interoperability of end-to-end services to users.
2. When a Party is considering the obligations referred in paragraph 1, it may take account of,
inter alia, the following factors:
(a) the technical and economic viability of using or installing competing facilities, taking into
account the nature and type of interconnection and access involved, including the viability of
other upstream access products such as access to ducts;
EU/SG/en 127
(b) the feasibility of providing the access proposed, in relation to the capacity available;
(c) the initial investment by the facility owner, taking into account the risks involved in making
the investment; and
(d) the need to safeguard effective and sustainable competition.
ARTICLE 8.33
Co-location
1. Each Party shall ensure that major suppliers in its territory provide to suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services of the other Party physical co-location of equipment
necessary for interconnection or access to unbundled network elements in a timely fashion and on
terms and conditions that are reasonable and non-discriminatory.
2. Each Party may determine in accordance with its domestic law the locations at which it
requires major suppliers in its territory to provide co-location under paragraph 1.
EU/SG/en 128
ARTICLE 8.34
Resale
Each Party shall ensure that major suppliers in its territory offer for resale to suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services of the other Party, public telecommunications services
that such major suppliers provide at retail to end-users in accordance with the provisions of this
Sub-Section and, in particular, with Article 8.32 (Unbundled Network Elements).
ARTICLE 8.35
Facility Sharing
1. Each Party shall be able, taking into account the principle of proportionality, to impose on any
major supplier having the right to install facilities on, over or under public or private property, the
sharing of such facilities or property, including buildings, entries to buildings, building wiring,
masts, antennae, towers and other supporting constructions, poles, ducts, conduits, manholes and
cabinets.
2. Each Party may determine in accordance with its domestic law the facilities to which it
requires major suppliers in its territory to provide access under paragraph 1, on the basis that such
facilities cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order to provide a competing
service.
EU/SG/en 129
ARTICLE 8.36
Provisioning of Leased Circuits Services
Each Party shall ensure that major suppliers of leased circuits services in its territory provide
juridical persons of the other Party leased circuits services that are public telecommunications
services in a timely fashion on terms and conditions that are reasonable, non-discriminatory and
transparent.
ARTICLE 8.37
Number Portability
Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications services in its territory provide
number portability for those services designated by that Party, to the extent technically feasible, on
a timely basis and on reasonable terms and conditions.
ARTICLE 8.38
Submarine Cable Landing Stations
Each Party shall ensure access to submarine cable systems, including landing facilities, in its
territory, where a supplier is authorised to operate a submarine cable system as a public
telecommunications service, on reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent terms and
conditions.
EU/SG/en 130
ARTICLE 8.39
Independent Regulatory Authority
1. Each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory body is separate from, and not
accountable to, any supplier of public telecommunications networks or services or
telecommunications equipment. To this end, each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications
regulatory body does not hold any financial interest or control in such a supplier.
2. Each Party shall ensure that the decisions of, and procedures followed by, its
telecommunications regulatory bodies are fair and impartial with respect to all market participants
and that they are made and implemented without undue delay. To this end, each Party shall ensure
that any financial interest that it holds in a supplier of public telecommunications networks or
services does not influence the decisions of, and procedures followed by, its telecommunications
regulatory body.
3. The powers of the regulatory authorities shall be exercised transparently in accordance with
the applicable domestic law.
4. Regulatory authorities shall have the power to ensure that suppliers of telecommunications
transport networks and services within their respective territories provide them, promptly upon
request, with all the information, including financial information, which is necessary to enable the
regulatory authorities to carry out their tasks in accordance with this Sub-Section. Information
requested shall be reasonably proportionate to the performance of the regulatory authorities' tasks
and treated in accordance with the requirements of confidentiality.
EU/SG/en 131
5. The regulatory authority shall be sufficiently empowered to regulate the sector. The tasks to
be undertaken by a regulatory authority shall be made public in an easily accessible and clear form,
in particular where those tasks are assigned to more than one body.
ARTICLE 8.40
Universal Services
1. Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligations that it wishes to
maintain.
2. Such obligations will not be regarded as anti-competitive per se, provided that they are
administered in a transparent, objective, non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner and
are not more burdensome than necessary for the kind of universal service defined by the Party.
3. Where a Party requires a supplier of telecommunications services to provide directories of
subscribers, that Party shall ensure that the supplier applies the principle of non-discrimination to
the treatment of information that has been provided to them by other suppliers of such
telecommunications services.
EU/SG/en 132
ARTICLE 8.41
Authorisation to Provide Telecommunications Services
1. Each Party shall ensure that licensing procedures are as simple as possible and do not unduly
complicate or delay the provisions of the service.
2. Where a Party requires a supplier of public telecommunications networks or services to have
a licence, that Party shall make publicly available:
(a) all the licensing criteria, terms, conditions and procedures it applies; and
(b) a reasonable period of time that would normally be required to reach a decision concerning an
application for a licence.
3. Each Party shall ensure that, if it so requests, the applicant receives in writing the reasons for
the denial of a licence.
4. Where a licence has been unduly denied, the applicant for a licence shall be able to seek
recourse before an appeal body.
5. Any licensing or authorisation fees1 which the applicants may incur from their application
should be reasonable and should not in themselves restrict the supply of the service.
 1 Licensing or authorisation fees do not include payments for auction, tendering or other
non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal
service provision.
EU/SG/en 133
ARTICLE 8.42
Allocation and Use of Scarce Resources
1. Any procedures for the allocation and use of scarce resources, including frequencies, numbers
and rights of way, shall be carried out in an objective, timely, transparent and non-discriminatory
manner. The current state of allocated frequency bands shall be made publicly available, but
detailed identification of frequencies allocated for specific government uses is not required.
2. The Parties understand that decisions on allocating and assigning spectrum and frequency
management are not measures that are per se inconsistent with Articles 8.5 (Market Access) and
8.10 (Market Access). Accordingly, each Party retains the right to exercise its spectrum and
frequency management policies, which may affect the number of suppliers of public
telecommunications services, provided that this is done in a manner that is consistent with this
Chapter. The Parties also retain the right to allocate frequency bands in a manner that takes existing
and future needs into account.
ARTICLE 8.43
Enforcement
1. Each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory body maintains appropriate
procedures and has the authority to enforce domestic measures relating to the obligations under this
Sub-Section. Such procedures and authority shall include the ability to impose timely, proportionate
and effective sanctions, and the ability to modify, suspend, and revoke licences.
EU/SG/en 134
2. Where a major supplier refuses the application of the rights and obligations provided for in
Article 8.29 (Interconnection with Major Suppliers), Article 8.30 (Conduct of Major Suppliers),
Article 8.31 (Competitive Safeguards on Major Suppliers), Article 8.32 (Unbundled Network
Elements), Article 8.33 (Co-location), Article 8.34 (Resale), Article 8.35 (Facility Sharing) or
Article 8.36 (Provisioning of Leased Circuit Services), the requesting service supplier may seek the
intervention of the regulatory body, which shall issue, in accordance with its domestic law, a
binding decision , in the shortest possible period of time, and in any case within a reasonable period
of time.
ARTICLE 8.44
Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes
1. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services of
the other Party have timely recourse to a telecommunications regulatory body or other relevant
body to resolve disputes arising under domestic measures that address a matter set out in this
Sub-Section.
2. Each Party shall ensure that any supplier of public telecommunications networks or services
of the other Party that is affected by a decision of its telecommunications regulatory body may
appeal against that decision to a judicial or administrative authority independent of the parties
involved.
3. Where the appeal body is not judicial in character, written reasons for its decision shall be
given and its decision shall be subject to review by an impartial and independent judicial authority.
EU/SG/en 135
4. Decisions taken by appeal bodies shall be effectively implemented by the parties concerned in
accordance with the applicable domestic law and internal procedures. An appeal shall not relieve a
party concerned of its obligation to comply with the underlying regulatory decision unless an
appropriate authority has stayed that regulatory decision.
ARTICLE 8.45
Transparency
When regulatory bodies intend to take measures related to the provisions of this Sub-Section, they
shall give interested parties the opportunity to comment on the draft measure within a reasonable
period of time, in accordance with their domestic law. Regulatory bodies shall make their
consultation procedures for such draft measures publicly available. The results of the consultation
procedure should be made publicly available by the regulatory body except in the case of
confidential information in accordance with the domestic law on business confidentiality.
ARTICLE 8.46
Flexibility in the Choice of Technologies
Neither Party shall prevent suppliers of public telecommunications services from having the
flexibility to choose the technologies that they use to supply their services, subject to the ability of
each Party to take measures to ensure that end-users of different networks are able to communicate
with each other.
EU/SG/en 136
ARTICLE 8.47
Relationship to other Sub-Sections, Sections and Chapters
In the event of any inconsistency between this Sub-Section and another Sub-Section or Section in
this Chapter or another Chapter, this Sub-Section shall prevail to the extent of such inconsistency.
ARTICLE 8.48
Cooperation
1. The Parties, recognising the rapid development of the telecommunications and information
technology industry, both in the domestic and international contexts, shall cooperate to promote the
development of such services with a view to obtaining the maximum benefit for the Parties from the
use of telecommunications and information technology.
2. The areas of cooperation may include the following:
(a) exchanging views on policy issues such as the regulatory framework for high speed
broadband networks and the reduction of international mobile roaming charges; and
(b) promoting the use by consumers, the public sector and the private sector of
telecommunications and information technology services, including newly emerging services.
EU/SG/en 137
3. The forms of cooperation may include the following:
(a) promoting dialogue on policy issues;
(b) enhancing cooperation in international fora relating to telecommunications and information
technology; and
(c) other forms of cooperation activities.
SUB-SECTION 6
FINANCIAL SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.49
Scope and Definitions
1. This Sub-Section sets out the principles of the regulatory framework for all financial services
liberalised pursuant to Sections B (Cross-border Supply of Services), C (Establishment) and D
(Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes).
EU/SG/en 138
2. For the purposes of this Sub-Section:
(a) "financial service" means any service of a financial nature, including a service incidental or
auxiliary to a service of a financial nature, offered by a financial service supplier of a Party;
financial services include the following activities:
(i) insurance and insurance-related services:
(1) direct insurance (including co-insurance):
(aa) life insurance;
(bb) non-life insurance;
(2) reinsurance and retrocession;
(3) insurance inter-mediation, such as brokerage and agency; and
(4) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment and
claim settlement services;
and
(ii) banking and other financial services (excluding insurance):
(1) the acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;
EU/SG/en 139
(2) lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring and
financing of commercial transaction;
(3) financial leasing;
(4) all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and debit
cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts;
(5) guarantees and commitments;
(6) the trading on own account or for the account of customers, whether on an
exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, of the following:
(aa) money market instruments (including cheques, bills, certificates of
deposits);
(bb) foreign exchange;
(cc) derivative products including, but not limited to, futures and options;
(dd) exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as
swaps, forward rate agreements;
(ee) transferable securities;
EU/SG/en 140
(ff) other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion;
(7) the participation in issues of securities of all kinds, including underwriting and
placement as agent, whether publicly or privately, and provision of services
related to such issues;
(8) money broking;
(9) asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, any form of collective
investment management, pension fund management, custodial, depository and
trust services;
(10) settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;
(11) the provision and transfer of financial information, and the provision of financial
data processing and related software by suppliers of other financial services; and
(12) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities
listed in subparagraphs (1) to (11), including credit reference and analysis,
investment and portfolio research and advice, advice on acquisitions and on
corporate restructuring and strategy;
EU/SG/en 141
(b) "financial service supplier" means any natural or juridical person of a Party that is engaged or
is seeking to engage in the business of supplying financial services within the territory of that
Party but does not include a public entity;
(c) "new financial service" means a service of a financial nature, including services related to
existing and new products or the manner in which a product is delivered, that is not supplied
by any financial service supplier in the territory of a Party but which is supplied in the
territory of the other Party;
(d) "public entity" means:
(i) a government, central bank or monetary authority of a Party, or an entity owned or
controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in carrying out governmental functions
or activities for governmental purposes, other than an entity principally engaged in
supplying financial services on commercial terms; or
(ii) a private entity, performing functions normally performed by a central bank or
monetary authority, when exercising those functions; and
(e) "self-regulatory organisation" means any non-governmental body, including any securities or
futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or other organisation or association, that
exercises regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service suppliers by statute or
delegation from central, regional or local governments or authorities.
EU/SG/en 142
ARTICLE 8.50
Prudential Carve-out
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining
reasonable measures for prudential reasons, such as:
(a) the protection of investors, depositors, policy-holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is
owed by a financial service supplier;
(b) the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial
service suppliers; or
(c) ensuring the integrity and stability of the Party's financial system.
2. These measures shall not be more burdensome than necessary to achieve their aim, and shall
not constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against financial service suppliers
of the other Party in comparison to its own like financial service suppliers, or a disguised restriction
on trade in services.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to disclose information
relating to the affairs and accounts of individual consumers or to disclose any confidential or
proprietary information in the possession of public entities.
EU/SG/en 143
4. Each Party shall use its best endeavours to ensure that the Basel Committee's "Core Principles
for Effective Banking Supervision", the standards and principles of the International Association of
Insurance Supervisors and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions' "Objectives
and Principles of Securities Regulation", and the internationally agreed Standard for transparency
and exchange of information for tax purposes, as spelled out in the 2017 OECD Model Tax
Convention on Income and on Capital, are implemented and applied in its territory.
5. Subject to Article 8.6 (National Treatment) and without prejudice to other means of prudential
regulation of cross-border trade in financial services, a Party may require the registration or
authorisation of cross-border financial service suppliers of the other Party and of financial
instruments.
ARTICLE 8.51
Self-regulatory Organisations
When membership or participation in, or access to, any self-regulatory organisation is required by a
Party in order for financial service suppliers of the other Party to supply financial services in or into
the territory of the first Party, the Party shall ensure observance of the obligations under Article 8.6
(National Treatment) and Article 8.11 (National Treatment) by such self-regulatory organisation.
EU/SG/en 144
ARTICLE 8.52
Payment and Clearing Systems
Under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each Party shall, as permitted by its
access criteria, grant to financial service suppliers of the other Party that are established in its
territory and regulated or supervised as financial service suppliers under its domestic law, access to
payment and clearing systems operated by public entities and to official funding and refinancing
facilities available in the normal course of ordinary business. This Article is not intended to confer
access to a Party's lender-of-last-resort facilities.
ARTICLE 8.53
New Financial Services
Each Party shall permit a financial service supplier of the other Party to supply any new financial
service that the first Party would permit its own like financial service suppliers to supply without
additional legislative action required by the first Party. Each Party may determine the institutional
and juridical form through which the new financial service may be supplied and may require
authorisation for the supply of the service. Where a Party requires such authorisation, a decision
shall be made within a reasonable time and the authorisation may only be refused for prudential
reasons under Article 8.50 (Prudential Carve-out).
EU/SG/en 145
ARTICLE 8.54
Data Processing
1. Each Party shall, subject to appropriate safeguards on privacy and confidentiality, permit a
financial service supplier of the other Party to transfer information in electronic or other form, into
and out of its territory, for data processing, where such processing is required in the ordinary course
of business of such financial service supplier.
2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate safeguards to protect privacy and personal
data, including individual records and accounts, as long as these safeguards are not used to
circumvent the provisions of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8.55
Specific Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party, including its public entities,
from exclusively conducting or providing activities or services in its territory that form part of a
public retirement plan or statutory system of social security, except where those activities may be
carried out, by financial service suppliers in competition with public entities or private institutions,
as provided by the Party's domestic regulation.
EU/SG/en 146
2. Nothing in this Agreement applies to activities conducted by a central bank or monetary
authority or by any other public entity in pursuit of monetary or exchange rate policies.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party, including its public entities,
from exclusively conducting or providing activities or services in its territory for the account or
with the guarantee or using the financial resources of the Party, or its public entities, except where
that Party's domestic regulation provides that those activities may be carried out by financial service
suppliers in competition with public entities or private institutions.
SUB-SECTION 7
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME TRANSPORT SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.56
Scope, Definitions and Principles
1. This Sub-Section sets out the principles regarding the liberalisation of international maritime
transport services pursuant to Sections B (Cross-border Supply of Services), C (Establishment) and
D (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes).
EU/SG/en 147
2. For the purposes of this Sub-Section, "international maritime transport" includes door-to-door
and multi-modal transport operations, which means the carriage of goods using more than one mode
of transport, and which involves a sea-leg, where such carriage takes place under a single transport
document, and to this effect involves the right to contract directly with providers of other modes of
transport.
3. As regards international maritime transport, the Parties agree to ensure the effective
application of the principles of unrestricted access to cargoes on a commercial basis, the freedom to
supply international maritime transport services, as well as national treatment in the framework of
the supply of such services.
In view of the existing levels of liberalisation between the Parties in international maritime
transport:
(a) the Parties shall effectively apply the principle of unrestricted access to the international
maritime transport markets and trades on a commercial and non-discriminatory basis; and
(b) each Party shall grant to ships flying the flag of the other Party or operated by service
suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable than the treatment that the granting
Party accords to its own ships or those of any third country, whichever is better, with regard
to, inter alia, access to ports, the use of infrastructure and auxiliary maritime services of the
ports, as well as with regard to related fees and charges, customs facilities and access to berths
and facilities for loading and unloading.
EU/SG/en 148
4. In applying these principles, the Parties shall:
(a) not introduce cargo-sharing arrangements in future agreements with third countries
concerning maritime transport services, including dry and liquid bulk and liner trade, and
shall terminate, within a reasonable period of time, any such cargo-sharing arrangements that
exist in previous agreements; and
(b) upon the entry into force of this Agreement, abolish and abstain from introducing any
unilateral measures1 or administrative, technical and other obstacles which could constitute a
disguised restriction or could have discriminatory effects on the free supply of services in
international maritime transport.
5. Each Party shall permit international maritime transport service suppliers of the other Party to
have an establishment in its territory under conditions of establishment and operation in accordance
with the conditions inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments.
6. The Parties shall make the use of the following services at the port available to international
maritime transport suppliers of the other Party on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and
conditions:
(a) pilotage;
(b) towing and tug assistance;
 1 For the purposes of this subparagraph, the term "measures" shall comprise only measures that
adversely discriminate based on the nationality or geographic area(s) of origin of the natural
or juridical person to which the measure is applied.
EU/SG/en 149
(c) provisioning;
(d) fuelling and watering;
(e) garbage collecting and ballast waste disposal;
(f) port captain's services;
(g) navigation aids;
(h) shore-based operational services that are essential to ship operations, including
communications, water and electrical supplies; and
(i) emergency repair facilities, anchorage, berth and berthing services.
SECTION F
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
ARTICLE 8.57
Objectives
1. The Parties, recognising that electronic commerce increases trade opportunities in many
sectors, agree on the importance of facilitating its use and development and the applicability of
WTO rules to electronic commerce.
EU/SG/en 150
2. The Parties agree to promote the development of electronic commerce between them, in
particular by cooperating on the issues raised by electronic commerce under the provisions of this
Chapter. Within this context both Parties should avoid imposing unnecessary regulations or
restrictions on electronic commerce.
3. The Parties recognise the importance of the free flow of information on the internet, while
agreeing that this should not impair the rights of intellectual property owners, given the importance
of protecting intellectual property rights on the internet.
4. The Parties agree that the development of electronic commerce must be fully compatible with
international standards of data protection, in order to ensure the confidence of users of electronic
commerce.
ARTICLE 8.58
Customs Duties
The Parties shall not impose customs duties on electronic transmissions.
EU/SG/en 151
ARTICLE 8.59
Electronic Supply of Services
For greater certainty, the Parties affirm that measures related to the supply of a service using
electronic means falls within the scope of the obligations contained in the relevant provisions of this
Chapter, subject to any exceptions applicable to such obligations.
ARTICLE 8.60
Electronic Signatures
1. The Parties shall take steps to facilitate the better understanding of each other's electronic
signatures framework and, subject to relevant domestic conditions and legislation, to examine the
feasibility of having a mutual recognition agreement on electronic signatures in the future.
2. In achieving the objectives of paragraph 1, each Party shall:
(a) facilitate, as much as possible, the representation of the other Party in available fora on
electronic signatures organised formally or informally by its own competent authorities, by
allowing the other Party to present its electronic signatures framework;
(b) encourage, as much as possible, the exchange of views on electronic signatures through
dedicated seminars and expert meetings in areas such as security and interoperability; and
EU/SG/en 152
(c) contribute, as much as possible, to the other Party's efforts to study and analyse its own
framework by making available relevant information.
ARTICLE 8.61
Regulatory Cooperation on Electronic Commerce
1. The Parties shall maintain a dialogue on regulatory issues raised by electronic commerce,
which will, inter alia, address the following issues:
(a) the recognition of certificates of electronic signatures issued to the public and the facilitation
of cross-border certification services;
(b) the liability of intermediary service providers with respect to the transmission or storage of
information;
(c) the treatment of unsolicited electronic commercial communications;
(d) the protection of consumers; and
(e) any other issue relevant for the development of electronic commerce.
EU/SG/en 153
2. This cooperation may take the form of an exchange of information on the Parties' respective
legislation on these issues as well as on the implementation of such legislation.
SECTION G
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 8.62
General Exceptions
Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a
means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against the other Party where like conditions
prevail, or a disguised restriction on establishment or cross-border supply of services, nothing in
this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party of measures:
(a) necessary to protect public security or public morals or to maintain public order1;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are applied in
conjunction with restrictions on domestic entrepreneurs or on the domestic supply or
consumption of services;
(d) necessary for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value;
(e) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Chapter, including those relating to:
(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the effects of a
default on contracts;
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and
dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality of individual records
and accounts; or
(iii) safety;
or
EU/SG/en 155
(f) inconsistent with Article 8.6 (National Treatment) and Article 8.11 (National Treatment),
provided that the difference in treatment is aimed at ensuring the effective or equitable
imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of economic activities, entrepreneurs or
service suppliers of the other Party.1
 1 Measures that are aimed at ensuring the effective or equitable imposition or collection of
direct taxes include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:
(a) apply to non-resident entrepreneurs and service suppliers in recognition of the fact that
the tax obligation of non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced
or located in the Party's territory;
(b) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the
Party's territory;
(c) apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes,
including compliance measures;
(d) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of the other Party in
order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from
sources in the Party's territory;
(e) distinguish entrepreneurs and service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable
items from other entrepreneurs and service suppliers, in recognition of the difference in
the nature of the tax base between them; or
(f) determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of
resident persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same
person, in order to safeguard the Party's tax base.
Tax terms or concepts in subparagraph (f) and in this footnote are determined according to tax
definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the domestic
law of the Party taking the measure.
EU/SG/en 156
ARTICLE 8.63
Review
With a view to further deepening liberalisation and eliminating remaining restrictions and ensuring
an overall balance of rights and obligations, the Parties shall review this Chapter and their
Schedules of Specific Commitments no later than three years after the entry into force of this
Agreement, and at regular intervals thereafter. As a result of such review, the Committee on Trade
in Services, Investment and Government Procurement established pursuant to
Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees) may decide to amend the relevant Schedules of Specific
Commitments.
ARTICLE 8.64
Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and Government Procurement
1. The Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and Government Procurement shall be
responsible for the effective implementation of this Chapter and to that end it shall:
(a) regularly review the implementation of this Chapter by each Party and the Schedules of
Specific Commitments in accordance with Article 8.63 (Review);
(b) as appropriate, take decisions pursuant to Article 8.63 (Review) amending the Appendices to
Annexes 8-A and 8-B; and
EU/SG/en 157
(c) consider any matter in relation to this Chapter as the Parties may agree.
2. The responsibilities of the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and Government
Procurement in relation to Chapter Nine (Government Procurement) are set out in
Article 9.19 (Responsibilities of the Committee).
CHAPTER NINE
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE 9.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) "commercial goods and services" means goods and services of a type generally sold or
offered for sale in the commercial marketplace to, and customarily purchased by,
non-governmental buyers for non-governmental purposes;
EU/SG/en 158
(b) "competitive activity" means, in the case of the Union:
(i) an activity, performed within the territory of a Member State of the Union, which is
directly exposed to competition in markets to which access is not restricted; and
(ii) a competent authority in the Union has adopted a decision establishing the applicability
of paragraph (i);
for the purposes of subparagraph (b)(i), the question of whether an activity is directly exposed
to competition shall be decided on the basis of the characteristics of the goods or services
concerned, the existence of alternative goods or services, and their prices and the actual or
potential presence of more than one supplier of the goods or services in question;
(c) "construction services" means a service that has as its objective the realisation by whatever
means of civil or building works as defined in Division 51 of the Provisional UN Central
Product Classification (CPC);
(d) "corrective action" means, in the context of domestic review procedures, either setting aside
or ensuring the setting aside of decisions that were taken unlawfully by a procuring entity,
including the removal of discriminatory technical, economic or financial specifications in the
invitation to tender, the contract documents or any other document relating to the tendering
procedure;
EU/SG/en 159
(e) "electronic auction" means an iterative process that involves the use of electronic means for
the presentation by suppliers of either new prices, or new values for quantifiable non-price
elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, or both, resulting in a ranking or
re-ranking of tenders;
(f) "in writing" or "written" means any worded or numbered expression that can be read,
reproduced, and later communicated; it may include electronically transmitted and stored
information;
(g) "juridical person" is understood as provided for in paragraph (b) of Article 8.2 (Definitions);
(h) a "Union juridical person" or a "Singapore juridical person" is understood as provided for in
paragraph (c) of Article 8.2 (Definitions);
(i) "limited tendering" means a procurement method where the procuring entity contacts a
supplier or suppliers of its choice;
(j) "locally established" means a juridical person which is established in one Party and which is
owned or controlled by natural or juridical persons of the other Party;
a juridical person is:
(i) "owned" by natural or juridical persons of the other Party if more than 50 per cent of the
equity interest in that juridical person is beneficially owned by persons of the other
Party; and
EU/SG/en 160
(ii) "controlled" by natural or juridical persons of the other Party if such persons have the
power to name a majority of the directors of that juridical person or otherwise to legally
direct its actions;
(k) "measure" means any law, regulation, procedure, administrative guidance or practice, or any
action of a procuring entity relating to a covered procurement;
(l) "multi-use list" means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has determined satisfies the
conditions for participation in that list, and that the procuring entity intends to use more than
once;
(m) "notice of intended procurement" means a notice published by a procuring entity inviting
interested suppliers to submit a request for participation, a tender, or both;
(n) "offsets" means any condition or undertaking that encourages local development or improves
a Party's balance-of-payments accounts, such as the use of domestic content, the licensing of
technology, investment, counter-trade, and similar actions or requirements;
(o) "open tendering" means a procurement method where all interested suppliers may submit a
tender;
EU/SG/en 161
(p) "privatised" means, in the case of Singapore, an entity that has been reconstituted from a
procuring entity or part thereof to be a legal person acting in accordance with commercial
considerations in the procurement of goods and that is no longer entitled to exercise
governmental authority, even though the government possesses holdings thereof or appoints
members of the Board of Directors thereto;
for greater certainty, where the government of a Party possesses holdings thereof or appoints a
government official to the board of directors of a privatised entity, that entity is deemed to act
in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase of goods and services, such as
with regard to the availability, price and quality of the goods and services if the government
or the government official so appointed does not directly or indirectly influence or direct the
decisions of the board of directors in relation to the entity's procurement of goods and
services;
(q) "procuring entity" means an entity covered under Annexes 9-A, 9-B or 9-C;
(r) "qualified supplier" means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as having satisfied the
conditions for participation;
(s) "Revised GPA" means the text of the Agreement on Government Procurement, as amended
by the Protocol Amending the Agreement on Government Procurement, done at Geneva on
30 March 2012;
EU/SG/en 162
(t) "selective tendering" means a procurement method where only qualified suppliers are invited
by the procuring entity to submit a tender;
(u) "services" includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;
(v) "standard" means a document that has been approved by a recognised body and that provides,
for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines, or characteristics for goods or services, or
related processes and production methods, with which compliance is not mandatory; it may
also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking, or labelling
requirements as they apply to a good, service, process, or production method;
(w) "supplier" means a person or group of persons of either Party, as applicable, that provides or
could provide goods or services; and
(x) "technical specification" means a tendering requirement that:
(i) lays down the characteristics of goods or services to be procured, including quality,
performance, safety, and dimensions, or the processes and methods for their production
or provision; or
(ii) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking, or labelling requirements, as they
apply to a good or service.
EU/SG/en 163
ARTICLE 9.2
Scope and Coverage
Application of this Chapter
1. This Chapter applies to any measure regarding covered procurement, whether or not it is
conducted exclusively or partially by electronic means.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, "covered procurement" means procurement for
governmental purposes:
(a) of goods, services, or any combination thereof:
(i) as specified in each Party's Section of Annexes 9-A to 9-G; and
(ii) not procured with a view to commercial sale or resale, or for use in the production or
supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale;
(b) by any contractual means, including purchase, lease, and rental or hire purchase with or
without an option to buy, and any public-private partnership contracts as defined in
Annex 9-I;
EU/SG/en 164
(c) for which the value, as estimated in accordance with paragraphs 6 to 8, equals or exceeds the
relevant threshold specified in Annexes 9-A to 9-G at the time of publication of a notice in
accordance with Article 9.6 (Notices);
(d) by a procuring entity; and
(e) that is not otherwise excluded from coverage in paragraph 3 or in a Party's Section of
Annexes 9-A to 9-G.
3. Except where provided otherwise in Annexes 9-A to 9-G, this Chapter does not apply to:
(a) the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings, or other immovable property or the rights
thereon;
(b) non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party provides, including
cooperative agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees, and fiscal incentives;
(c) the procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services, liquidation and
management services for regulated financial institutions, or services related to the sale,
redemption and distribution of public debt, including loans and government bonds, notes and
other securities;
(d) public employment contracts;
EU/SG/en 165
(e) procurement conducted:
(i) for the specific purpose of providing international assistance, including development
aid;
(ii) under the particular procedure or condition of an international agreement relating to the
stationing of troops or relating to the joint implementation by the signatory countries of
a project; or
(iii) under the particular procedure or condition of an international organisation, or funded
by international grants, loans, or other assistance, where the applicable procedure or
condition would be inconsistent with this Chapter.
4. Each Party shall specify the following information in Annexes 9-A to 9-G:
(a) in Annex 9-A, the central government entities whose procurement is covered by this Chapter;
(b) in Annex 9-B, the sub-central entities whose procurement is covered by this Chapter;
(c) in Annex 9-C, all other entities whose procurement is covered by this Chapter;
(d) in Annex 9-D, the goods covered by this Chapter;
(e) in Annex 9-E, the services, other than construction services, covered by this Chapter;
EU/SG/en 166
(f) in Annex 9-F, the construction services covered by this Chapter; and
(g) in Annex 9-G, any general notes.
5. Where a procuring entity, in the context of covered procurement, requires persons who are not
listed in Annexes 9-A to 9-C to procure in accordance with particular requirements, Article 9.4
(General Principles) shall apply mutatis mutandis to such requirements.
Valuation
6. In estimating the value of a procurement for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is a
covered procurement, a procuring entity shall:
(a) neither divide a procurement into separate procurements nor select or use a particular
valuation method for estimating the value of a procurement with the intention of totally or
partially excluding it from the application of this Chapter; and
(b) include the estimated maximum total value of the procurement over its entire duration,
whether awarded to one or more suppliers, taking into account all forms of remuneration,
including:
(i) premiums, fees, commissions, and interest; and
(ii) where the procurement provides for the possibility of options, the total value of such
options.
EU/SG/en 167
7. Where an individual requirement for a procurement results in the award of more than one
contract, or in the award of contracts in separate parts (hereafter referred to as "recurring
procurements"), the calculation of the estimated maximum total value shall be based on:
(a) the value of recurring procurements of the same type of good or service awarded during the
preceding twelve months or the procuring entity's preceding fiscal year, adjusted where
possible to take into account anticipated changes in the quantity or value of the good or
service being procured over the subsequent twelve months; or
(b) the estimated value of recurring procurements of the same type of good or service to be
awarded during the twelve months subsequent to the initial contract award or the procuring
entity's fiscal year.
8. In the case of procurement by lease, rental, or hire purchase of goods or services, or
procurement for which a total price is not specified, the basis for valuation shall be:
(a) in the case of a fixed-term contract:
(i) where the term of the contract is twelve months or less, the total estimated maximum
value for its duration; or
(ii) where the term of the contract exceeds twelve months, the total estimated maximum
value, including any estimated residual value;
EU/SG/en 168
(b) where the contract is for an indefinite period, the estimated monthly instalment multiplied
by 48; and
(c) where it is not certain whether the contract is to be a fixed-term contract, subparagraph (b)
shall be used.
ARTICLE 9.3
Security and General Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party from taking any action or
from not disclosing any information that it considers necessary for the protection of its essential
security interests relating to the procurement of arms, ammunition, or war materials, or to
procurement indispensable for national security or for national defence purposes.
2. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner that would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where the same
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to prevent any Party from imposing or enforcing measures:
(a) necessary to protect public morals, order, or safety;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
EU/SG/en 169
(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or
(d) relating to goods or services of persons with disabilities, philanthropic institutions, or prison
labour.
ARTICLE 9.4
General Principles
National Treatment and Non-Discrimination
1. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, each Party, including its
procuring entities, shall immediately and unconditionally accord to the goods and services of the
other Party and to the suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable than the treatment
the Party, including its procuring entities, accords to domestic goods, services, and suppliers.
2. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, a Party, including its procuring
entities, shall not:
(a) treat a locally established supplier of the other Party less favourably than another locally
established supplier on the basis of degree of foreign affiliation or ownership; or
(b) discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the goods or services
offered by that supplier for a particular procurement are goods or services of the other Party.
EU/SG/en 170
Use of Electronic Means
3. When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, procuring entities shall:
(a) ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology systems and software,
including those related to authentication and encryption of information, that are generally
available and interoperable with other generally available information technology systems and
software; and
(b) maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of requests for participation and tenders,
including establishment of the time of receipt and the prevention of inappropriate access.
Conduct of Procurement
4. Procuring entities shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent and impartial manner
that:
(a) is consistent with this Chapter, using methods such as open tendering, selective tendering, and
limited tendering;
(b) avoids conflicts of interest; and
(c) prevents corrupt practices.
EU/SG/en 171
Rules of Origin
5. For the purposes of covered procurement, neither Party may apply rules of origin to goods or
services imported from or supplied from the other Party that are different from the rules of origin
the Party applies at the same time in the normal course of trade to imports or supplies of the same
goods or services from the other Party.
Offsets
6. With regard to covered procurement, a Party, including its procuring entities, shall not seek,
take account of, impose, or enforce any offsets.
Measures Not Specific to Procurement
7. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on, or
in connection with, importation, the method of levying such duties and charges, other import
regulations or formalities, and measures affecting trade in services other than measures governing
covered procurement.
EU/SG/en 172
ARTICLE 9.5
Information on the Procurement System
1. Each Party shall:
(a) promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision, administrative ruling of general
application, standard contract clause mandated by law or regulation and incorporated by
reference in notices or tender documentation, and any procedure regarding covered
procurement, and any modifications thereof, in an officially designated electronic or paper
medium that is widely disseminated and remains readily accessible to the public; and
(b) provide an explanation thereof to the other Party on request.
2. Each Party shall list in Annex 9-H:
(a) the electronic or paper media in which the Party publishes the information described in
paragraph 1; and
(b) the electronic or paper media in which the Party publishes the notices required by
Article 9.6 (Notices), paragraph 8 of Article 9.8 (Qualification of Suppliers), and paragraph 2
of Article 9.15 (Transparency of Procurement Information).
3. Each Party shall promptly notify the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and
Government Procurement established pursuant to Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees) of any
modification to the media of information listed in Annex 9-H.
EU/SG/en 173
ARTICLE 9.6
Notices
Notice of Intended Procurement
1. For each covered procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a notice of intended
procurement, which shall be directly accessible by electronic means, free of charge, through a
single point of access, except in the circumstances described in Article 9.12 (Limited Tendering).
The notice of intended procurement shall remain readily accessible to the public, at least until the
expiration of the time-period indicated in the notice. The appropriate electronic medium shall be
listed by each Party in its Section of Annex 9-H.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each notice of intended procurement shall
include:
(a) the name and address of the procuring entity, and other information necessary to contact the
procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the procurement, and their cost
and terms of payment, if any;
(b) a description of the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the goods or
services to be procured or, where the quantity is not known, the estimated quantity;
(c) for recurring contracts, an estimate, if possible, of the timing of subsequent notices of
intended procurement;
EU/SG/en 174
(d) a description of any options;
(e) the time-frame for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the contract;
(f) the procurement method that will be used and whether it will involve negotiation or electronic
auction;
(g) where applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of requests for
participation in the procurement;
(h) the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;
(i) the language or languages in which tenders or requests for participation may be submitted, if
they may be submitted in a language other than an official language at the place where the
procuring entity is located;
(j) a list and brief description of any conditions for participation of suppliers, including any
requirements for specific documents or certifications to be provided by suppliers in
connection therewith, unless such requirements are included in tender documentation that is
made available to all interested suppliers at the same time as the notice of intended
procurement;
(k) where the procuring entity intends to select a limited number of qualified suppliers to be
invited to tender pursuant to Article 9.8 (Qualification of Suppliers), the criteria that will be
used to select those suppliers and, where applicable, any limitation on the number of suppliers
that will be permitted to tender; and
EU/SG/en 175
(l) an indication that the procurement is covered by this Agreement.
Summary Notice
3. For each case of intended procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a summary notice that
is readily accessible in one of the WTO languages at the same time as the publication of the notice
of intended procurement. The notice shall contain at least the following information:
(a) the subject-matter of the procurement;
(b) the final date for the submission of tenders or, where applicable, any final date for the
submission of requests for participation in the procurement or for inclusion on a multi-use list;
and
(c) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be requested.
Notice of Planned Procurement
4. Procuring entities are encouraged to publish by electronic means through the single point of
access used for the publication of notices of intended procurement as early as possible in each fiscal
year a notice regarding their future procurement plans (hereinafter referred to as a "notice of
planned procurement"). That notice of planned procurement should include the subject-matter of the
procurement and the planned date of the publication of the notice of intended procurement.
EU/SG/en 176
5. Procuring entities covered by Annexes 9-B or 9-C may use a notice of planned procurement
as a notice of intended procurement, provided that the notice of planned procurement includes as
much of the information referred to in paragraph 2 as is available and a statement that interested
suppliers should express their interest in the procurement to the procuring entity.
ARTICLE 9.7
Conditions for Participation
1. Procuring entities shall limit the conditions for participation in a given procurement to those
that are essential to ensure that a supplier has the legal, commercial, technical, and financial ability
to undertake the relevant procurement.
2. In establishing the conditions for participation, procuring entities:
(a) shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to participate in a procurement, the
supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts by a procuring entity of a Party,
or that the supplier has prior experience in the territory of that Party; but
(b) may require relevant prior experience where essential to meet the requirements of the
procurement.
EU/SG/en 177
3. In assessing whether a supplier satisfies the conditions for participation, procuring entities:
(a) shall evaluate the financial capacity and the commercial and technical abilities of a supplier
on the basis of that supplier's business activities both inside and outside the territory of the
Party of the procuring entity; and
(b) shall base their evaluation on the conditions that they specified in advance in notices or tender
documentation.
4. Where there is supporting evidence, a Party, including its procuring entities, may exclude a
supplier on grounds such as:
(a) bankruptcy;
(b) false declarations;
(c) significant or persistent deficiencies in performance of any substantive requirement or
obligation under a prior contract or contracts;
(d) final judgments in respect of serious crimes or other serious offences;
(e) professional misconduct or acts or omissions that adversely reflect upon the commercial
integrity of the supplier; or
(f) failure to pay taxes.
EU/SG/en 178
ARTICLE 9.8
Qualification of Suppliers
Registration Systems and Qualification Procedures
1. Each Party, including its procuring entities, may maintain a supplier registration system under
which interested suppliers are required to register and provide certain information.
2. Each Party shall ensure that:
(a) its procuring entities make efforts to minimise differences in their qualification procedures;
and
(b) where its procuring entities maintain registration systems, those procuring entities make
efforts to minimise differences in their registration systems.
3. Neither Party, including its procuring entities, shall adopt or apply any registration system or
qualification procedure with the purpose or the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to the
participation of suppliers of the other Party in its procurement.
EU/SG/en 179
Selective Tendering
4. Where a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, that procuring entity shall:
(a) in the notice of intended procurement include at least the information in subparagraphs 2(a),
(b), (f), (g), (j), (k), and (l) of Article 9.6 (Notices) and invite suppliers to submit a request for
participation; and
(b) by the commencement of the time period for tendering, provide at least the information in
subparagraphs 2(c), (d), (e), (h), and (i) of Article 9.6 (Notices) to the qualified suppliers that
it notifies in accordance with subparagraph 3(b) of Article 9.10 (Time Periods).
5. Procuring entities shall allow all qualified suppliers to participate in a particular procurement,
unless the procuring entity sets a limit in the notice of intended on the number of suppliers that will
be permitted to tender and states the criteria for selecting the limited number of suppliers. In any
case, the number of suppliers permitted to submit a tender shall be sufficient to ensure competition
without affecting the operational efficiency of the procurement system.
6. Where the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the date of publication
of the notice referred to in paragraph 4, the procuring entity shall ensure that those documents are
made available at the same time to all the qualified suppliers that have been selected in accordance
with paragraph 5.
EU/SG/en 180
Multi-Use Lists
7. Procuring entities may maintain a multi-use list of suppliers, provided that a notice inviting
interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list is:
(a) published annually; and
(b) where published by electronic means, made available continuously, in the appropriate
medium listed in Annex 9-H.
8. The notice provided for in paragraph 7 shall include:
(a) a description of the goods or services, or categories thereof, for which the list may be used;
(b) the conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for inclusion on the list and the
methods that the procuring entity will use to verify that a supplier satisfies the conditions;
(c) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information necessary to contact the
procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the list;
(d) the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or termination, or where the
period of validity is not provided, an indication of the method by which notice will be given
of the termination of use of the list; and
(e) an indication that the list may be used for procurement covered by this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 181
9. Notwithstanding paragraph 7, where a multi-use list will be valid for three years or less,
procuring entities may publish the notice referred to in paragraph 7 only once, at the beginning of
the period of validity of the list, provided that the notice:
(a) states the period of validity and that further notices will not be published; and
(b) is published by electronic means and is made available continuously during the period of its
validity.
10. Procuring entities shall allow suppliers to apply at any time for inclusion on a multi-use list
and shall include on the list all qualified suppliers within a reasonably short time.
11. Where a supplier that is not included on a multi-use list submits a request for participation in a
procurement based on a multi-use list and all required documents relating thereto within the time
period provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 9.10 (Time Periods), the procuring entity shall
examine the request. The procuring entity shall not exclude the supplier from consideration in
respect of the procurement on the grounds that the procuring entity has insufficient time to examine
the request unless, in exceptional cases, due to the complexity of the procurement, the procuring
entity is not able to complete the examination of the request within the time period allowed for the
submission of tenders.
EU/SG/en 182
Annex 9-C Entities
12. Procuring entities covered under Annex 9-C may use a notice inviting suppliers to apply for
inclusion on a multi-use list as a notice of intended procurement, provided that:
(a) the notice is published in accordance with paragraph 7 and includes the information in
paragraph 8, as much of the information in paragraph 2 of Article 9.6 (Notices) as is available,
and a statement that it constitutes a notice of intended procurement or that only the suppliers
on the multi-use list will receive further notices of procurement covered by the multi-use list;
and
(b) the procuring entity promptly provides to suppliers that have expressed an interest to the
procuring entity in a given procurement, sufficient information to permit them to assess their
interest in the procurement, including all remaining information required in paragraph 2 of
Article 9.6 (Notices), to the extent such information is available.
13. Procuring entities covered under Annex 9-C may allow a supplier that has applied for
inclusion on a multi-use list in accordance with paragraph 10 to tender in a given procurement,
where there is sufficient time for the procuring entity to examine whether the supplier satisfies the
conditions for participation.
Information on Procuring Entity Decisions
14. Procuring entities shall promptly inform any supplier that submits a request for participation
or application for inclusion on a multi-use list of the procuring entity's decision with respect to the
request.
EU/SG/en 183
15. Where a procuring entity rejects a supplier's request for participation or application for
inclusion on a multi-use list, ceases to recognise a supplier as qualified, or removes a supplier from
a multi-use list, that procuring entity shall promptly inform the supplier and, at the request of the
supplier, promptly provide the supplier with a written explanation of the reasons for its decision.
ARTICLE 9.9
Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation
Technical Specifications
1. Procuring entities shall not prepare, adopt, or apply any technical specification or prescribe
any conformity assessment procedure with the purpose or the effect of creating unnecessary
obstacles to international trade.
2. In prescribing the technical specifications for the goods or services being procured, procuring
entities shall, where appropriate:
(a) set out the technical specification in terms of performance and functional requirements, rather
than design or descriptive characteristics; and
(b) base the technical specification on international standards, where such exist; otherwise, on
national technical regulations, recognised national standards, or building codes.
EU/SG/en 184
3. Where design or descriptive characteristics are used in the technical specifications, procuring
entities should indicate, where appropriate, that they will consider tenders of equivalent goods or
services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the procurement by including words such as
"or equivalent" in the tender documentation.
4. Procuring entities shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or refer to a
particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design, type, specific origin, producer, or
supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or intelligible way of describing the
procurement requirements, and provided that, in such cases, the procuring entity include words such
as "or equivalent" in the tender documentation.
5. Procuring entities shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have the effect of
precluding competition, advice that may be used in the preparation or adoption of any technical
specification for a specific procurement from a person that may have a commercial interest in the
procurement.
6. For greater certainty, each Party, including its procuring entities, may, in accordance with this
Article, prepare, adopt, or apply technical specifications to promote the conservation of natural
resources or protect the environment.
EU/SG/en 185
7. Where procuring entities lay down environmental characteristics in terms of performance or
functional requirement, as referred to in paragraph 2(a), they may consider using the detailed
specification or, if necessary, parts thereof, as defined by eco-labels existing within the Union and
green labels existing in Singapore, provided that:
(a) those specifications are appropriate to define the characteristics of the supplies or services that
are the object of the contract;
(b) the requirements of the label are drawn up on the basis of scientific information; and
(c) those specifications are accessible to all interested parties.
Tender Documentation
8. Procuring entities shall provide to suppliers tender documentation that includes all
information necessary to permit suppliers to prepare and submit responsive tenders. Unless already
provided in the notice of intended procurement, such documentation shall include a complete
description of:
(a) the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the goods or services to be procured
or, where the quantity is not known, the estimated quantity and any requirements to be
fulfilled, including any technical specifications, conformity assessment certification, plans,
drawings, or instructional materials;
EU/SG/en 186
(b) any conditions for participation of suppliers, including a list of information and documents
that suppliers are required to submit in connection with the conditions for participation;
(c) all evaluation criteria that the procuring entity will apply in the awarding of the contract and,
except where price is the sole criterion, the relative importance of such criteria;
(d) where the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic means, any
authentication and encryption requirements or other requirements related to the submission of
information by electronic means;
(e) where the procuring entity will hold an electronic auction, the rules, including identification
of the elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, on which the auction will be
conducted;
(f) where there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time, and place for the opening and,
where appropriate, the persons authorised to be present;
(g) any other terms or conditions, including terms of payment and any limitation on the means by
which tenders may be submitted, such as whether on paper or by electronic means; and
(h) any dates for the delivery of goods or the supply of services. 9. In establishing any delivery date for the goods or services being procured, procuring entities
shall take into account such factors as the complexity of the procurement, the extent of
subcontracting anticipated and the realistic time required for production, de-stocking and transport
of goods from the point of supply or for supply of services.
10. Procuring entities may lay down environmental conditions relating to the performance of a
procurement, provided that these are compatible with the rules established by this Chapter and are
indicated in the notice of intended procurement or in another notice used as a notice of intended
procurement1 or tender documentation.
11. The evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or in another notice used
as a notice of intended procurement or tender documentation may include, among others, price and
other cost factors, quality, technical merit, environmental characteristics, and terms of delivery.
12. Procuring entities shall promptly:
(a) make available tender documentation to ensure that interested suppliers have sufficient time
to submit responsive tenders;
 1 For the purposes of paragraphs 10, 11 and 13 of this Article and paragraph 2 of Article
9.11 (Negotiations), "another notice used as a notice of intended procurement" means a notice
of planned procurement falling within paragraph 5 of Article 9.6 (Notices) and a notice
inviting suppliers to apply for inclusion on a multi-use list falling within paragraph 12 of
Article 9.8 (Qualification of Suppliers).
EU/SG/en 188
(b) provide, on request, the tender documentation to any interested supplier; and
(c) reply to any reasonable request for relevant information by any interested or participating
supplier, provided that such information does not give that supplier an advantage over other
suppliers.
Modifications
13. Where, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the criteria or
requirements set out in a notice of intended procurement or in another notice used as a notice of
intended procurement or tender documentation provided to participating suppliers, or amends or
reissues a notice or tender documentation, it shall transmit in writing all such modifications or
amended or re-issued notices or tender documentation:
(a) to all suppliers that are participating at the time of the modification, amendment or
re-issuance, where such suppliers are known to the procuring entity, and in all other cases, in
the same manner as the original information was made available; and
(b) in adequate time to allow such suppliers to modify and re-submit amended tenders, as
appropriate.
EU/SG/en 189
ARTICLE 9.10
Time Periods
General
1. Procuring entities shall, consistent with their own reasonable needs, provide sufficient time
for suppliers to prepare and submit requests for participation and responsive tenders, taking into
account such factors as:
(a) the nature and complexity of the procurement;
(b) the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and
(c) the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non-electronic means from foreign as well as
domestic points, where electronic means are not used.
Such time-periods, including any extension of the time periods, shall be the same for all interested
or participating suppliers.
Deadlines
2. Procuring entities that use selective tendering shall establish that, in principle, the final date
for the submission of requests for participation shall not be less than 25 days from the date of
publication of the notice of intended procurement. Where a state of urgency duly substantiated by
the procuring entity renders this time period impracticable, the time period may be reduced to not
less than ten days.
EU/SG/en 190
3. Except as provided for in paragraphs 4, 5, 7 and 8, procuring entities shall establish that the
final date for the submission of tenders shall not be less than 40 days from the date on which:
(a) in the case of open tendering, the notice of intended procurement is published; or
(b) in the case of selective tendering, the procuring entity notifies suppliers that they will be
invited to submit tenders, whether or not it uses a multi-use list.
4. Procuring entities may reduce the time-period for tendering set out in paragraph 3 to not less
than ten days where:
(a) the procuring entity published a notice of planned procurement under paragraph 4 of
Article 9.6 (Notices) at least 40 days and not more than twelve months in advance of the
publication of the notice of intended procurement, and the notice of planned procurement
contains:
(i) a description of the procurement;
(ii) the approximate final dates for the submission of tenders or requests for participation;
(iii) a statement that interested suppliers should express their interest in the procurement to
the procuring entity;
(iv) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be obtained; and
EU/SG/en 191
(v) as much of the information that is required under paragraph 2 of Article 9.6 (Notices)
for the notice of intended procurement, as is available;
(b) the procuring entity, for procurements of a recurring nature, indicated in an initial notice of
intended procurement that subsequent notices will provide time periods for tendering based
on this paragraph; or
(c) a state of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity has rendered the time period for
tendering established in accordance with paragraph 3 impracticable.
5. Procuring entities may reduce the time period for tendering set out in paragraph 3 by five days
for each one of the following circumstances:
(a) the notice of intended procurement is published by electronic means;
(b) all the tender documentation is made available by electronic means from the date of the
publication of the notice of intended procurement; and
(c) the tenders can be received by electronic means by the procuring entity.
6. The use of paragraph 5, in conjunction with paragraph 4, shall in no case result in the
reduction of the time period for tendering set out in paragraph 3 to less than ten days from the date
on which the notice of intended procurement is published.
EU/SG/en 192
7. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Article, where a procuring entity purchases
commercial goods or services, or any combination thereof, it may reduce the time period for
tendering set out in paragraph 3 to not less than thirteen days, provided that it publishes by
electronic means, at the same time, both the notice of intended procurement and the tender
documentation. In addition, where the procuring entity also accepts tenders for commercial goods
and services by electronic means, it may reduce the time period set out in paragraph 3 to not less
than ten days.
8. Where a procuring entity covered under Annexes 9-B or 9-C has selected all or a limited
number of qualified suppliers, the time period for tendering may be fixed by mutual agreement
between the procuring entity and the selected suppliers. In the absence of agreement, the period
shall not be less than ten days.
ARTICLE 9.11
Negotiations
1. Each Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations:
(a) where the procuring entity has indicated its intent to conduct negotiations in the notice of
intended procurement required under paragraph 2 of Article 9.6 (Notices); or
(b) where it appears from the evaluation that no one tender is obviously the most advantageous in
terms of the specific evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or in
another notice used as a notice of intended procurement or tender documentation.
EU/SG/en 193
2. Procuring entities shall:
(a) ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in negotiations is carried out in
accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or in
another notice used as a notice of intended procurement or tender documentation; and
(b) where negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the remaining participating
suppliers to submit any new or revised tenders.
ARTICLE 9.12
Limited Tendering
1. Provided that they do not use this provision for the purpose of avoiding competition among
suppliers or in a manner that discriminates against suppliers of the other Party or protects domestic
suppliers, procuring entities may use limited tendering and may choose not to apply
Article 9.6 (Notices), Article 9.7 (Conditions for Participation), Article 9.8 (Qualification of
Suppliers), paragraphs 8 to 13 of Article 9.9 (Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation),
Article 9.10 (Time Periods), Article 9.11 (Negotiations), Article 9.13 (Electronic Auctions), and
Article 9.14 (Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts) only under any of the following
circumstances:
(a) where:
(i) no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested participation;
EU/SG/en 194
(ii) no tenders that conform to the essential requirements of the tender documentation were
submitted;
(iii) no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or
(iv) the tenders submitted have been collusive;
provided that the procuring entity does not substantially modify the requirements set out in
the tender documentation;
(b) where the goods or services can be supplied only by a particular supplier and no reasonable
alternative or substitute goods or services exist for any of the following reasons:
(i) the requirement is for a work of art;
(ii) the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; or
(iii) due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;
(c) for additional deliveries by the original supplier of goods and services that were not included
in the initial procurement where a change of supplier for such additional goods and services:
(i) cannot be made for economic or technical reasons such as requirements of
interchangeability or interoperability with existing equipment, software, services, or
installations procured under the initial procurement; and
EU/SG/en 195
(ii) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of costs for the
procuring entity;
(d) insofar as is strictly necessary where, for reasons of extreme urgency brought about by events
unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the goods or services could not be obtained in time
using open tendering or selective tendering;
(e) for goods purchased on a commodity market;
(f) where a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service that is developed at its
request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for research, experiment, study or
original development. Original development of a first good or service may include limited
production or supply in order to incorporate the results of field testing and to demonstrate that
the good or service is suitable for production or supply in quantity at acceptable quality
standards, but does not include quantity production, supply for the purpose of establishing
commercial viability, or the recovery of research and development costs;
(g) for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that only arise in the very
short term in the case of unusual disposals, such as those arising from liquidation,
receivership, or bankruptcy, but not for routine purchases from regular suppliers; and
(h) where a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest, provided that:
(i) the contest has been organised in a manner that is consistent with the principles of this
Chapter, in particular relating to the publication of a notice of intended procurement;
and
EU/SG/en 196
(ii) the participants are judged by an independent jury with a view to a design contract
being awarded to a winner.
2. Procuring entities shall prepare a report in writing on each contract awarded under
paragraph 1. The report shall include the name of the procuring entity, the value and kind of goods
or services procured, and a statement indicating the circumstances and conditions described in
paragraph 1 that justified the use of limited tendering.
ARTICLE 9.13
Electronic Auctions
Where a procuring entity intends to conduct a covered procurement using an electronic auction, the
procuring entity shall provide each participant, before commencing the electronic auction, with:
(a) the automatic evaluation method, including the mathematical formula, that is based on the
evaluation criteria set out in the tender documentation and that will be used in the automatic
ranking or re-ranking during the auction;
(b) the results of any initial evaluation of the elements of its tender where the contract is to be
awarded on the basis of the most advantageous tender; and
(c) any other relevant information relating to the conduct of the auction.
EU/SG/en 197
ARTICLE 9.14
Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts
Treatment of Tenders
1. Procuring entities shall receive, open, and treat all tenders in accordance with procedures that
guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the procurement process, and the confidentiality of
tenders.
2. Procuring entities shall not penalise any supplier whose tender is received after the time
specified for receiving tenders if the delay was due solely to mishandling on the part of the
procuring entity.
3. Where a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to correct unintentional
errors of form between the opening of tenders and the awarding of the contract, the procuring entity
shall provide the same opportunity to all participating suppliers.
Awarding of Contracts
4. To be considered for an award, a tender shall have been submitted in writing and shall, at the
time of opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in the notices and tender
documentation, and shall be from a supplier that satisfies the conditions for participation.
EU/SG/en 198
5. Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to award a contract, the
procuring entity shall award the contract to the supplier that the procuring entity has determined to
be capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and that, based solely on the evaluation criteria
specified in the notices and tender documentation, has submitted:
(a) the most advantageous tender; or
(b) where price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.
6. Where a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally lower than the
prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with the supplier that it satisfies the conditions for
participation and is capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract, and whether the price takes into
account the grant of subsidies.
7. Where a procuring entity establishes that a tender is abnormally low because the supplier has
obtained subsidies, it may reject the tender on that ground alone only after having consulted with
the supplier and the latter is unable to prove, within a sufficient period fixed by the procuring entity,
that the subsidy in question was granted in compliance with the disciplines relating to subsidies laid
down in this Agreement.
8. A procuring entity shall not use options, cancel a procurement, or modify awarded contracts,
in a manner that circumvents the obligations under this Chapter.
EU/SG/en 199
ARTICLE 9.15
Transparency of Procurement Information
Information Provided to Suppliers
1. Procuring entities shall promptly inform participating suppliers of the procuring entity's
contract award decisions and, upon the request of a supplier, shall do so in writing. Subject to
paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 9.16 (Disclosure of Information), procuring entities shall, upon
request, provide an unsuccessful supplier with an explanation of the reasons why the procuring
entity did not select its tender and the relative advantages of the successful supplier's tender.
Publication of Award Information
2. Not later than 72 days after the award of each contract covered by this Chapter, the procuring
entity shall publish a notice in the appropriate paper or electronic medium listed in Annex 9-H.
Where the procuring entity publishes the notice only in an electronic medium, the information shall
remain readily accessible for a reasonable period of time. The notice shall include at least the
following information:
(a) a description of the goods or services procured;
(b) the name and address of the procuring entity;
(c) the name and address of the successful supplier;
EU/SG/en 200
(d) the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken into account in the
award of the contract;
(e) the date of award; and
(f) the type of procurement method used, and in cases where limited tendering was used pursuant
to Article 9.12 (Limited Tendering), a description of the circumstances justifying the use of
limited tendering.
Maintenance of Documentation, Reports, and Electronic Traceability
3. Each procuring entity shall, for a period of at least three years from the date it awards a
contract, maintain:
(a) the documentation and reports of tendering procedures and contract awards relating to
covered procurement, including the reports required under Article 9.12 (Limited Tendering);
and
(b) data that ensure the appropriate traceability of the conduct of covered procurement by
electronic means.
Collection and Report of Statistics
4. Each Party agrees to communicate to the other Party the available and comparable statistical
data relevant to the procurement covered by this Chapter.
EU/SG/en 201
ARTICLE 9.16
Disclosure of Information
Provision of Information to Parties
1. Upon the request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide any information necessary
to determine whether a procurement was conducted fairly, impartially and in accordance with this
Chapter, including information on the characteristics and relative advantages of the successful
tender. In cases where release of the information would prejudice competition in future tenders, the
Party that receives that information shall not disclose such information to any supplier, except after
consultation with, and the agreement of, the Party that provided the information.
Non-Disclosure of Information
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party, including its procuring entities,
shall not provide to any particular supplier information that might prejudice fair competition
between suppliers.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring a Party, including its procuring
entities, authorities, and review bodies, to disclose confidential information where disclosure:
(a) would impede law enforcement;
(b) might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;
EU/SG/en 202
(c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons, including the
protection of intellectual property; or
(d) would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.
ARTICLE 9.17
Domestic Review Procedures
1. Each Party shall provide a timely, effective, transparent, and non-discriminatory
administrative or judicial review procedure through which a supplier may challenge:
(a) a breach of this Chapter; or
(b) where the supplier does not have the right to challenge a breach of this Chapter directly under
the domestic law of that Party, a failure to comply with that Party's measures implementing
this Chapter,
arising in the context of a covered procurement in which the supplier has, or has had, an interest. In
any case, each Party shall ensure that the review body, upon a challenge by a supplier, can examine
decisions taken by their respective procuring entities on whether a particular procurement falls
within the procurement that is covered by this Chapter.
EU/SG/en 203
The procedural rules for all challenges shall be in writing and made generally available through
electronic means or a paper medium.
2. In the event of a complaint by a supplier, that there has been a breach or a failure as referred
to in paragraph 1 arising in the context of covered procurement in which the supplier has, or has
had, an interest, the Party of the procuring entity conducting the procurement shall encourage the
procuring entity and the supplier to seek resolution of the complaint through consultations. The
procuring entity shall accord impartial and timely consideration to any such complaint in a manner
that is not prejudicial to the supplier's participation in on-going or future procurement or to its right
to seek corrective measures under the administrative or judicial review procedure.
3. Each supplier shall be allowed a sufficient period of time to prepare and submit a challenge,
which in no case shall be less than ten days from the time when the basis of the challenge became
known to the supplier or reasonably should have become known to the supplier.
4. Each Party shall establish or designate at least one impartial administrative or judicial
authority that is independent of its procuring entities for the purpose of receiving and reviewing
challenges by suppliers arising in the context of covered procurements.
5. Where a body other than an authority referred to in paragraph 4 initially reviews a challenge,
the relevant Party shall ensure that the supplier may appeal the initial decision to an impartial
administrative or judicial authority that is independent of the procuring entity whose procurement is
the subject of the challenge.
EU/SG/en 204
6. Each Party shall ensure that a review body that is not a court shall have its decision subject to
judicial review or have procedures that provide that:
(a) the procuring entity shall respond in writing to the challenge and disclose all relevant
documents to the review body;
(b) the participants to the proceedings (hereinafter referred to as "participants") shall have the
right to be heard prior to the decision of the review body on the challenge;
(c) the participants shall have the right to be represented and accompanied;
(d) the participants shall have access to all proceedings;
(e) the participants shall have the right to request that the proceedings take place in public and
that witnesses may be presented; and
(f) the review body shall make its decisions or recommendations, in a timely fashion, in writing,
and shall include an explanation of the basis for each decision or recommendation.
7. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for rapid interim measures to
preserve the supplier's opportunity to participate in the procurement. Such interim measures may
result in suspension of the procurement process. The procedures may provide that overriding
adverse consequences for the interests concerned, including the public interest, may be taken into
account when deciding whether such measures should be applied. Just cause for not acting shall be
provided in writing.
EU/SG/en 205
8. Each Party shall provide that where a review body has determined that there has been a
breach or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, the review body may impose corrective action or
grant compensation for the loss or damages suffered, which may be limited to either the costs for
the preparation of the tender or the costs relating to the challenge. Where a contract has already
been awarded, the Parties may provide that corrective action is not available.
ARTICLE 9.18
Modification and Rectification of Coverage
Notification of Proposed Modification
1. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any proposed rectification of Annexes 9-A to 9-I,
any transfer of an entity from one of those Annexes to another, any withdrawal of an entity from
those Annexes, or any other modification to those Annexes (such acts collectively referred
hereinafter to as a "modification").
2. For any proposed withdrawal by a Party of a procuring entity from Annexes 9-A to 9-C on the
grounds that government control or influence over the procuring entity's covered procurement has
been effectively eliminated, the Party proposing the modification (hereinafter referred to as
"modifying Party") shall include in the notification evidence that such government control or
influence has been effectively eliminated. Government control or influence over the covered
procurement of entities covered under Annex 9-C is deemed to be effectively eliminated if:
(a) in the case of the Union, the procuring entity performs a competitive activity; and
EU/SG/en 206
(b) in the case of Singapore, the procuring entity has been privatised.
Where government control or influence over the covered procurement of a procuring entity of a
Party has been effectively eliminated, the other Party shall not be entitled to compensatory
adjustments.
3. For any other proposed modification, the modifying Party shall include in the notification
information as to the likely consequences of the change for the coverage provided in this Chapter.
Where the modifying Party proposes to make minor amendments or technical rectifications of a
purely formal nature not affecting covered procurement, it shall notify these modifications at least
every two years.
Resolution of Objection
4. Where the other Party (hereinafter referred to as "objecting Party") objects to the notification
by the modifying Party, the Parties shall seek to resolve the objection through consultations,
including if necessary, consultations at the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and
Government Procurement established pursuant to Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees). In such
consultations, the Parties shall consider:
(a) evidence pertaining to the effective elimination of government control or influence over an
entity's covered procurement in the case of a notification under paragraph 2;
(b) evidence that the proposed modification does not affect coverage in the case of a notification
under paragraph 3; and
EU/SG/en 207
(c) any claims relating to the need for compensatory adjustments arising from modifications
notified according to paragraph 1 or to the level of such adjustments. Such adjustments may
consist either of the compensatory expansion of coverage by the modifying Party or of a
withdrawal of equivalent coverage by the objecting Party, in both cases with a view to
maintaining a balance of rights and obligations and a comparable level of mutually agreed
coverage provided in this Chapter.
5. The Parties may have recourse to the dispute settlement mechanism under
Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) where the objecting Party, after consultations under
paragraph 4, considers that one or more of the following situations exist:
(a) in the case of subparagraph 4(a), government control or influence over an entity's covered
procurement has not been effectively eliminated;
(b) in the case of subparagraph 4(b), a modification does not meet the criteria in paragraph 3 and
which affects coverage, and should be subject to compensatory adjustments; or
(c) in the case of subparagraph 4(c), compensatory adjustments proposed during the consultation
between the Parties are not adequate to maintain a comparable level of mutually agreed
coverage.
EU/SG/en 208
Implementation
6. A proposed modification shall only become effective where:
(a) the objecting Party has not submitted a written objection to the proposed modification to the
modifying Party within 45 days of the date of the notification of the proposed modifications;
(b) the objecting Party has notified the modifying Party of the withdrawal of its objection;
(c) the Parties have reached an agreement after due consultations under paragraph 4; or
(d) the objection has been resolved through the dispute settlement mechanism under paragraph 5.
ARTICLE 9.19
Responsibilities of the Committee
1. In the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and Government Procurement established
pursuant to Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees), the Parties may:
(a) adopt modalities for reporting statistical data pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 9.15
(Transparency of Procurement Information);
(b) review pending notifications of modifications to coverage and endorse updates to the list of
entities in Annexes 9-A to 9-C;
EU/SG/en 209
(c) endorse compensatory adjustments resulting from modifications affecting coverage;
(d) revise, where required, indicative criteria that demonstrate the effective elimination of
government control or influence over an entity's covered procurement;
(e) adopt criteria for deciding over the level of compensatory adjustments of coverage;
(f) consider issues regarding government procurement that are referred to it by a Party;
(g) exchange information relating to government procurement opportunities in each Party,
including those at sub-central levels; and
(h) discuss any other matters related to the operation of this Chapter.
2. In the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and Government Procurement established
pursuant to Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees), the Parties may take any decision required for
the purposes of subparagraphs (a) to (h).
ARTICLE 9.20
Adjustment to GPA provisions
If the Revised GPA is amended or superseded by another agreement, the Parties shall amend this
Chapter by decision in the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and Government
Procurement established pursuant to Article 16.2 (Specialised Committees), as appropriate.
EU/SG/en 210
CHAPTER TEN
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 10.1
Objectives
1. The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) facilitate the production and commercialisation of innovative and creative products and the
provision of services between the Parties; and
(b) increase the benefits from trade and investment through the adequate and effective level of
protection of intellectual property rights and the provision of measures for the effective
enforcement of such rights.
2. The objectives and principles set forth in Part I of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular in
Article 7 (Objectives) and Article 8 (Principles) shall apply to this Chapter, mutatis mutandis.
EU/SG/en 211
SECTION A
PRINCIPLES
ARTICLE 10.2
Scope and Definitions
1. The Parties recall the commitments under the international treaties dealing with intellectual
property, including the TRIPS Agreement and the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property of 20 March 1883, as revised at Stockholm on 15 July 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the
"Paris Convention"). The provisions of this Chapter shall complement the rights and obligations of
the Parties under the TRIPS Agreement and other international treaties in the field of intellectual
property to which they both are parties.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, "intellectual property rights" means:
(a) all categories of intellectual property that are the subject of Sections 1 to 7 of Part II of the
TRIPS Agreement namely:
(i) copyright and related rights;
(ii) patents;1
 1 In the case of the Union, for the purposes of this Chapter, "patents" include rights derived
from supplementary protection certificates.
EU/SG/en 212
(iii) trademarks;
(iv) designs;
(v) layout-designs (topographies) of integrated circuits;
(vi) geographical indications;
(vii) protection of undisclosed information; and
(b) plant variety rights.
ARTICLE 10.3
Exhaustion
Each Party shall be free to establish its own regime for the exhaustion of intellectual property rights
subject to the relevant provisions of the TRIPS Agreement.
EU/SG/en 213
SECTION B
STANDARDS CONCERNING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
SUB-SECTION A
COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS
ARTICLE 10.4
Protection Granted
The Parties shall comply with the rights and obligations set out in the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works of 9 September 1886 (as last revised at Paris on July 24,
1971), the WIPO Copyright Treaty, adopted in Geneva on 20 December 1996, the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty, adopted in Geneva on 20 December 1996, and the TRIPS
Agreement.1 The Parties may provide for the protection of performers, producers of phonograms
and broadcasting organisations in accordance with the relevant provisions of the International
Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting
Organisations, done at Rome on 26 October 1961.
 1 Without prejudice to Article 10.6 (Producers of Phonograms), the Parties recognise that
references to these international agreements are subject to the reservations which each Party
has formulated in relation thereto.
EU/SG/en 214
ARTICLE 10.5
Term of Protection
1. Each Party shall provide that, where the term of protection of a work is to be calculated on the
basis of the life of the author, the term shall be not less than the life of the author and 70 years after
the author's death.
2. In the case of a work of joint authorship, the term referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
calculated from the death of the last surviving author.
3. The term of protection of cinematographic works1 shall be not less than 70 years after the
work has been made available to the public with the consent of the author or, failing such an event
within 50 years of the making of the work, at least 70 years after the making of the work.2
4. The term of protection for rights in phonograms shall be not less than 50 years after the
making of the phonogram, and, if published within this period, no less than 70 years after the first
lawful publication of the phonogram.
 1 For the Union, the term "cinematographic works" also includes audiovisual works.
2 In the case of the Union, the term of protection expires 70 years after the death of the last
person designated as author under its domestic law, which will not in any case be shorter than
the minimum duration of protection provided under paragraph 3 of Article 10.5 (Term of
Protection).
EU/SG/en 215
5. The term of protection for rights in broadcasts shall be not less than 50 years after the first
transmission or the making of the broadcast.
6. The terms laid down in this Article shall be calculated from the first of January of the year
following the event which gives rise to them.
ARTICLE 10.6
Producers of Phonograms
Each Party shall provide producers of phonograms1 with the right to a single equitable remuneration
if a phonogram published for commercial purposes, or a reproduction of such phonogram, is used
for broadcasting by wireless means or for public performance.2,3
 1 "Producer of a phonogram" means the person or the legal entity, who or which takes the
initiative and has the responsibility for the first fixation of the sounds of a performance or
other sounds, or the representations of sounds.
2 "Public performance" means, in relation to a phonogram, any mode of aural presentation to
the public of sounds or representations of sounds fixed in a phonogram.
3 Singapore shall fully implement the obligations of this Article within two years of the entry
into force of this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 216
ARTICLE 10.7
Resale Rights
The Parties agree to exchange views and information on practices and policies with regard to the
resale rights of artists.
ARTICLE 10.8
Cooperation on Collective Management of Rights
The Parties shall endeavour to promote dialogue and cooperation among their respective collective
management societies for the purpose of ensuring easier access and delivery of content between the
territories of the Parties, and ensuring the transfer of royalties arising from the use of works or other
copyright-protected subject matter.
EU/SG/en 217
ARTICLE 10.9
Protection of Technological Measures
1. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against the
circumvention of any effective technological measures1 that are used by authors, performers or
producers of phonograms in connection with the exercise of their rights in, and that restrict acts in
respect of, their works, performances, and phonograms, which are not authorised by the authors, the
performers or the producers of phonograms concerned or permitted by domestic law.2
 1 For the purposes of this Article, "technological measures" means any technology, device or
component that, in the normal course of its operation, is designed to prevent or restrict acts, in
respect of works, performances, or phonograms, which are not authorised by authors,
performers or producers of phonograms, as provided for by each Party's domestic law.
Without prejudice to the scope of copyright or related rights contained in each Party's
domestic law, technological measures shall be deemed effective where the use of protected
works, performances, or phonograms is controlled by authors, performers or producers of
phonograms through the application of a relevant access control or protection process, such as
encryption or scrambling, or a copy control mechanism, which achieves the objective of
protection.
2 Nothing in this Chapter shall require Singapore to restrict the importation or domestic sale of
a device that does not render effective a technological measure which sole purpose is to
control market segmentation for legitimate copies of motion pictures, and is not otherwise a
violation of its domestic law.
EU/SG/en 218
2. In order to provide the adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies referred to in
paragraph 1, each Party shall provide protection at least against:
(a) to the extent provided by its domestic law:
(i) the unauthorised circumvention of an effective technological measure carried out
knowingly or with reasonable grounds to know; and;
(ii) the offering to the public by marketing of a device or product, including computer
programs, or a service, as a means of circumventing an effective technological measure;
and
(b) the manufacture, importation, or distribution of a device or product, including computer
programs, or provision of a service that:
(i) is primarily designed or produced for the purpose of circumventing an effective
technological measure; or
(ii) has only a limited commercially significant purpose other than circumventing an
effective technological measure.1
 1 In implementing paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, neither Party shall be obligated to require
that the design of, or the design and selection of parts and components for, a consumer
electronics product, telecommunications product or computing product, provide for a
response to any particular technological measure, so long as the product does not otherwise
contravene its measures implementing these paragraphs.
EU/SG/en 219
3. In providing adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies pursuant to paragraph 1, a
Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations, or exceptions to, measures implementing
paragraphs 1 and 2. The obligations under paragraphs 1 and 2 are without prejudice to the rights,
limitations, exceptions, or defences to copyright or related rights infringement under each Party's
domestic law.
ARTICLE 10.10
Protection of Rights Management Information
1. To protect electronic rights management information,1 each Party shall provide adequate legal
protection and effective legal remedies against any person knowingly performing without authority
any of the following acts knowing or, with respect to civil remedies, having reasonable grounds to
know, that it will induce, enable, facilitate or conceal an infringement of any copyright or related
rights. Such acts are:
(a) the removal or alteration of any electronic rights management information; and
 1 For the purposes of this Article, "rights management information" means:
(a) information that identifies the work, the performance, or the phonogram; the author of
the work, the performer of the performance, or the producer of the phonogram; or the
owner of any right in the work, performance or phonogram;
(b) information about the terms and conditions of use of the work, performance, or
phonogram; or
(c) any number or codes that represent the information described in subparagraphs (a)
and (b),
when any of these items of information is attached to a copy of a work, performance, or
phonogram, or appears in connection with the communication or making available of a work,
performance or phonogram to the public.
EU/SG/en 220
(b) the distribution, import for distribution, broadcast, communication, or making available to the
public copies of works, performances, or phonograms, knowing that electronic rights
management information has been removed or altered without authority.
2. In providing adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies pursuant to paragraph 1, a
Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations, or exceptions to, measures implementing
paragraph 1. The obligations under paragraph 1 are without prejudice to the rights, limitations,
exceptions or defences to copyright or related rights infringement under a Party's domestic law.
ARTICLE 10.11
Exceptions and Limitations
The Parties may provide for limitations or exceptions to the rights under Article 10.6 (Producers of
Phonograms) only in certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the
work or other subject matter and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right
holders.
EU/SG/en 221
SUB-SECTION B
TRADEMARKS
ARTICLE 10.12
International Agreements
Each Party shall make all reasonable efforts to comply with the Trademark Law Treaty, done at
Geneva on 27 October 1994, and with the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks, adopted in
Singapore on 27 March 2006.1
ARTICLE 10.13
Registration Procedure
Each Party shall provide for a system for the registration of trademarks in which the relevant
trademark administration shall give reasons in writing for any refusal to register a trademark. The
applicant shall have the opportunity to appeal against such refusal before a judicial authority. Each
Party shall introduce the possibility for third parties to oppose trademark applications. Each Party
shall provide a publicly available electronic database of trademark applications and trademark
registrations.
 1 Singapore is a party to the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks, while the Union shall
make all reasonable efforts to facilitate accession to the Singapore Treaty on the Law of
Trademarks.
EU/SG/en 222
ARTICLE 10.14
Well-Known Trademarks
The Parties shall protect well-known trademarks in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement. In
determining whether a trademark is well-known, the Parties shall give consideration to the Joint
Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks, adopted by the
Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the General Assembly of
the WIPO at the Thirty-Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States of WIPO
on 20 to 29 September 1999.
ARTICLE 10.15
Exceptions to the Rights Conferred by a Trademark
Each Party:
(a) shall provide for the fair use of descriptive terms1 as a limited exception to the rights
conferred by trademarks; and
(b) may provide for other limited exceptions,
provided that these exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the owners of the
trademarks and of third parties.
 1 The fair use of descriptive terms includes the use of a sign to indicate the geographic origin of
the goods or services, and where such use is in accordance with honest practices in industrial
or commercial matters.
EU/SG/en 223
SUB-SECTION C
GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS1
ARTICLE 10.16
Scope
1. Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) applies to the recognition and protection of
geographical indications for wines, spirits, agricultural products and foodstuffs which are
originating in the territories of the Parties.
2. Geographical indications of a Party that are to be protected by the other Party shall only be
subject to Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) if they are recognised and declared as
geographical indications in their country of origin.
 1 For the purposes of this Chapter, "geographical indications" means indications which identify
a good as originating in the territory of a Party, or a region or locality in that territory, where a
given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its
geographical origin.
EU/SG/en 224
ARTICLE 10.17
System of Protection of Geographical Indications
1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall establish systems for the
registration and protection of geographical indications in its territory for such categories of wines
and spirits and agricultural products and foodstuffs as it deems appropriate.
2. The systems referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain elements such as:
(a) a domestic register;
(b) an administrative process to verify that the geographical indications entered, or to be entered,
on the domestic register referred to in subparagraph 2(a), identify a good as originating in the
territory of a Party, or a region or locality in that Party's territory, where a given quality,
reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to their geographical
origin;
(c) an objection procedure that allows the legitimate interests of third parties to be taken into
account; and
(d) legal means that permit the rectification and cancellation of entries on the domestic register
referred to in subparagraph 2(a), that take into account the legitimate interests of third parties
and the right holders of the registered geographical indications in question.
EU/SG/en 225
3. The Parties shall, as soon as practicable after the procedures for protection of geographical
indications in each Party1 have been concluded for all the names listed in Annex 10-A, meet to
adopt a decision in the Trade Committee referred to under Article 16.1 (Trade Committee)
regarding the listing in Annex 10-B of the names from Annex 10-A of each Party that have been
and remain protected as geographical indications under the respective Party's system referred to in
paragraph 2.
ARTICLE 10.18
Amendment of List of Geographical Indications
The Parties agree on the possibility of amending the list of geographical indications for wines,
spirits, agricultural products and foodstuffs listed in Annex 10-B to be protected by each Party
under Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications). Such amendments to Annex 10-B shall be subject
to the geographical indications having been and remaining protected as geographical indications
under the respective Party's system referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 10.17 (System of Protection
of Geographical Indications).
 1 For the purposes of Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications), in the case of Singapore, the
procedure for protection of geographical indications refers to the domestic registration
procedure under the system established by Singapore pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 10.17
(System of Protection of Geographical Indications).
EU/SG/en 226
ARTICLE 10.19
Scope of Protection of Geographical Indications
1. Subject to Article 10.22 (General Rules), in respect of geographical indications for wines,
spirits, agricultural products and foodstuffs listed in Annex 10-B that remain protected as
geographical indications under its system as referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 10.17 (System of
Protection of Geographical Indications), each Party shall provide the legal means for interested
parties to prevent:
(a) the use of any means in the designation or presentation of a good that indicates or suggests
that the good in question originates in a geographical area other than its true place of origin in
a manner which misleads the public as to the geographical origin of the good; and
(b) any other use which constitutes an act of unfair competition within the meaning of
Article 10bis (Unfair Competition) of the Paris Convention.
2. Subject to Article 10.22 (General Rules), in respect of geographical indications for wines and
spirits listed in Annex 10-B that remain protected as geographical indications under its system as
referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 10.17 (System of Protection of Geographical Indications), each
Party shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent the use of any such geographical
indication identifying wines for wines not originating in the place indicated by the geographical
indication in question or identifying spirits for spirits not originating in the place indicated by the
geographical indication in question, even where:
(a) the true origin of the good is indicated;
EU/SG/en 227
(b) the geographical indication is used in translation; or
(c) the geographical indication is accompanied by expressions such as "kind", "type", "style",
"imitation", or the like.
3. Subject to Article 10.22 (General Rules), in respect of geographical indications for
agricultural products and foodstuffs listed in Annex 10-B that remain protected as geographical
indications under the Party's system as referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 10.17 (System of
Protection of Geographical Indications), each Party shall provide the legal means for interested
parties to prevent the use of any such geographical indication identifying a good for a like good1 not
originating in the place indicated by the geographical indication in question, even where:
(a) the true origin of the good is indicated;
(b) the geographical indication is used in translation;2 or
 1 For the purposes of this paragraph and paragraph 1 of Article 10.21 (Relationship with
Trademarks), the term "like good", in relation to a good for which a geographical indication
has been protected in a Party's system as referred to in Article 10.17 (System of Protection of
Geographical Indications), means a good that would fall within the same category of good in
that Party's register as the good for which a geographical indication has been registered.
2 For greater certainty, it is understood that this is assessed on a case-by-case basis. This
provision does not apply where evidence is provided that there is no link between the
protected geographical indication and the translated term. It is further understood that this
provision applies without prejudice to the general rules of Sub-Section C (Geographical
Indications).
EU/SG/en 228
(c) the geographical indication is accompanied by expressions such as "kind", "type", "style",
"imitation", or the like.
4. Nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall require a Party to apply its
provisions in respect of a geographical indication in the case of the failure of a right holder to:
(a) renew the registration of the geographical indication in that Party's market; or
(b) maintain minimal commercial activity or interest in the geographical indication in that Party's
market, including commercialisation, promotion or market monitoring.
5. Without prejudice to paragraph 3 of Article 23 of the TRIPS Agreement, each Party shall
determine the practical conditions under which homonymous geographical indications will be
differentiated from each other in its territory, taking into account the need to ensure equitable
treatment of the producers concerned and the need to ensure that consumers are not misled.
6. Where a Party receives an application for registration or protection of a geographical
indication that is homonymous with one of the geographical indications in Annex 10-B, that Party
will take into consideration the views and submissions of the applicant and the producers
concerned1 in determining the conditions under which the homonymous geographical indications
will be differentiated from each other.
 1 In the case of Singapore, "the producers concerned" refers to the right holders in question.
EU/SG/en 229
ARTICLE 10.20
Right of Use of Geographical Indications
The persons who may use a geographical indication protected under Sub-Section C (Geographical
Indications) are not limited to the applicant, provided that such use relates to the goods as identified
by that geographical indication.
ARTICLE 10.21
Relationship with Trademarks
1. Subject to Article 10.22 (General Rules), in respect of geographical indications listed in
Annex 10-B that remain protected as geographical indications under a Party's system as referred to
in paragraph 2 of Article 10.17 (System of Protection of Geographical Indications), the registration
of a trademark for goods which contains or consists of a geographical indication that identifies like
goods shall be refused or invalidated ex officio if that Party's domestic law so permits, or at the
request of an interested party, with respect to goods not having the origin of the geographical
indication concerned, provided that the application to register the trademark is submitted after the
date of application for the registration of the geographical indication in the territory concerned.
EU/SG/en 230
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 4, the Parties acknowledge that the existence of a prior
conflicting trademark in the territory of a Party would not completely preclude the registration of a
subsequent geographical indication for like goods in that Party.1
3. Where a trademark has been applied for or has been registered in good faith, or where rights
to a trademark have been acquired through use in good faith, if that possibility is provided by the
Parties' respective domestic laws, and such application, registration or acquisition takes place either:
(a) before the date of application for protection of the geographical indication in the territory
concerned; or
(b) before the geographical indication is protected in its country of origin,
any measures adopted to implement Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall not prejudice
the eligibility for or the validity of the registration of a trademark, or the right to use a trademark, on
the basis that such a trademark is identical with, or similar to, a geographical indication.
4. The Parties shall have no obligation to protect a geographical indication pursuant to
Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) where, in the light of a reputed or well-known trademark,
such protection is liable to mislead consumers as to the true identity of the product.
 1 In the case of Singapore, a geographical indication which conflicts with a prior existing
trademark is capable of being registered with the consent of the prior existing trademark
rights holder. In the case of the Union, such consent is not a prerequisite to the registration of
a geographical indication which conflicts with a prior existing trademark.
EU/SG/en 231
ARTICLE 10.22
General Rules
1. The conditions for import, export and commercialisation of the products referred to in SubSection C (Geographical Indications) in the territory of a Party shall be governed by the domestic
law of that Party.
2. For agricultural products and foodstuffs, nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications)
shall require a Party to prevent the continued and similar use by any of its nationals or domiciliaries
of any geographical indication of the other Party in connection with goods or services, where those
nationals or domiciliaries have used that geographical indication in a continuous manner with
regard to the same or related goods or services in the territory of that Party either:
(a) for at least ten years preceding 1st January 2004; or
(b) in good faith preceding that date.
3. In relation to the geographical indications to be listed in Annex 10-B, where prior use has
been determined pursuant to:
(a) the opposition proceedings during the domestic registration procedures; or
(b) any legal proceedings,
EU/SG/en 232
such prior use shall be listed in Annex 10-B, in respect of the geographical indication in question, in
accordance with:
(i) the mechanism established in paragraph 3 of Article 10.17 (System of Protection of
Geographical Indications), in the case of subparagraph 3(a); and
(ii) the mechanism established in Article 10.18 (Amendment of List of Geographical Indications),
in the case of subparagraph 3(b).
4. Each Party may determine the practical conditions under which such prior use will be
differentiated from the geographical indication in its territory, taking into account the need to ensure
that consumers are not misled.
5. Nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall require a Party to apply its
provisions in respect of a geographical indication of the other Party with respect to goods or
services for which the relevant indication is identical to the term customary in common language as
the common name for such goods or services in the territory of that Party.
6. Nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall require a Party to apply its
provisions in respect of any name contained in a geographical indication of the other Party with
respect to goods or services for which the name is identical to the term customary in common
language as the common name for such goods or services in the territory of that Party.
EU/SG/en 233
7. Nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall require a Party to apply its
provisions in respect of a geographical indication of the other Party with respect to products of the
vine for which the relevant indication is identical to the customary name of a grape variety existing
in the territory of that Party as of the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement in that Party.
8. Nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall prevent a Party from protecting as
a geographical indication, in accordance with its domestic law, a term that conflicts with the name
of a plant variety or animal breed.
9. A Party may provide that any request made under Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications)
in connection with the use or registration of a trademark must be presented within five years after
the adverse use of the protected indication has become generally known in that Party or within five
years after the date of registration of the trademark in that Party, provided that the trademark has
been published by that date, if the date of registration is earlier than the date on which the adverse
use became generally known in that Party, and provided that the geographical indication is not used
or registered in bad faith.
10. Nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall prejudice the right of any person to
use, in the course of trade, that person's name or the name of that person's predecessor in business,
except where such name is used in such a manner as to mislead the public.
11. Nothing in Sub-Section C (Geographical Indications) shall oblige a Party to protect a
geographical indication of the other Party which is not or has ceased to be protected in accordance
with the domestic law of its country of origin. The Parties shall notify each other if a geographical
indication ceases to be protected in its country of origin.
EU/SG/en 234
ARTICLE 10.23
Relation to Trade Committee
The Trade Committee established pursuant to Article 16.1 (Trade Committee) shall have the
authority to:
(a) adopt decisions regarding the listing in Annex 10-B referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 10.17
(System of Protection of Geographical Indications); and
(b) amend Annex 10-B in accordance with Article 10.18 (Amendment of List of Geographical
Indications).
EU/SG/en 235
SUB-SECTION D
DESIGNS
ARTICLE 10.24
Requirements for Protection of Registered Designs1
1. The Parties shall provide for the protection of independently created designs that are new or
original.2 This protection shall be provided by registration and shall confer exclusive rights upon
their holders in accordance with the provisions of Sub-Section D (Designs).3
 1 For the purposes of Sub-Section (Designs), the Union also grants protection to the
unregistered design when it meets the requirements of Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 of
12 December 2001 on Community designs, as last amended by Council Regulation (EC)
No 1891/2006 of 18 December 2006.
2 The Parties agree that when the domestic law of a Party so provides, individual character of
designs can also be required. This refers to designs that significantly differ from known
designs or combinations of known designs' features. The Union considers designs to have
individual character if the overall impression it produces on the informed users differs from
the overall impression produced on such a user by any design which has been made available
to the public.
3 It is understood that designs are not excluded from protection simply on the basis that they
constitute a part of an article or product, provided that they are visible, fulfil the criteria of this
paragraph, and:
(a) fulfil any other criteria for design protection; and
(b) are not otherwise excluded from design protection,
under the Parties' respective domestic law.
EU/SG/en 236
2. Design protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or functional
considerations.
3. A design right shall not subsist in a design which is contrary to public policy or to accepted
principles of morality.1
ARTICLE 10.25
Rights Conferred by Registration
The owner of a protected design shall have the right to prevent third parties who do not have the
owner's consent from at least making, offering for sale, selling or importing articles that bear or
embody a design which is a copy, or is substantially a copy, of the protected design, where such
acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.
ARTICLE 10.26
Term of Protection
The available term of protection shall be at least ten years from the date of application.
 1 Nothing in this Article precludes either Party from providing other specified exclusions from
design protection under its domestic law. The Parties understand that such exclusions shall
not be extensive.
EU/SG/en 237
ARTICLE 10.27
Exceptions
Each Party may provide limited exceptions to the protection of designs, provided that such
exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of protected designs, and do
not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design, taking into
account the legitimate interests of third parties.
ARTICLE 10.28
Relationship to Copyright
Each Party shall offer the possibility that a design registered in the territory of a Party in accordance
with Sub-Section D (Designs) is not completely precluded from enjoying protection under the
domestic law of copyright of that Party. The extent to which, and the conditions under which, such
protection is enjoyed shall be determined by that Party.1
 1 In the case of Singapore, the extent to which, and the conditions under which, such protection
is enjoyed include the circumstances under section 74 of Singapore's Copyright Act.
EU/SG/en 238
SUB-SECTION E
PATENTS
ARTICLE 10.29
International Agreements
The Parties recall the obligations under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (done at Washington on
19 June 1970, amended on 28 September 1979, and modified on 3 February 1984). The Parties
shall, where appropriate, make all reasonable efforts to comply with Article 1 to Article 16 of the
Patent Law Treaty, adopted in Geneva on 1 June 2000, in a manner consistent with their domestic
law and procedures.
ARTICLE 10.30
Patents and Public Health
1. The Parties recognise the importance of the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, adopted on 14 November 2001 by the Ministerial Conference of the WTO at Doha. In
interpreting and implementing the rights and obligations under Sub-Section E (Patents) and
Sub-Section F (Protection of Test Data Submitted to Obtain an Administrative Marketing Approval
to put a Pharmaceutical Product on the Market), the Parties shall ensure consistency with this
Declaration.
EU/SG/en 239
2. Each Party shall respect the Decision of the WTO General Council of 30 August 2003 on
Implementation of Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, as well as the Decision of the WTO General Council of 6 December 2005 on Amendment
of the TRIPS Agreement, adopting the Protocol Amending the TRIPS Agreement.
ARTICLE 10.31
Extension of the Duration of the Rights Conferred by a Patent
The Parties recognise that pharmaceutical products1 protected by a patent in their respective
territories may be subject to an administrative marketing approval process before being put on their
respective markets. The Parties shall make available an extension of the duration of the rights
conferred by the patent protection to compensate the patent owner for the reduction in the effective
patent life as a result of the administrative marketing approval process.2 The extension of the
duration of the rights conferred by the patent protection may not exceed five years.3
 1 For the purposes of this Article and Article 10.33 (Protection of Test Data Submitted to
Obtain an Administrative Marketing Approval to put a Pharmaceutical Product on the
Market), the term "pharmaceutical product" shall be defined for each Party by the respective
legislations of the Parties as at the date of signature of this Agreement. In the case of the
Union, the term "pharmaceutical product" refers to "medicinal product".
2 Singapore undertakes to make available an extension of the duration of the rights conferred by
patent protection to compensate the patent owner for the reduction in the effective patent life
as the result of the administrative marketing approval process to substances for diagnosis or
testing and authorised as a medicinal product.
3 The conditions and procedures for the provision of the extension of the patent term shall be
determined by the respective legislations of the Parties. This is without prejudice to a possible
extension for paediatric purposes, if provided for by either Party.
EU/SG/en 240
ARTICLE 10.32
Cooperation
The Parties agree to cooperate on initiatives to facilitate:
(a) the granting of patents on the basis of applications filed by applicants of a Party in the other
Party; and
(b) the qualification and recognition of patent agent professionals of a Party in the territory of the
other Party.
EU/SG/en 241
SUB-SECTION F
PROTECTION OF TEST DATA
ARTICLE 10.33
Protection of Test Data Submitted to Obtain an Administrative Marketing Approval
to put a Pharmaceutical Product on the Market
Where a Party requires the submission of test data or studies concerning the safety and efficacy of a
pharmaceutical product prior to granting approval for the marketing of such product, that Party shall
not, for a period of at least five years from the date of approval in that Party, permit third parties to
market the same or a similar product on the basis of the marketing approval granted to the party
which had provided the test data or studies, unless that party has given its consent.1,2,3
 1 The conditions and procedures for the provision of the protection contemplated under this
Article shall be determined by the respective legislations of the Parties.
2 The Parties shall, five years after the entry into force of this Agreement, initiate without
prejudice discussions on the possible extension of the duration of the protection of test data
submitted to obtain an administrative marketing approval to put a pharmaceutical product on
the market.
3 In the context of this Article, it is understood that such confidential supporting test data or
studies shall not be used for the purpose of determining whether to grant any other application
for a period of at least five years:
(a) in the case of Singapore, from the date that the first application is received;
(b) in the case of the Union, from the date of approval of the first application,
unless the party which had provided the test data or studies has given his consent.
EU/SG/en 242
ARTICLE 10.34
Protection of Test Data Submitted
to Obtain an Administrative Marketing Approval
to put an Agricultural Chemical Product1 on the Market
1. Where a Party requires the submission of test data or studies concerning the safety and
efficacy of an agricultural chemical product prior to the granting of approval for the marketing of
such product in that Party, the Party shall not, for a period of at least ten years from the date of
approval, permit third parties to market the same or a similar product on the basis of the marketing
approval granted to the party which had provided the test data or studies, unless that party has given
its consent.
 1 In the case of the Union, for the purposes of this Article, "agricultural chemical products"
means active substances and preparations containing one or more active substances, put up in
the form in which they are supplied to the user, intended to:
(a) protect plants or plant products against all harmful organisms or prevent the action of
such organisms, in so far as such substances or preparations are not otherwise defined in
subparagraphs (b) to (e);
(b) influence the life processes of plants, other than as a nutrient (e.g. plant growth
regulators);
(c) preserve plant products, in so far as such substances or products are not subject to
special Council or Commission provisions on preservatives;
(d) destroy undesirable plants; or
(e) destroy parts of plants, check or prevent undesirable growth of plants.
EU/SG/en 243
2. Where a Party provides for measures or procedures to avoid duplicative testing on vertebrate
animals with respect to agricultural chemical products, that Party may provide for the conditions
and circumstances under which third parties may market the same or similar product on the basis of
the marketing approval granted to the party which had provided the test data or studies.
3. Where a Party requires the submission of test data or studies concerning the safety or efficacy
of an agricultural chemical product prior to the granting of an approval for the marketing of such
product, that Party shall endeavour to make best efforts to process the application expeditiously,
with a view to avoiding unreasonable delays.
SUB-SECTION G
PLANT VARIETIES
ARTICLE 10.35
International Agreements
The Parties affirm their obligations under the International Convention for the Protection of New
Varieties of Plants adopted in Paris on 2 December 1961, as last revised in Geneva on
19 March 1991, including their ability to implement the optional exception to the breeder's right, as
referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 15 of that Convention.
EU/SG/en 244
SECTION C
CIVIL ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
ARTICLE 10.36
General Obligations
1. The Parties affirm their commitments under Articles 41 to 50 of the TRIPS Agreement, and
shall provide for the measures, procedures and remedies under their respective domestic law against
acts of infringement of intellectual property rights covered by this Chapter, that are in compliance
with such commitments.
2. In particular, the measures, procedures and remedies referred to in paragraph 1, and provided
for by each Party under its domestic law, shall:
(a) take into account, as appropriate, the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the
infringement and the interests of third parties;
(b) be fair and equitable;
EU/SG/en 245
(c) not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time limits or unwarranted
delays; and
(d) be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to
provide for safeguards against their abuse.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the capacity of either Party to enforce its domestic law in
general or create any obligation on either Party to amend its existing laws as they relate to the
enforcement of intellectual property rights. Without prejudice to the foregoing general principles,
nothing in this Chapter shall create any obligation on either Party:
(a) to put in place a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights that is
distinct from that for the enforcement of law in general; or
(b) with respect to the distribution of resources as between the enforcement of intellectual
property rights and the enforcement of law in general.
EU/SG/en 246
ARTICLE 10.37
Publication of Judicial Decisions
In civil judicial proceedings instituted for infringement of an intellectual property right, each Party
shall take appropriate measures, pursuant to its domestic law and policies, to publish or make
available to the public information on final judicial decisions. Nothing in this Article shall require a
Party to disclose confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement
or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would prejudice the legitimate commercial
interests of particular enterprises, public or private. Each Party may provide for other additional
publicity measures which are appropriate to the particular circumstances, including prominent
advertising.
ARTICLE 10.38
Availability of Civil Measures, Procedures and Remedies
1. Each Party shall make available, in its respective domestic law and to right holders, the civil
measures, procedures and remedies referred to in Section C (Civil Enforcement of Intellectual
Property Rights) for the intellectual property rights as defined in paragraph 2.
EU/SG/en 247
2. For the purposes of Section C (Civil Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights), the
following terms have the following meanings:
(a) "right holders" shall include exclusive licensees as well as federations and associations1
having the legal standing to assert such rights; and
(b) "intellectual property rights" means all categories of intellectual property that are the subject
of Sections 1 to 6 of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement.2
ARTICLE 10.39
Measures for Preserving Evidence
1. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order prompt and
effective provisional measures:
(a) against a party or, where appropriate, a third party over whom the relevant judicial authority
exercises jurisdiction, to prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right from
occurring, and in particular to prevent goods that involve the infringement of an intellectual
property right from entering into the channels of commerce; and
 1 In so far as permitted by and in accordance with the provisions of the applicable law, it is
understood that the phrase "federations and associations" includes collective rights
management bodies and, in the Union context, professional defence bodies which are
regularly recognised as having a right to represent holders of intellectual property rights.
2 A Party may exclude patents from the scope of Section C (Civil Enforcement of Intellectual
Property Rights).
EU/SG/en 248
(b) to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement.
2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to adopt provisional
measures inaudita altera parte where appropriate, in particular where any delay is likely to cause
irreparable harm to the right holder or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being
destroyed. In proceedings conducted inaudita altera parte, each Party shall provide its judicial
authorities with the authority to act expeditiously on requests for provisional measures and to make
a decision without undue delay.
3. At least in cases of copyright or related rights infringement and in cases of trademark
counterfeiting, each Party shall provide that in civil judicial proceedings, its judicial authorities,
have the authority to order the seizure or taking into custody of suspect goods, of materials and
implements relevant to the act of infringement, and, at least for trademark counterfeiting, of
documentary evidence, either original or copies thereof, relevant to the infringement.
4. Each Party shall provide that its authorities have the authority to require the applicant, with
respect to provisional measures, to provide any reasonably available evidence in order to satisfy
themselves with a sufficient degree of certainty that the applicant's right is being infringed or that
such infringement is imminent, and to order the applicant to provide a security or equivalent
assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and to prevent abuse. Such security or equivalent
assurance shall not unreasonably deter recourse to procedures for such provisional measures.
EU/SG/en 249
5. Where the provisional measures are revoked, or where they lapse due to any act or omission
by the applicant, or where it is subsequently found that there has been no infringement of an
intellectual property right, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the applicant,
upon the request of the defendant, to provide the defendant appropriate compensation for any injury
caused by those measures.
ARTICLE 10.40
Evidence and Right of Information
1. Without prejudice to each Party's domestic law governing privilege, the protection of
confidentiality or the processing of personal data, each Party shall provide that, in civil judicial
proceedings concerning the enforcement of intellectual property rights, its judicial authorities have
the authority, upon a justified request of the right holder, to order the infringer or, in the alternative,
the alleged infringer, to provide, to the right holder or to the judicial authorities, at least for the
purpose of collecting evidence, relevant information as provided for in its applicable laws and
regulations that the infringer or alleged infringer possesses or controls.
2. The relevant information referred to in paragraph 1 may include information regarding any
person involved in any aspect of the infringement or alleged infringement and regarding the means
of production or the channels of distribution of the infringing or allegedly infringing goods or
services, including the identification of third persons alleged to be involved in the production and
distribution of such goods or services and of their channels of distribution.
EU/SG/en 250
ARTICLE 10.41
Other Remedies
1. Each Party shall provide that, in civil judicial proceedings where a judicial decision is taken
finding an infringement of a right holder's intellectual property right, its judicial authorities shall,
upon application by the right holder, have the authority, at least with respect to pirated copyright
goods and counterfeit trademark goods, to order:
(a) that such infringing goods, without compensation of any sort, be:
(i) destroyed, except in exceptional circumstances; or
(ii) disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid any harm
caused to the right holder; and
(b) that materials and implements, the predominant use of which has been in the manufacture or
creation of such infringing goods, shall be, without undue delay and without compensation of
any sort, destroyed or disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to
minimise the risks of further infringements.
2. In considering any application by a right holder, as referred to in paragraph 1, the need for
proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement and the remedies ordered as well as the
interests of third parties shall be taken into account.
EU/SG/en 251
3. The remedies under this Article may be carried out at the expense of the infringer.
ARTICLE 10.42
Injunctions
Each Party shall provide that, in civil judicial proceedings where a judicial decision is taken finding
an infringement of a right holder's intellectual property right, its judicial authorities shall, upon
application by the right holder, have the authority to issue against the infringer or, where
appropriate, against a third party over whom the relevant judicial authority exercises jurisdiction, an
injunction aimed at prohibiting the continuation of the infringement. Where provided for by the
Party's domestic law, non-compliance with an injunction shall, where appropriate, be subject to a
recurring penalty payment with a view to ensuring compliance.
EU/SG/en 252
ARTICLE 10.43
Alternative Measures
Each Party may provide in its domestic law that, in civil judicial proceedings where a judicial
decision is taken finding an infringement of a right holder's intellectual property right, in
appropriate cases and on application by the person liable to be subject to the measures provided for
in Article 10.41 (Other Remedies) and/or Article 10.42 (Injunctions), its judicial authorities have
the authority to order pecuniary compensation to be paid to the injured party instead of applying the
measures provided for in Article 10.41 (Other Remedies) and/or Article 10.42 (Injunctions),
provided that the applicant acted unintentionally and without negligence, the execution of the
measures in question would cause disproportionate harm to the applicant, and pecuniary
compensation to the injured party appears reasonably satisfactory.1
 1 It is understood that, in the case of Singapore, Singapore may provide that its judicial
authorities have the authority to order pecuniary compensation if that person acted
unintentionally and without negligence, or if execution of the measures in question would
cause him disproportionate harm and if pecuniary compensation to the injured party appears
reasonably satisfactory.
EU/SG/en 253
ARTICLE 10.44
Damages
1. Each Party shall provide that, in civil judicial proceedings concerning the enforcement of
intellectual property rights, its judicial authorities have the authority to order the infringer who,
knowingly or with reasonable grounds to know, engaged in infringing activity to pay the right
holder damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered as a result of the
infringement.
2. In determining the amount of damages for infringement of intellectual property rights, a
Party's judicial authorities shall have the authority to consider, inter alia, any legitimate measure of
value the right holder submits, which may include lost profits, the value of the infringed goods or
services measured by the market price, or the suggested retail price.1 At least in cases of copyright
or related rights infringement and trademark counterfeiting, each Party shall provide that its judicial
authorities have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right holder the infringer's profits that
are attributable to the infringement, whether as an alternative to or in addition to or as part of the
damages.
3. As an alternative to paragraph 2, each Party may provide that its judicial authorities have the
authority, in appropriate cases, to set the damages as a lump sum on the basis of elements such as at
least the amount of royalties or fees which would have been due if the infringer had requested
authorisation to use the intellectual property right in question.
 1 In the case of the Union, this would also include, in appropriate cases, elements other than
economic factors such as the moral prejudice caused to the right holder by the infringement.
EU/SG/en 254
4. Nothing in this Article precludes either Party from providing that where the infringer did not
knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engage in infringing activity, its judicial authorities
may order the recovery of profits or the payment of damages which may be pre-established.
ARTICLE 10.45
Legal Costs
Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities, where appropriate, have the authority to order,
at the conclusion of civil judicial proceedings concerning infringement of intellectual property
rights, that the prevailing party be awarded payment by the losing party of court costs or fees and
appropriate attorney's fees, or any other expenses as provided for under that Party's domestic law.
ARTICLE 10.46
Presumptions Relating to Copyright and Related Rights
In civil proceedings involving copyright or related rights, each Party shall provide for a
presumption that, at least with respect to a literary or artistic work, performance or phonogram, in
the absence of proof to the contrary, the natural or legal person whose name appears on such work,
performance or phonogram in the usual manner, is the right holder and is consequently entitled to
institute infringement proceedings.
EU/SG/en 255
ARTICLE 10.47
Liability of Intermediary Service Providers
1. Subject to paragraphs 2 to 6, each Party shall provide for exemptions or limitations in its
domestic law regarding the liability of, or scope of remedies available against, service providers for
infringements of copyright or related rights or trademarks that take place through systems or
networks controlled or operated by them or on their behalf.
2. The exemptions or limitations referred to in paragraph 1:
(a) shall cover the functions of:
(i) transmitting,1 or providing access for material without selection and/or modification of
its content2; and
(ii) caching carried out through an automatic process;3 and
 1 It is understood that the function of transmission includes the function of routing.
2 It is understood that the function of providing access for material without selection and/or
modification of the content also refers to any means that is used to access the communication
network and includes instances where connections are provided for the material.
3 It is understood that the process of caching carried out through an automatic process may refer
to the intermediate and temporary storage of material in the course of transmission or
providing access to such material.
EU/SG/en 256
(b) may also cover the functions of:
(i) storage at the direction of a user of material residing on a system or network controlled
or operated by or for the service provider; and
(ii) referring or linking users to an online location by using information location tools,
including hyperlinks and directories.
3. Eligibility for the exemptions or limitations in this Article may not be conditioned on the
service provider monitoring its service, or affirmatively seeking facts indicating infringing activity,
except to the extent consistent with such technical measures.
4. Each Party may prescribe in its domestic law, conditions for service providers to qualify for
the exemptions or limitations in this Article. Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 to 3, each Party may
establish appropriate procedures for effective notifications of claimed infringement and effective
counter-notifications by those whose material is removed or disabled through mistake or
misidentification.
5. This Article is without prejudice to the availability of defences to the infringement of
copyright or related rights, or trademarks, that are of general applicability. This Article shall not
affect the possibility of the court or administrative authority of a Party, in accordance with its legal
system, requiring the service provider to terminate or prevent an infringement.
6. Either Party may request consultations with the other Party to consider how to address future
functions of a nature similar to those addressed in this Article.
EU/SG/en 257
SECTION D
BORDER MEASURES
ARTICLE 10.48
Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:
(a) "counterfeit geographical indication goods" means any goods, including packaging, bearing,
without authorisation, a sign which is identical to the geographical indication validly
registered in respect of such goods in the territory where the goods are, or which cannot be
distinguished in its essential aspects from such a geographical indication and which thereby
infringes the rights of the owner or holder of the geographical indication in question under the
domestic law of the Party where the goods are;
(b) "counterfeit trademark goods" means any goods, including packaging bearing, without
authorisation, a trademark which is identical to the trademark validly registered in respect of
such goods, or which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark
and which thereby infringes the rights of the owner of the trademark in question under the
domestic law of the Party where the goods are;
EU/SG/en 258
(c) "goods in transit" means goods the passage of which across the territory of a Party, with or
without transhipment, whether or not landed in the territory of the Party, warehousing,
breaking bulk, or change in the mode of transport or conveyance, is only a portion of a
complete journey beginning and terminating beyond the frontier of the Party across which
territory the traffic passes;
(d) "pirated copyright goods" means any goods which are copies made without the consent of the
right holder or of a person duly authorised by the right holder in the country of production,
and which are made directly or indirectly from an article where the making of that copy
would have constituted an infringement of a copyright or a related right under the domestic
law of the Party where the goods are; and
(e) "pirated design goods" means any goods in respect of which the design is registered and to
which that design or a design not substantially different from it has been applied without the
consent of the right holder or of a person duly authorised by the right holder in the country of
production, where the making of those goods would have constituted an infringement under
the domestic law of the Party where the goods are.
EU/SG/en 259
ARTICLE 10.49
Scope of Border Measures
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures with respect
to goods under customs control under which a right holder may request its competent authorities to
suspend the release of suspect:
(a) counterfeit trademark goods;
(b) pirated copyright goods;
(c) counterfeit geographical indication goods; and
(d) pirated design goods.
2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures with respect to goods under customs control,
under which its competent authorities may act upon their own initiative to suspend the release of
suspect:1
(a) counterfeit trademark goods;
(b) pirated copyright goods; and
 1 The Parties will review the possibility of including pirated design goods within the scope of
paragraph 2 of this Article within three years of the entry into force of this Agreement. The
Parties may, by decision in the Trade Committee, amend paragraph 2 of this Article as a result
of such review.
EU/SG/en 260
(c) counterfeit geographical indication goods.
3. The Parties shall not have the obligation to provide for the procedures referred to in
paragraphs 1 and 2 with regards to goods in transit. This is without prejudice to paragraph 2 of
Article 10.51 (Cooperation).
4. Singapore shall fully implement the obligations of paragraphs 1 and 2 ideally within two but
no later than three years of the entry into force of this Agreement with regard to procedures with
respect to:
(a) counterfeit geographical indication goods; and
(b) pirated design goods.
ARTICLE 10.50
Identification of Shipments
To facilitate the effective enforcement of intellectual property rights, the customs authorities shall
adopt a range of approaches to identify shipments containing counterfeit trademark goods, pirated
copyright goods, pirated design goods, and counterfeit geographical indication goods. These
approaches include risk analysis techniques based, inter alia, on information provided by right
holders, intelligence gathered and cargo inspections.
EU/SG/en 261
ARTICLE 10.51
Cooperation
1. The Parties agree to cooperate with a view to eliminating international trade in goods that
infringe intellectual property rights. For this purpose, they shall, in particular, exchange information
and arrange for cooperation, to be mutually agreed between their customs authorities, with regard to
trade in counterfeit trademark goods, pirated copyright goods, pirated design goods, or counterfeit
geographical indication goods.
2. For shipments of goods transiting or transhipped through the territory of a Party and destined
for the territory of the other Party, which are suspected of being counterfeit or pirated, the Parties
shall, upon their own initiative or upon the request of the other Party, provide available information
to the other Party to enable effective enforcement against those shipments. The Parties may not
provide information which is submitted confidentially by the shipper, shipping line or its agent.
EU/SG/en 262
SECTION E
COOPERATION
ARTICLE 10.52
Cooperation
1. The Parties agree to cooperate with a view to supporting the implementation of the
commitments and obligations undertaken under this Chapter. Areas of cooperation include, but are
not limited to, the following activities:
(a) exchange of information on legal frameworks concerning intellectual property rights,
including implementation of intellectual property legislation and systems, aimed at promoting
the efficient registration of intellectual property rights;
(b) exchange, between respective authorities responsible for the enforcement of intellectual
property rights, of their experiences and best practices concerning enforcement of intellectual
property rights;
(c) exchange of information and cooperation on public outreach and appropriate initiatives to
promote awareness of the benefits of intellectual property rights and systems;
EU/SG/en 263
(d) capacity-building and technical cooperation in relation, but not limited, to: management,
licensing, valuation and exploitation of intellectual property rights; technology and market
intelligence; facilitation of industry collaborations, including on intellectual property rights
that may be applied towards environmental conservation or enhancement, which may include
establishing a platform or database; and public private partnerships to support culture and
innovation;
(e) exchange of information and cooperation on intellectual property issues, where appropriate
and relevant to developments in environmentally friendly technology; and
(f) any other areas of cooperation or activities as may be discussed and agreed between the
Parties.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the Parties agree to designate a contact point for the
purpose of maintaining dialogue including, where useful, convening meetings on intellectual
property issues between their respective technical experts on matters covered by this Chapter.
3. Cooperation under this Article shall be carried out subject to each Party's laws, rules,
regulations, directives or policies. Cooperation shall also be on mutually agreed terms and
conditions and be subject to the availability of resources of each Party.
EU/SG/en 264
CHAPTER ELEVEN
COMPETITION AND RELATED MATTERS
SECTION A
ANTI-COMPETITIVE CONDUCT AND MERGERS
ARTICLE 11.1
Principles
1. The Parties recognise the importance of free and undistorted competition in their trade
relations. They acknowledge that anti-competitive business conduct and anti-competitive
transactions have the potential to distort the proper functioning of their markets and undermine the
benefits of trade liberalisation.
EU/SG/en 265
2. To promote free and undistorted competition in all sectors of their economy, each Party shall
maintain in its respective territory comprehensive legislation which effectively addresses the
following practices, where such practices affect trade between the Parties:
(a) horizontal and vertical agreements1 between undertakings, decisions by associations of
undertakings, and concerted practices, which have as their object or effect the prevention,
restriction or distortion of competition in the territory of either Party as a whole or in a
substantial part thereof;
(b) abuses by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territory of either Party as a
whole or in a substantial part thereof; and
(c) concentrations between undertakings which result in a substantial lessening of competition or
which significantly impede effective competition, in particular as a result of the creation or
strengthening of a dominant position in the territory of either Party as a whole or in a
substantial part thereof.
 1 Where the competent authority in Singapore assesses that according to the prohibition laid
down in section 34 of the Competition Act (Chapter 50B), the anti-competitive effects of a
vertical agreement will likely outweigh its pro-competitive effects, the competent authority
will refer the matter to the Minister. The Minister shall decide on the applicability of
section 34 of the Competition Act to the vertical agreement in question. This is without
prejudice to the possibility of the competent authority in Singapore applying section 47 of the
Competition Act, which is applicable to vertical agreements concluded by a dominant firm.
EU/SG/en 266
ARTICLE 11.2
Implementation
1. Each Party shall maintain its autonomy in developing and enforcing its law. The Parties
undertake, however, to maintain authorities that are responsible for, and appropriately equipped to
effectively enforce the legislation referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 11.1 (Principles).
2. The Parties will apply their respective legislation referred to in paragraph 2 of
Article 11.1 (Principles) in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner, respecting the principles
of procedural fairness and the rights of defence of the parties concerned, including the right of the
parties concerned to be heard prior to the taking of a decision in a case.
SECTION B
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS, UNDERTAKINGS ENTRUSTED
WITH SPECIAL OR EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS AND STATE MONOPOLIES
ARTICLE 11.3
Public Undertakings and Undertakings Entrusted with Special or Exclusive Rights
1. Nothing in this Chapter prevents a Party from establishing or maintaining public
undertakings, or entrusting undertakings with special or exclusive rights according to its respective
law.
EU/SG/en 267
2. Each Party shall ensure that public undertakings and undertakings that are entrusted with
special or exclusive rights are subject to the legislation referred to in Section A (Anti-Competitive
Conduct and Mergers), insofar as the application of such rules does not obstruct the performance, in
law or in fact, of the particular tasks assigned to them.
3. Each Party shall ensure that undertakings entrusted with special or exclusive rights do not use
those special or exclusive rights to engage either directly or indirectly, including through their
dealings with their parents, subsidiaries, or other undertakings with common ownership, in anticompetitive practices in another market in respect of which such undertakings have no special or
exclusive rights, that adversely affect investments, trade in goods or services of the other Party.
4. Singapore shall ensure that any public undertaking and any undertaking entrusted with special
or exclusive rights acts solely in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale
of goods or services, such as with regard to price, quality, availability, marketability, transportation,
and other terms and conditions of purchase or sale, and provides non-discriminatory treatment to
establishments of the Union, to goods of the Union, and to service suppliers of the Union.
EU/SG/en 268
ARTICLE 11.4
State Monopolies
While nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from designating or maintaining
state monopolies, each Party shall adjust state monopolies of a commercial character to ensure no
discrimination is exercised by such monopolies regarding the conditions under which goods and
services are procured from and marketed to natural or legal persons of the other Party.
SECTION C
SUBSIDIES
ARTICLE 11.5
Definition and Scope
1. For the purposes of this Agreement, a subsidy is a measure which fulfils the conditions set out
in Article 1.1 of the SCM Agreement, mutatis mutandis, irrespective of whether the subsidy is
granted in relation to the production of goods or of services.1
 1 This paragraph does not prejudice the outcome of future discussions in the WTO on the
definition of subsidies for services. The Parties shall give positive consideration to the
adoption of a possible decision by the Trade Committee to update this Agreement to reflect
the agreement reached at the WTO on the definition of subsidies for services.
EU/SG/en 269
2. Subsidies shall be subject to this Chapter only if they are specific, within the meaning of
Article 2 of the SCM Agreement. Any subsidy falling under Article 11.7 (Prohibited Subsidies)
shall be deemed to be specific.
3. Articles 11.7 (Prohibited Subsidies), 11.8 (Other Subsidies) and 11.10 (Review Clause) and
Annex 11-A shall not apply to fisheries subsidies, subsidies related to products covered by Annex 1
of the Agreement on Agriculture and other subsidies covered by the Agreement on Agriculture.
ARTICLE 11.6
Relationship with the WTO
The provisions in this Section are without prejudice to the rights and obligations of a Party under
the WTO Agreement, in particular to apply trade remedies or to engage in dispute settlement
proceedings or other appropriate action against a subsidy granted by the other Party.
ARTICLE 11.7
Prohibited Subsidies
1. With respect to subsidies related to trade in goods, the Parties affirm their rights and
obligations under Article 3 of the SCM Agreement, which is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
EU/SG/en 270
2. The following subsidies related to trade in goods and services shall be prohibited unless the
subsidising Party upon the request of the other Party has demonstrated that the subsidy in question
does not affect trade of the other Party nor will be likely to do so:
(a) any legal arrangements whereby a government or any public body is responsible for covering
debts or liabilities of certain undertakings without any limitation in law or in fact as to the
amount of those debts and liabilities or the duration of such responsibility; and
(b) any support to insolvent or ailing undertakings in whatever form (such as loans and
guarantees, cash grants, capital injections, provision of assets below market prices, tax
exemptions) without a credible restructuring plan, based on realistic assumptions, with a view
to ensuring the return of the ailing undertaking to long-term viability within a reasonable time,
and without the undertaking itself significantly contributing to the costs of restructuring.1
3. Subparagraphs 2(a) and 2(b) do not prevent a Party from providing subsidies to remedy a
serious disturbance in its economy. A serious disturbance in the economy of a Party means an
exceptional, temporary and significant crisis which affects the whole economy of the Party rather
than a specific region or economic sector of that Party.
4. Subparagraph 2(b) does not apply to subsidies granted as compensation for carrying out
public service obligations nor to subsidies to the coal industry.
 1 This does not prevent the Parties from providing temporary liquidity support in the form of
loan guarantees or loans limited to the amount needed to merely to keep an ailing undertaking
in business for the time necessary to work out a restructuring or liquidation plan.
EU/SG/en 271
ARTICLE 11.8
Other Subsidies
1. The Parties agree to use their best endeavours to apply their competition law or other laws to
remedy or remove distortions of competition caused by other specific subsidies related to trade in
goods and services which are not covered by Article 11.7 (Prohibited Subsidies), insofar as they
affect or are likely to affect trade of either Party, and also to prevent the occurrence of such
situations. Annex 11-A contains guidance in particular on the types of subsidies which do not
produce these effects.
2. The Parties agree to exchange information at the request of either Party and hold a first
dialogue within two years of the entry into force of this Agreement with a view to developing rules
applicable to other subsidies, taking into account developments at multilateral level. To that end, the
Parties may take a decision in the Trade Committee.
ARTICLE 11.9
Transparency
1. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of subsidies that relate to trade in goods or to
the supply of services. To that end, each Party shall report every two years to the other Party on the
legal basis, the form, and to the extent possible, the amount or budget, and the recipients of
subsidies granted by its government or any public body.
EU/SG/en 272
2. Such report shall be deemed to have been provided if the relevant information was made
available by the Parties, or on their behalf, on a publicly accessible website by June of the second
calendar year after the subsidies were granted.
ARTICLE 11.10
Review Clause
The Parties shall keep under constant review the matters to which reference is made in this Section.
Each Party may refer such matters to the Trade Committee. The Parties agree to review progress in
implementing this Section every two years after the entry into force of this Agreement, unless both
Parties agree otherwise.
SECTION D
GENERAL MATTERS
ARTICLE 11.11
Cooperation and Coordination in Law Enforcement
The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation and coordination to further enhance effective
law enforcement. Their respective authorities shall endeavour to coordinate and cooperate in the
enforcement of their respective laws to fulfil the objective of this Agreement of free and undistorted
competition in their trade relations.
EU/SG/en 273
ARTICLE 11.12
Confidentiality
1. When a Party communicates information under this Agreement, that Party shall ensure the
protection of business secrets and other confidential information.
2. When a Party communicates information in confidence under this Agreement, the receiving
Party shall, consistent with its laws and regulations, maintain the confidentiality of that
communicated information.
ARTICLE 11.13
Consultation
1. To foster mutual understanding between the Parties or to address specific matters that arise
under Section A (Anti-Competitive Conduct and Mergers), Section B (Public Undertakings,
Undertakings Entrusted with Special or Exclusive Rights and State Monopolies) or
Section D (General Matters), each Party upon the request of the other Party, shall enter into
consultations regarding representations made by the other Party. In its requests, the Party shall
indicate, if relevant, how the matter affects trade between the Parties.
EU/SG/en 274
2. The Parties shall promptly discuss, upon the request of a Party, any questions arising from the
interpretation or application of Section A (Anti-Competitive Conduct and Mergers), Section B
(Public Undertakings, Undertakings Entrusted with Special or Exclusive Rights and State
Monopolies) or Section D (General Matters).
3. To facilitate discussion of the matter that is the subject of the consultations, each Party shall
endeavour to provide relevant non-confidential information to the other Party.
ARTICLE 11.14
Dispute Settlement and Mediation Mechanism
Neither Party may have recourse to Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) and
Chapter Fifteen (Mediation Mechanism) for any matter arising under this Chapter except for
Article 11.7 (Prohibited Subsidies).
EU/SG/en 275
CHAPTER TWELVE
TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
SECTION A
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 12.1
Context and Objectives
1. The Parties recall the Agenda 21 of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development of 1992, the Preamble to the WTO Agreement, the Singapore Ministerial Declaration
of the WTO of 1996, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation on Sustainable Development of
2002, the Ministerial Declaration of the UN Economic and Social Council on Generating Full and
Productive Employment and Decent Work for All of 2006, and the International Labour
Organization (hereinafter referred to as "ILO") Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair
Globalization of 2008. In view of these instruments, the Parties reaffirm their commitment to
developing and promoting international trade and their bilateral trade and economic relationship in
such a way as to contribute to sustainable development.
EU/SG/en 276
2. The Parties recognise that economic development, social development and environmental
protection are interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development.
They underline the benefit of cooperation on trade-related social and environmental issues as part of
a global approach to trade and sustainable development.
3. The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by weakening
or reducing the protections afforded by their domestic labour and environment law. At the same
time, the Parties stress that environmental and labour standards should not be used for protectionist
trade purposes.
4. The Parties recognise that it is their aim to strengthen their trade relations and cooperation in
ways that promote sustainable development in the context of paragraphs 1 and 2. In light of the
specific circumstances of each Party, it is not their intention to harmonise the labour or environment
standards of the Parties.
ARTICLE 12.2
Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection
1. The Parties recognise the right of each Party to establish its own levels of environmental and
labour protection, and to adopt or modify its relevant laws and policies accordingly, consistent with
the principles of the internationally recognised standards or agreements to which it is party, referred
to in Articles 12.3 (Multilateral Labour Standards and Agreements) and 12.6 (Multilateral
Environmental Standards and Agreements).
EU/SG/en 277
2. The Parties shall continue to improve those laws and policies, and shall strive towards
providing and encouraging high levels of environmental and labour protection.
SECTION B
TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
LABOUR ASPECTS1
ARTICLE 12.3
Multilateral Labour Standards and Agreements
1. The Parties recognise the value of international cooperation and agreements on employment
and labour affairs as a response of the international community to economic, employment and
social challenges and opportunities resulting from globalisation. They commit to consulting and
cooperating as appropriate on trade-related labour and employment issues of mutual interest.
 1 When "labour" is referred to in this Chapter, it includes the issues relevant to the Decent
Work Agenda as agreed on in the ILO and in the Ministerial Declaration of the UN Economic
and Social Council on Generating Full and Productive Employment and Decent Work for All
of 2006.
EU/SG/en 278
2. The Parties affirm their commitments, under the Ministerial Declaration of the UN Economic
and Social Council on Generating Full and Productive Employment and Decent Work for All of
2006, to recognising full and productive employment and decent work for all as a key element of
sustainable development for all countries and as a priority objective of international cooperation.
The Parties resolve to promote the development of international trade in a way that is conducive to
full and productive employment and decent work for all.
3. In accordance with the obligations assumed under the ILO and the ILO Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up adopted by the International Labour
Conference at its 86th Session in Geneva, June 1998, the Parties commit to respecting, promoting
and effectively implementing the principles concerning the fundamental rights at work, namely:
(a) the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining;
(b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;
(c) the effective abolition of child labour; and
(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation.
The Parties affirm the commitment to effectively implementing the ILO Conventions that Singapore
and the Member States of the Union have ratified respectively.
EU/SG/en 279
4. The Parties will make continued and sustained efforts towards ratifying and effectively
implementing the fundamental ILO conventions, and they will exchange information in this regard.
The Parties will also consider the ratification and effective implementation of other ILO
conventions, taking into account domestic circumstances. The Parties will exchange information in
this regard.
5. The Parties recognise that the violation of fundamental principles and rights at work cannot be
invoked or otherwise used as a legitimate comparative advantage.
ARTICLE 12.4
Labour Cooperation
in the Context of Trade and Sustainable Development
The Parties recognise the importance of working together on trade-related aspects of labour policies
in order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement. The Parties may initiate cooperative activities
of mutual benefit in areas including, but not limited to:
(a) cooperation in international fora addressing labour aspects of trade and sustainable
development, including, but not limited to, the ILO and Asia-Europe Meeting;
(b) the exchange of information and the sharing of best practices in areas such as labour law and
practices, compliance and enforcement systems, labour dispute management, labour
consultation, labour-management cooperation and occupational safety and health;
EU/SG/en 280
(c) the exchange of views on the positive and negative impacts of this Agreement on labour
aspects of sustainable development and on ways to enhance, prevent or mitigate those
impacts, taking into account sustainability impact assessments carried out by either or both
Parties;
(d) the exchange of views on the promotion of the ratification of fundamental ILO Conventions
and other conventions of mutual interest, as well as on the effective implementation of ratified
conventions;
(e) cooperation on trade-related aspects of the ILO Decent Work Agenda, including on the
interlinkages between trade and full and productive employment, labour market adjustment,
core labour standards, labour statistics, human resources development and lifelong learning,
social protection and social inclusion, social dialogue and gender equality; and
(f) the exchange of views on the trade impact of labour regulations, norms and standards.
ARTICLE 12.5
Scientific Information
Each Party, when preparing and implementing measures aimed at health and safety at work which
may affect trade or investment between the Parties, shall take account of relevant scientific and
technical information and related international standards, guidelines or recommendations, if
available, including the precautionary principle as enshrined in such international standards,
guidelines or recommendations.
EU/SG/en 281
SECTION C
TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS
ARTICLE 12.6
Multilateral Environmental Standards and Agreements
1. The Parties recognise the value of international environmental governance and agreements as
a response of the international community to global or regional environmental problems, and they
stress the need to enhance the mutual supportiveness between trade and environment policies, rules
and measures. In this context, they will consult and cooperate as appropriate with respect to
negotiations on trade-related environmental issues of mutual interest.
2. The Parties shall effectively implement, in their respective laws, regulations or other measures
and practices in their territories, the multilateral environmental agreements to which they are party.1
 1 The multilateral environmental agreements referred to shall encompass those protocols,
amendments, annexes and adjustments binding on the Parties.
EU/SG/en 282
3. The Parties affirm their commitment to reaching the ultimate objective of the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change (hereinafter referred to as "UNFCCC"), and to effectively
implementing the UNFCCC, its Kyoto Protocol, and the Paris Agreement of 12 December 2015 in a
manner consistent with the principles and provisions of the UNFCCC. They commit to work
together to strengthen the multilateral, rules-based regime under the UNFCCC building on the
UNFCCC's agreed decisions, and to support efforts to develop a post-2020 international climate
change agreement under the UNFCCC applicable to all parties.
4. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures to
implement the multilateral environmental agreements to which they are party, provided that such
measures are not applied in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination between the Parties or a disguised restriction on trade.
ARTICLE 12.7
Trade in Timber and Timber Products
The Parties recognise the importance of the global conservation and sustainable management of
forests. To that end, the Parties undertake to:
(a) exchange information on approaches to promote the trade in, and the consumption of, timber
and timber products from legally and sustainably managed forests, and to promote the
awareness of such approaches;
EU/SG/en 283
(b) promote global forest law enforcement and governance and to address trade in illegally
harvested timber and timber products through, for example, promoting the use of timber and
timber products from legally and sustainably managed forests, including through verification
and certification schemes;
(c) cooperate to promote the effectiveness of measures or policies aimed at addressing the trade
in illegally harvested timber and timber products; and
(d) promote the effective use of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) with regard to timber species whose conservation status is
considered at risk.
ARTICLE 12.8
Trade in Fish Products
The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring the conservation and management of fish stocks in
a sustainable manner. To that end, the Parties undertake to:
(a) comply with long-term conservation measures and sustainable exploitation of fish stocks as
defined in the international instruments ratified by the respective Parties and to uphold the
principles of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (hereinafter referred to
as "FAO") and relevant UN instruments relating to these issues;
EU/SG/en 284
(b) introduce and implement effective measures to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated
(hereinafter referred to as "IUU") fishing, including by cooperating with Regional Fisheries
Managements Organisations and implementing their Catch Documentation or Certification
Schemes for the export of fish and fish products, when required, and the Parties shall also
facilitate the elimination of IUU products from trade flows and the exchange of information
on IUU activities;
(c) adopt effective monitoring and control measures to ensure compliance with conservation
measures, such as appropriate Port State Measures; and
(d) uphold the principles of the FAO Agreement to Promote Compliance with International
Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas and respect the
relevant provisions of the FAO Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and
Eliminate IUU Fishing.
ARTICLE 12.9
Scientific Information
Each Party, when preparing and implementing measures aimed at environmental protection which
may affect trade or investment between the Parties, shall take account of scientific evidence and
relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, where available, and of the
precautionary principle.
EU/SG/en 285
ARTICLE 12.10
Cooperation on Environmental Aspects
in the Context of Trade and Sustainable Development
The Parties recognise the importance of working together on trade-related aspects of environmental
policies in order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement. The Parties may initiate cooperative
activities of mutual benefit in areas including, but not limited to:
(a) the exchange of views on the positive and negative impacts of this Agreement on
environmental aspects of sustainable development and ways to enhance, prevent or mitigate
those impacts, taking into account sustainability impact assessments carried out by either or
both Parties;
(b) cooperation in international fora addressing environmental aspects of trade and sustainable
development, including in particular in the WTO, under the United Nations Environment
Programme and under multilateral environmental agreements;
(c) cooperation with a view to promoting the ratification and effective implementation of
multilateral environmental agreements with relevance to trade;
(d) the exchange of information and cooperation on private and public certification and labelling
schemes, including eco-labelling, and on green public procurement;
(e) the exchange of views on the trade impact of environmental regulations, norms and standards;
EU/SG/en 286
(f) cooperation on trade-related aspects of the current and future international climate change
regime, including ways to address adverse effects of trade on climate, as well as means to
promote low-carbon technologies and energy efficiency;
(g) cooperation on trade related aspects of multilateral environmental agreements, including
customs cooperation;
(h) cooperation on sustainable forest management to encourage effective measures for
certification of sustainably produced timber;
(i) the exchange of views on the relationship between multilateral environmental agreements and
international trade rules;
(j) the exchange of views on the liberalisation of environmental goods and services; and
(k) the exchange of views regarding conservation and management of the living marine
resources.
EU/SG/en 287
SECTION D
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 12.11
Trade and Investment Promoting Sustainable Development
1. The Parties resolve to make continuing special efforts to facilitate and promote trade and
investment in environmental goods and services, including through addressing related non-tariff
barriers. The Parties also recognise the usefulness of efforts to promote trade in goods that are the
subject of voluntary or private sustainable development assurance schemes, such as eco-labelling,
or fair and ethical trade.
2. The Parties shall pay special attention to facilitating the removal of obstacles to trade or
investment concerning climate-friendly goods and services, such as sustainable renewable energy
goods and related services and energy efficient products and services, including through the
adoption of policy frameworks conducive to the deployment of best available technologies and
through the promotion of standards that respond to environmental and economic needs and
minimise technical obstacles to trade.
EU/SG/en 288
3. The Parties recognise the need to ensure that, when developing public support systems for
fossils fuels, proper account is taken of the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and of the need
to limit distortions of trade as much as possible. While subparagraph 2(b) of
Article 11.7 (Prohibited Subsidies) does not apply to subsidies to the coal industry, the Parties share
the goal of progressively reducing subsidies for fossil fuels. Such reductions may be accompanied
by measures to alleviate the social consequences associated with the transition to low carbon fuels.
In addition, both Parties will actively promote the development of a sustainable and safe low-carbon
economy, such as through investment in renewable energies and energy efficient solutions.
4. When promoting trade and investment, the Parties should make special efforts to promote
corporate social responsibility practices which are adopted on a voluntary basis. In this regard, each
Party shall refer to relevant internationally accepted principles, standards or guidelines to which it
has agreed or acceded, such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, the UN Global Compact, and the ILO Tripartite
Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy. The Parties
commit to exchanging information and cooperating on promoting corporate social responsibility.
ARTICLE 12.12
Upholding Levels of Protection
1. A Party shall not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise derogate
from, its environmental and labour laws, in a manner affecting trade or investment between the
Parties.
EU/SG/en 289
2. A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental and labour laws, through a
sustained or recurring course of action or inaction, where such failure to effectively enforce would
affect trade or investment between the Parties.
ARTICLE 12.13
Transparency
Each Party shall ensure that where any measure of general application aimed at protecting the
environment or labour conditions may affect trade and investment between the Parties, such
measure is developed, introduced and administered in a transparent manner and with due notice and
opportunities for interested persons to submit their views, in accordance with that Party's domestic
law and with Chapter Thirteen (Transparency).
ARTICLE 12.14
Review of Impact on Sustainable Development
1. The Parties undertake to jointly or independently monitor, assess and review the impact of the
implementation of this Agreement on sustainable development through their relevant participative
processes and institutions, in accordance with their existing practices.
EU/SG/en 290
2. The Parties will exchange views on methodologies and indicators for trade sustainability
impact assessments.
ARTICLE 12.15
Institutional Set up and Monitoring Mechanism
1. Each Party shall designate an office within its administration that shall serve as contact point
with the other Party for the purpose of implementing this Chapter.
2. The Parties shall establish a Board on Trade and Sustainable Development (hereinafter
referred to as the "Board"). The Board shall comprise senior officials from within the administration
of each Party.
3. The Board shall meet within the first two years after the date this Agreement enters into force
and thereafter as necessary, to oversee the implementation of this Chapter.
4. Each meeting of the Board shall include a public session with stakeholders to exchange views
on issues related to the implementation of this Chapter. The Parties shall promote a balanced
representation of relevant interests, including independent representative organisations of
employers, workers, environmental interests and business groups, as well as other relevant
stakeholders as appropriate.
EU/SG/en 291
5. Each Party shall establish new consultative mechanisms or make use of existing consultative
mechanisms to seek advice from relevant domestic stakeholders on the implementation of this
Chapter, such as domestic advisory groups. Such mechanisms shall include balanced representation
of independent economic, social and environmental stakeholders. These stakeholders include
employers' and workers' organisations, and non-governmental organisations. These stakeholders
may, on their own initiative, submit views or recommendations to their respective Parties on the
implementation of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 12.16
Government Consultations
1. In case of disagreement on any matter arising under this Chapter, the Parties shall only have
recourse to the procedures provided for in Article 12.16 (Government Consultations) and Article
12.17 (Panel of Experts). Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) and Chapter Fifteen (Mediation
Mechanism) do not apply to this Chapter.
2. In case of any disagreement referred to in paragraph 1, a Party may request consultations with
the other Party by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party. Consultations
shall commence promptly after a Party has delivered a request for consultations.
EU/SG/en 292
3. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of the
matter. The Parties shall take into account the activities of the ILO or relevant multilateral
environmental organisations or bodies so as to promote greater cooperation and coherence between
the work of the Parties and these organisations. Where relevant, the Parties, subject to mutual
agreement, may seek the views of these organisations or bodies, or of any person or body the
Parties deem appropriate, in order to fully examine the matter.
4. If a Party considers that the matter needs further discussion that Party may request that the
Board be convened to consider the matter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the
other Party. The Board shall convene promptly and endeavour to agree on a resolution of the matter.
5. Where appropriate, the Board may consult relevant stakeholders.
6. Any resolution reached by the Board on the matter shall be made public unless it otherwise
decides.
ARTICLE 12.17
Panel of Experts
1. For any matter that has not been satisfactorily addressed by the Board within 120 days from
the delivery of a request for the Board to convene to consider that matter pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Article 12.16 (Government Consultations), or within a longer period as agreed by both Parties, a
Party may request, by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party, that a
Panel of Experts be established to examine that matter.
EU/SG/en 293
2. At its first meeting after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Board shall establish the
rules of procedure of the Panel of Experts, taking reference from the relevant Rules of Procedure in
Annex 14-A. The principles in Annex 14-B shall apply to this Article.
3. At its first meeting after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Board shall establish a list
of at least twelve individuals who are willing and able to serve on the Panel of Experts. This list
shall be composed of three sub-lists: one sub-list for each Party and one sub-list of individuals who
are not nationals of either Party and who shall act as Chairpersons of the Panel of Experts. Each
Party shall propose at least four individuals to serve as experts on its own sub-list. Each Party shall
also propose at least two individuals to serve on the sub-list of Chairpersons with the agreement of
both Parties. At its meetings, the Board will review the list and ensure that it is maintained at least
at the level of twelve individuals.
4. The list referred to in paragraph 3 shall comprise individuals with specialised knowledge or
expertise regarding the issues addressed in this Chapter, regarding labour or environmental law, or
regarding the resolution of disputes arising under international agreements. Those individuals shall
be independent, shall serve in their individual capacities, and shall neither take instructions from
any organisation or government with regard to issues related to the matter at stake nor be affiliated
with the government of Singapore, the government of any Member State of the Union, or the
Union.
EU/SG/en 294
5. A Panel of Experts shall be composed of three members, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
Within 30 days of the date of receipt by the responding Party of the request for the establishment of
a Panel of Experts, the Parties shall consult each other in order to reach an agreement on its
composition. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the composition of the Panel of
Experts within this time-frame, they shall select the chairperson from the relevant sub-list referred
to in paragraph 3 by mutual agreement or, in case they cannot agree within another seven days, by
lot. Each Party shall select one expert who satisfies the requirements of paragraph 4 within 44 days
of the date of receipt by the responding Party of the request for the establishment of a Panel of
Experts. The Parties may agree on the selection of any other expert who satisfies the requirements
of paragraph 4 to sit on the Panel of Experts. In the event that the composition of the Panel of
Experts has not been completed within 44 days from the date of receipt by the responding Party of
the request for the establishment of a Panel of Experts, the remaining expert(s) shall be selected
within seven days by lot from among the individuals on the sub-list(s) referred to in paragraph 3
that was proposed by the Party or Parties that had not completed the procedure. In the event that
such list has not yet been established, the experts shall be selected by lot from the individuals who
have been formally proposed by one or both of the Parties. The date of establishment of the Panel of
Experts shall be the date on which the last of the three experts is selected.
6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within seven days from the date of establishment of the
Panel of Experts, the terms of reference of the Panel of Experts shall be:
"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Trade and Sustainable Development
Chapter, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of the Panel of Experts, and to
issue a report, in accordance with paragraph 8 of Article 12.17 (Panel of Experts), making
recommendations for the solution of the matter".
EU/SG/en 295
7. The Panel of Experts may obtain information from any source it deems appropriate. In matters
related to the respect of multilateral agreements as set out in Articles 12.3 (Multilateral Labour
Standards and Agreements) and 12.6 (Multilateral Environmental Standards and Agreements), the
Panel of Experts should seek information and advice from the ILO or Multilateral Environmental
Agreement bodies. Any information obtained under this paragraph shall be disclosed to both Parties
and submitted to them for their comments.
8. The Panel of Experts shall issue an interim and a final report to the Parties. These reports shall
set out the findings of facts, the applicability of the relevant provisions, and the basic rationale
behind any findings and recommendations. The Panel of Experts shall issue the interim report to the
Parties not later than 90 days from its date of establishment. Any Party may submit written
comments on the interim report to the Panel of Experts. After considering any such written
comments, the Panel of Experts may modify the report and make any further examination it
considers appropriate. The Panel of Experts shall issue the final report to the Parties no later than
150 days from its date of establishment. Where it considers that the deadlines set in this paragraph
cannot be met, the chairperson of the Panel of Experts shall notify the Parties in writing, stating the
reasons for the delay and the date on which the Panel of Experts plans to issue its interim or final
report. The Panel of Experts shall issue the final report no later than 180 days after the date of its
establishment, unless the Parties agree otherwise. This final report shall be made publicly available
unless the Parties decide otherwise.
EU/SG/en 296
9. The Parties shall discuss the appropriate measures to be implemented, taking into account the
report and recommendations of the Panel of Experts. The Party concerned shall inform its
stakeholders, through the consultative mechanisms referred to in paragraph 5 of Article 12.15
(Institutional Set Up and Monitoring Mechanism), and the other Party, of its decisions on any
actions or measures to be implemented, no later than three months after the report has been
submitted to the Parties. The follow-up to the report and the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts shall be monitored by the Board. Stakeholders may submit observations to the Board in this
regard.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
TRANSPARENCY
ARTICLE 13.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) "measure of general application" means laws, regulations, judicial decisions, procedures and
administrative rulings that may have an impact on any matter covered by this Agreement but
does not include a ruling that applies to a particular person; and
EU/SG/en 297
(b) "interested person" means any natural or legal person that may be subject to any rights or
obligations under measures of general application.
ARTICLE 13.2
Objectives and Scope
1. Recognising the impact which their respective regulatory environments may have on trade
and investment between them, the Parties shall pursue a transparent and predictable regulatory
environment for economic operators, including small and medium-sized enterprises, that do
business in their territories.
2. The Parties, affirming their respective commitments under the WTO Agreement, hereby lay
down clarifications and improved arrangements for transparency, consultation, and the better
administration of measures of general application.
EU/SG/en 298
ARTICLE 13.3
Publication regarding Measures of General Application
1. Each Party shall ensure that in respect of measures of general application:
(a) such measures are readily available to interested persons, in a non-discriminatory manner, via
an officially designated medium and, where feasible and possible, via electronic means, in
such a manner as to enable interested persons and the other Party to become acquainted with
them;
(b) an explanation of the objective of, and rationale for, such measures shall be provided to the
extent possible; and
(c) there shall be sufficient time between the publication and entry into force of such measures,
except where not possible for reasons of urgency.
2. Each Party shall:
(a) endeavour to publish in advance any proposal to adopt or to amend any measure of general
application, including an explanation of the objective of and rationale for the proposal;
(b) provide reasonable opportunities for interested persons to comment on such proposed
measures, allowing, in particular, for sufficient time for such opportunities; and
EU/SG/en 299
(c) endeavour to take into account the comments received from interested persons with respect to
such proposed measures.
ARTICLE 13.4
Enquiries and Contact Points
1. In order to facilitate the effective implementation of this Agreement, and to facilitate
communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement, each Party shall
designate a contact point upon the entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Upon the request of a Party, the contact point of the other Party shall indicate the office or the
official responsible for any particular matter that pertains to the implementation of this Agreement
and assist, as necessary, in facilitating communication with the requesting Party.
3. Each Party shall establish or maintain appropriate mechanisms for responding to enquiries
from any interested person of the other Party regarding any measures of general application which
are proposed or in force, and their application. Enquiries may be addressed through the contact
points established under paragraph 1 or any other mechanism, as appropriate.
4. The Parties recognise that any response provided for in paragraph 3 may not be definitive or
legally binding but for information purposes only, unless otherwise provided for in their laws and
regulations.
EU/SG/en 300
5. Requests or information under this Article shall be conveyed to the other Party through the
relevant contact points provided for in paragraph 1.
6. Upon the request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide information and respond
to questions pertaining to any actual or proposed measure of general application that the requesting
Party considers might affect the operation of this Agreement, regardless of whether the requesting
Party has previously been notified of that measure.
7. Each Party shall establish or maintain appropriate mechanism with the task of seeking to
effectively resolve problems for interested persons of the other Party that may arise from the
application of any measure of general application. Such processes should be easily accessible,
time-bound, result-oriented and transparent. They shall be without prejudice to any appeal or review
procedures which the Parties establish or maintain. They shall also be without prejudice to the
Parties' rights and obligations under Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) and Chapter Fifteen
(Mediation Mechanism).
8. Any information provided under this Article shall be without prejudice as to whether the
measure is consistent with this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 301
ARTICLE 13.5
Administrative Proceedings
With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial and reasonable manner all measures of
general application, each Party, in applying such measures to particular persons, goods or services
of the other Party in specific cases, shall:
(a) when proceedings are initiated, endeavour to provide reasonable notice in accordance with its
procedures to interested persons of the other Party who are directly affected by such
proceedings, including a description of the nature of the proceedings, a statement of the legal
authority under which the proceedings are initiated, and a general description of any issues in
controversy;
(b) afford such interested persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in
support of their positions prior to any final administrative action, insofar as permitted by time,
the nature of the proceedings and the public interest; and
(c) ensure that its procedures are based on and in accordance with its law ARTICLE 13.6
Review of Administrative Actions
1. Each Party shall, subject to its domestic law, establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial or
administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of the prompt review and, where warranted,
the correction of administrative actions1 relating to matters covered by this Agreement. Such
tribunals shall be impartial and shall be independent of the office or authority entrusted with
administrative enforcement, and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.
2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties to the
proceedings have the right to:
(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and
(b) a decision that was based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where required by
law of the Party, based on the record compiled by the administrative authority.
3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for under the law of
that Party, that the decision referred to in paragraph 2 shall be implemented by, and shall govern the
practice of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative action at issue.
 1 For greater certainty, the review of administrative actions can take the form of common law
judicial review, and the correction of administrative actions may include a referral back to the
body that took such action for corrective action.
EU/SG/en 303
ARTICLE 13.7
Regulatory Quality and Performance
and Good Administrative Behaviour
1. The Parties agree to cooperate in promoting regulatory quality and performance in their
respective regulatory policies through the exchange of information and best practices.
2. The Parties subscribe to the principles of good administrative behaviour, and agree to
cooperate in promoting it in their respective administrations through the exchange of information
and best practices.
ARTICLE 13.8
Specific Rules
Specific rules in other Chapters of this Agreement regarding the subject matter of this Chapter shall
prevail to the extent that they differ from the provisions of this Chapter.
EU/SG/en 304
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
SECTION A
OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
ARTICLE 14.1
Objective
The objective of this Chapter is to establish an effective and efficient mechanism for avoiding and
settling disputes between the Parties concerning the interpretation and application of this Agreement
with a view to reaching, where possible, a mutually acceptable solution.
ARTICLE 14.2
Scope
This Chapter applies to any dispute between the Parties concerning the interpretation and
application of the provisions of this Agreement, except as otherwise expressly provided.
EU/SG/en 305
SECTION B
CONSULTATIONS
ARTICLE 14.3
Consultations
1. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve any dispute concerning the interpretation and
application of the provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope) by entering into consultations in
good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually agreed solution.
2. A Party shall seek consultations by means of a written request to the other Party, copied to the
Trade Committee, which shall give the reasons for requesting consultations, including the
identification of the measures at issue, the applicable provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope),
and the reasons for considering the measures as incompatible with such provisions.
3. Consultations shall be held within 30 days of the date of receipt of the request and, unless the
Parties agree otherwise, shall take place on the territory of the Party complained against. The
consultations shall be deemed to be concluded within 60 days of the date of receipt of the request,
unless the Parties agree otherwise. Consultations shall be confidential, and shall be without
prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.
EU/SG/en 306
4. Consultations on matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods and, where
appropriate, seasonal goods or services, shall be held within 15 days of the date of receipt of the
request, and shall be deemed concluded within 30 days of the date of receipt of the request, unless
the Parties agree otherwise.
5. If the Party to which the request is made does not respond to the request for consultations
within ten days of the date of its receipt, or if consultations are not held within the timeframes laid
down in paragraph 3 or in paragraph 4 respectively, or if consultations have been concluded and no
mutually agreed solution has been reached, the complaining Party may request the establishment of
an arbitration panel in accordance with Article 14.4 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure).
EU/SG/en 307
SECTION C
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES
SUB-SECTION A
ARBITRATION PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 14.4
Initiation of Arbitration Procedure
1. Where the Parties have failed to resolve a dispute by recourse to consultations as provided for
in Article 14.3 (Consultations), the complaining Party may request the establishment of an
arbitration panel in accordance with this Article.
2. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in writing to the Party
complained against and to the Trade Committee. The complaining Party shall identify in its request
the specific measure at issue, and it shall explain how such measure constitutes a breach of the
provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope) in a manner sufficient to clearly present the legal basis
for the complaint.
EU/SG/en 308
ARTICLE 14.5
Establishment of the Arbitration Panel
1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.
2. Within five days of the date of receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 1 of
Article 14.4 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure) by the Party complained against, the Parties shall
enter into consultations in order to agree on the composition of the arbitration panel.
3. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the choice of chairperson of the arbitration
panel within ten days of entering into the consultations referred to in paragraph 2, within 20 days of
entering into consultations referred to in paragraph 2, the chairperson of the Trade Committee or the
chairperson's delegate shall select one arbitrator who will serve as a chairperson by lot from the list
referred to under paragraph 1 of Article 14.20 (Lists of Arbitrators).
4. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the arbitrators within ten days of entering
into the consultations referred to in paragraph 2:
(a) each Party may select one arbitrator, who will not act as a chairperson, from the individuals
on the list established under paragraph 2 of Article 14.20 (Lists of Arbitrators), within 15 days
of entering into the consultations referred to in paragraph 2; and
EU/SG/en 309
(b) if either Party fails to select an arbitrator under subparagraph 4(a), the chairperson of the
Trade Committee or the chairperson's delegate shall select any remaining arbitrator by lot
from among the individuals proposed by that Party pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 14.20
(Lists of Arbitrators), within 20 days of entering into consultations referred to in paragraph 2.
5. Should the list provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 14.20 (Lists of Arbitrators) not be
established at the time required pursuant to paragraph 4:
(a) where both Parties have proposed individuals pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 14.20 (Lists
of Arbitrators), each Party may select one arbitrator, who will not act as a chairperson, from
among the individuals proposed, within 15 days of entering into the consultations referred to
in paragraph 2. If a Party fails to select an arbitrator, the chairperson of the Trade Committee
or the chairperson's delegate shall select the arbitrator by lot from among the individuals
proposed by the Party which failed to select its arbitrator; or
(b) where only one Party has proposed individuals pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 14.20 (Lists
of Arbitrators), each Party may select one arbitrator, who will not act as a chairperson, from
among the individuals proposed, within 15 days of entering into the consultations referred to
in paragraph 2. If a Party fails to select an arbitrator, the chairperson of the Trade Committee
or the chairperson's delegate shall select the arbitrator by lot from among the individuals
proposed.
6. Should the list provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 14.20 (Lists of Arbitrators) not be
established at the time required for the purposes of paragraph 3, the chairperson shall be selected by
lot from among former Members of the WTO Appellate Body, none of whom shall be natural
persons of a Party.
EU/SG/en 310
7. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the last of the
three arbitrators is selected.
8. The replacement of arbitrators shall take place only for the reasons detailed in Rules 19 to 25
of Annex 14-A and in accordance with the procedures thereunder.
ARTICLE 14.6
Preliminary Ruling on Urgency
If a Party so requests, the arbitration panel shall give a preliminary ruling within ten days of its
establishment on whether it deems the case to be urgent.
ARTICLE 14.7
Interim Panel Report
1. The arbitration panel shall issue an interim report to the Parties setting out the findings of fact,
the applicability of relevant provisions of this Agreement, and the basic rationale behind any
findings and recommendations, not later than 90 days from the date of establishment of the
arbitration panel. Where the arbitration panel considers that this deadline cannot be met, the
chairperson of the arbitration panel must notify the Parties and the Trade Committee in writing,
stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration panel plans to issue its interim
report. Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel issue its interim report later than
120 days after the date of its establishment.
EU/SG/en 311
2. Any Party may submit a written request for the arbitration panel to review specific aspects of
the interim report within 30 days of its notification.
3. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or, where appropriate,
seasonal goods or services, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its interim report
within half of the period allowed under paragraph 1, and any Party may submit a written request for
the arbitration panel to review specific aspects of the interim report within 15 days of its
notification.
4. After considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim report, the arbitration
panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate. The
findings of the final ruling of the arbitration panel shall include a sufficient discussion of the
arguments made at the interim review stage, and shall clearly address the written comments of the
two Parties.
ARTICLE 14.8
Arbitration Panel Ruling
1. The arbitration panel shall issue its ruling to the Parties and to the Trade Committee within
150 days from the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel. Where it considers that this
deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the
Trade Committee in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration
panel plans to issue its ruling. Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel issue its ruling
later than 180 days after the date of its establishment.
EU/SG/en 312
2. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or, where appropriate,
seasonal goods or services, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its ruling within
75 days of the date of its establishment. Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel issue
its ruling later than 90 days after the date of its establishment.
SUB-SECTION B
COMPLIANCE
ARTICLE 14.9
Compliance with the Arbitration Panel Ruling
Each Party shall take any measure necessary to comply in good faith with the ruling of the
arbitration panel, and the Parties shall endeavour to agree on the period of time to comply with the
ruling.
EU/SG/en 313
ARTICLE 14.10
Reasonable Period of Time for Compliance
1. No later than 30 days after the receipt of the notification of the ruling of the arbitration panel
to the Parties, the Party against which the complaint was made shall notify the complaining Party
and the Trade Committee of the time it will require to comply with the ruling of the arbitration
panel (hereinafter referred to as "reasonable period of time"), if immediate compliance is not
possible.
2. If there is disagreement between the Parties on the reasonable period of time for compliance
with the ruling of the arbitration panel, within 20 days of the receipt of the notification made under
paragraph 1 by the Party complained against, the complaining Party shall request in writing that the
original arbitration panel determine the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be notified
simultaneously to the other Party and to the Trade Committee. The original arbitration panel shall
issue its ruling to the Parties, and shall notify the Trade Committee thereof, within 20 days of the
date of the submission of the request.
3. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer available, the
procedures set out in Article 14.5 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time
limit for issuing the ruling shall be 35 days from the date of the submission of the request referred
to in paragraph 2.
4. The Party against which the complaint was made shall inform the complaining Party in
writing of its progress in complying with the ruling of the arbitration panel at least one month
before the expiry of the reasonable period of time.
EU/SG/en 314
5. The reasonable period of time may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.
ARTICLE 14.11
Review of Any Measure Taken
to Comply with the Arbitration Panel Ruling
1. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the Trade Committee,
before the end of the reasonable period of time, of any measures that it has taken to comply with the
ruling of the arbitration panel.
2. In the event that there is disagreement between the Parties concerning the existence of any
measures notified under paragraph 1 or the consistency of such measures with the provisions
referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope), the complaining Party may request in writing that the original
arbitration panel rule on the matter. Such request shall identify the specific measure at issue and the
provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope) with which it considers that measure to be
inconsistent, in a manner sufficient to present the legal basis for the complaint clearly. Such request
shall also explain how the measure in question is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in
Article 14.2 (Scope). The original arbitration panel shall notify its ruling within 45 days of the date
of the submission of the request.
3. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer available, the
procedures set out in Article 14.5 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time
limit for issuing the ruling shall be 60 days from the date of the submission of the request referred
to in paragraph 2.
EU/SG/en 315
ARTICLE 14.12
Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-compliance
1. If the Party complained against fails to notify any measure taken to comply with the ruling of
the arbitration panel before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or if the arbitration panel
rules that no such measures were taken or that the measure notified under paragraph 1 of Article
14.11 (Review of Any Measure Taken to Comply with the Arbitration Panel Ruling) is inconsistent
with that Party's obligations under the provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope), the Party
against which the complaint was made shall enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with
a view to reaching a mutually acceptable agreement on compensation.
2. If no agreement on compensation is reached within 30 days of the end of the reasonable
period of time or within 30 days of the issuance of the ruling of the arbitration panel under
Article 14.11 (Review of Any Measure Taken to Comply with the Arbitration Panel Ruling) that no
measures were taken to comply with the ruling of the arbitration panel or that a measure taken to
comply with that ruling is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope), the
complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification to the other Party and to the Trade
Committee, to suspend obligations arising from any provision referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope) at
a level equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the violation. The notification shall
specify the level of obligations that the complaining Party intends to suspend. The complaining
Party may implement the suspension at any moment after the expiry of ten days after the date of
receipt of the notification by the Party complained against, unless the Party complained against has
requested arbitration under paragraph 3.
EU/SG/en 316
3. If the Party complained against considers that the level of suspension is not equivalent to the
nullification or impairment caused by the violation, it may request in writing that the original
arbitration panel rule on the matter. Such request shall be notified to the complaining Party and to
the Trade Committee before the expiry of the ten-day period referred to in paragraph 2. The original
arbitration panel, having sought, if appropriate, the opinion of experts, shall notify its ruling on the
level of the suspension of obligations to the Parties and to the Trade Committee within 30 days of
the date of the submission of the request. Obligations shall not be suspended until the original
arbitration panel has notified its ruling, and any suspension shall be consistent with the ruling of the
arbitration panel.
4. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer available, the
procedures laid down in Article 14.5 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The
period for issuing the ruling shall be 45 days from the date of the submission of the request referred
to in paragraph 3.
5. The suspension of obligations shall be temporary and shall not be applied after:
(a) the Parties have reached a mutually agreed solution pursuant to Article 14.15 (Mutually
Agreed Solution); or
(b) the Parties have reached an agreement on whether the measure notified under paragraph 1 of
Article 14.13 (Review of Any Measure Taken to Comply After the Suspension of
Obligations) brings the Party complained against into conformity with the provisions referred
to in Article 14.2 (Scope); or
EU/SG/en 317
(c) any measure found to be inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope)
has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with those provisions, as
ruled under paragraph 2 of Article 14.13 (Review of Any Measure Taken to Comply After the
Suspension of Obligations).
ARTICLE 14.13
Review of Any Measure Taken
to Comply After the Suspension of Obligations
1. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the Trade Committee of
any measure it has taken to comply with the ruling of the arbitration panel and of its request for the
termination of the suspension of obligations applied by the complaining Party.
2. If the Parties do not reach an agreement on whether the notified measure brings the Party
complained against into conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope) within
30 days of the date of receipt of the notification, the complaining Party shall request in writing that
the original arbitration panel rule on the matter. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the
other Party and the Trade Committee. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be notified to the
Parties and the Trade Committee within 45 days of the date of the submission of the request. If the
arbitration panel rules that any measure taken to comply is in conformity with the provisions
referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope), the suspension of obligations shall be terminated.
EU/SG/en 318
SUB-SECTION C
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 14.14
Suspension and Termination of Arbitration Procedures
1. The arbitration panel shall, at the written request of both Parties, suspend its work at any time
for a period agreed by the Parties, which shall not exceed twelve months. The arbitration panel shall
resume its work at the end of this agreed period at the written request of the complaining Party, or
before the end of this agreed period at the written request of both Parties. If the complaining Party
does not request the resumption of the arbitration panel's work before the expiry of the agreed
period, the dispute settlement procedures initiated pursuant to this Section shall be deemed
terminated. Subject to Article 14.21 (Relation with WTO Obligations), the suspension and
termination of the arbitration panel's work are without prejudice to the rights of either Party in other
proceedings.
2. At any time, the Parties may agree in writing to terminate the dispute settlement procedures
initiated pursuant to this Section.
EU/SG/en 319
ARTICLE 14.15
Mutually Agreed Solution
The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute under this Chapter at any time. They
shall notify the Trade Committee and the arbitration panel, if any, of such solution. If the solution
requires approval pursuant to the relevant domestic procedures of either Party, the notification shall
refer to this requirement, and the dispute settlement procedure initiated pursuant to this Section
shall be suspended. The procedure shall be terminated if such approval is not required or upon
notification of the completion of any such domestic procedures.
ARTICLE 14.16
Rules of Procedure
1. Dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter shall be governed by Annex 14-A.
2. Any meetings of the arbitration panel shall be open to the public in accordance with
Annex 14-A.
EU/SG/en 320
ARTICLE 14.17
Submission of Information
1. At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel may obtain
information from any source it deems appropriate for the arbitration panel proceedings, including
from the Parties involved in the dispute. The arbitration panel also has the right to seek the relevant
opinions of experts as it deems appropriate. The arbitration panel shall consult the Parties before
choosing such experts. Any information obtained in this manner must be disclosed to the Parties
and submitted for their comments.
2. Interested natural and legal persons of the Parties are authorised to submit amicus curiae
briefs to the arbitration panel in accordance with Annex 14-A.
ARTICLE 14.18
Rules of Interpretation
The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope) in accordance
with customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including those codified in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Where an obligation under this Agreement is identical
to an obligation under the WTO Agreement, the arbitration panel shall take into account any
relevant interpretation established in rulings of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (hereinafter
referred to as the "DSB"). The rulings of the arbitration panel shall not add to or diminish the rights
and obligations provided in the provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope).
EU/SG/en 321
ARTICLE 14.19
Arbitration Panel Decisions and Rulings
1. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by consensus. Where,
nevertheless, a decision cannot be reached by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by
majority vote.
2. Any ruling of the arbitration panel shall be binding on the Parties and shall not create any
rights or obligations to physical or legal persons. The ruling shall set out the findings of fact, the
applicability of the relevant provisions referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope), and the rationale behind
any findings and conclusions that it makes. The Trade Committee shall make the ruling of the
arbitration panel publicly available in its entirety, unless it decides not to do so in order to ensure
the confidentiality of any information designated by either Party as confidential.
SECTION D
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 14.20
Lists of Arbitrators
1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall establish a list of five
individuals who are willing and able to serve as the chairperson of an arbitration panel referred to in
Article 14.5 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).
EU/SG/en 322
2. No later than six months after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Trade Committee
shall establish a list of at least ten individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators. Upon
the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall propose at least five individuals to serve as
arbitrators.
3. The Trade Committee will ensure that the list of individuals to serve as chairpersons or
arbitrators, established pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 respectively, are maintained.
4. Arbitrators shall have specialised knowledge of or experience in law and international trade or
in the settlement of disputes arising under international trade agreements. They shall be
independent, shall serve in their individual capacities, shall not be affiliated with the government of
either Party, and shall comply with Annex 14-B.
ARTICLE 14.21
Relation with WTO Obligations
1. Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall be without prejudice to any
action in the WTO framework, including dispute settlement proceedings.
EU/SG/en 323
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, where a Party has initiated dispute settlement proceedings with
regard to a particular measure, either under this Chapter or under the WTO Agreement, it may not
institute dispute settlement proceedings regarding the same measure in the other forum until the first
proceedings have ended. Moreover, neither Party shall initiate dispute settlement proceedings under
both this Chapter and under the WTO Agreement unless substantially different obligations under
both agreements are in dispute, or unless the selected forum fails for procedural or jurisdictional
reasons to make findings on the claim seeking redress in relation to that obligation, provided that
the failure of the forum is not the result of a failure of a disputing Party to act diligently.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2:
(a) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement shall be deemed to be initiated by
a Party's request for the establishment of a panel under Article 6 of the DSU and shall be
deemed to be ended when the DSB adopts the Panel's report, and the Appellate Body's report
as the case may be, under Articles 16 and 17(14) of the DSU; and
(b) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter shall be deemed to be initiated by a Party's
request for the establishment of an arbitration panel under paragraph 1 of
Article 14.4 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure) and shall be deemed to be ended when the
arbitration panel issues its ruling to the Parties and to the Trade Committee under paragraph 2
of Article 14.8 (Arbitration Panel Ruling) or when the parties have reached a mutually agreed
solution under Article 14.15 (Mutually Agreed Solution).
4. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude a Party from implementing the suspension of
obligations authorised by the DSB. The WTO Agreement shall not be invoked to preclude a Party
from suspending obligations as provided for under this Chapter.
EU/SG/en 324
ARTICLE 14.22
Time Limits
1. All time limits laid down in this Chapter, including the limits for the arbitration panels to
notify their rulings, shall be counted in calendar days, the first day being the day following the acts
or facts to which they refer, unless otherwise specified.
2. Any time limit referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual agreement of the
Parties.
ARTICLE 14.23
Review and Modification of the Chapter
The Parties may, by decision in the Trade Committee, modify this Chapter and Annexes 14-A and
14-B.
EU/SG/en 325
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
MEDIATION MECHANISM
ARTICLE 15.1
Objective and Scope
1. The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate the finding of a mutually agreed solution through
a comprehensive and expeditious procedure with the assistance of a mediator.
2. This Chapter shall apply to any measure that is within the scope of this Agreement and that
adversely affects trade or investment between the Parties, except as otherwise provided.
EU/SG/en 326
SECTION A
PROCEDURE UNDER THE MEDIATION MECHANISM
ARTICLE 15.2
Request for Information
1. At any time before the initiation of the mediation procedure, a Party may request the other
Party in writing to provide information regarding a measure that adversely affects trade or
investment between the Parties. The Party to which such request is made shall provide a written
response within 20 days.
2. Where the responding Party considers that it is not practicable to respond within 20 days, it
shall inform the requesting Party of the reasons why it is not practicable to respond within this
period, together with an estimate of the shortest period within which it will be able to provide its
response.
EU/SG/en 327
ARTICLE 15.3
Initiation of the Procedure
1. At any time, a Party may request that the Parties enter into a mediation procedure. Such
request shall be addressed to the other Party in writing. The request shall be sufficiently detailed to
present clearly the concerns of the requesting Party and shall:
(a) identify the specific measure at issue;
(b) provide a statement of the alleged adverse effects that the requesting Party believes the
measure has, or will have, on trade or investment between the Parties; and
(c) explain how the requesting Party considers that those effects are linked to the measure.
2. The Party to which such request is addressed shall give sympathetic consideration to the
request and reply by accepting or rejecting it in writing within ten days of its receipt.
ARTICLE 15.4
Selection of the Mediator
1. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on a mediator no later than 15 days after the receipt of
the reply to the request referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 15.3 (Initiation of the Procedure).
EU/SG/en 328
2. If the Parties cannot agree on the mediator within the established time frame, either Party may
request the chairperson of the Trade Committee or the chairperson's delegate to select the mediator
by lot from the list established under paragraph 2 of Article 14.20 (Lists of Arbitrators).
Representatives of both Parties are entitled to be present when the lots are drawn.
3. The chairperson of the Trade Committee or the chairperson's delegate shall select the
mediator within five working days of the request referred to in paragraph 2.
4. The mediator shall not be a national of either Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
5. The mediator shall assist the Parties, in an impartial and transparent manner, in bringing
clarity to the measure and its possible adverse effects on trade and investment, and in reaching a
mutually agreed solution. Annex 14-B shall apply to mediators, mutatis mutandis. Rules 4 to 9 and
Rules 46 to 49 of Annex 14-A shall also apply, mutatis mutandis.
ARTICLE 15.5
Rules of the Mediation Procedure
1. Within 10 days after the appointment of the mediator, the Party having invoked the mediation
procedure shall present to the mediator and to the other Party a detailed written description of the
problem, describing in particular the operation of the measure at issue and its adverse effects on
trade and investment. Within 20 days of the date of delivery of that submission, the other Party may
provide its written comments on the description of the problem. Either Party may include any
information that it deems relevant in its description of the problem or its comments thereon.
EU/SG/en 329
2. The mediator may decide on the most appropriate way of bringing clarity to the measure
concerned and its possible adverse effects on trade and investment. In particular, the mediator may
organise meetings between the Parties, may consult the Parties jointly or individually, may seek the
assistance of or consult with relevant experts and stakeholders, and may provide any additional
support requested by the Parties. However, before seeking the assistance of or consulting with
relevant experts and stakeholders, the mediator shall consult with the Parties.
3. The mediator may offer advice and may propose a solution for the consideration of the
Parties, who may accept or reject the proposed solution or may agree on a different solution.
However, the mediator shall not advise or give comments on whether the measure at issue is
consistent with this Agreement.
4. The mediation procedure shall take place in the territory of the Party to which the request was
addressed or, by mutual agreement, at any other location or by any other means.
5. The Parties shall endeavour to reach a mutually agreed solution within 60 days of the
appointment of the mediator. Pending a final agreement, the Parties may consider possible interim
solutions, especially if the measure relates to perishable goods.
6. The solution may be adopted by means of a decision of the Trade Committee. Either Party
may make such solution subject to the completion of any necessary internal procedures. Mutually
agreed solutions shall be made publicly available. However, the version disclosed to the public may
not contain any information that a Party has designated as confidential.
EU/SG/en 330
7. The mediation procedure shall be terminated:
(a) by the adoption of a mutually agreed solution by the Parties, in which case the mediation
procedure shall terminate on the date of adoption;
(b) by the mutual agreement of the Parties at any stage of the mediation procedure, in which case
the mediation procedure shall terminate on the date of that agreement;
(c) by the written declaration of the mediator, after having consulted with the Parties, that further
efforts at mediation would be to no avail, in which case the mediation procedure shall
terminate on the date of such declaration; or
(d) by the written declaration of either Party after having explored mutually agreed solutions
under the mediation procedure and after having considered any advice and proposed solutions
by the mediator, in which case the mediation procedure shall terminate on the date of that
declaration.
EU/SG/en 331
SECTION B
IMPLEMENTATION
ARTICLE 15.6
Implementation of a Mutually Agreed Solution
1. Where the Parties have agreed to a solution, each Party shall take the measures necessary to
implement the mutually agreed solution within the agreed timeframe.
2. The implementing Party shall inform the other Party in writing of any steps or measures taken
to implement the mutually agreed solution.
3. At the request of the Parties, the mediator shall issue to the Parties a draft written factual
report, which shall provide a brief summary of: (i) the measure at issue in these proceedings; (ii) the
procedures followed; and (iii) any mutually agreed solution reached as the final outcome of these
proceedings, including possible interim solutions. The mediator shall provide the Parties 15 days to
comment on the draft report. After considering the comments of the Parties submitted within that
period, the mediator shall submit a final written factual report to the Parties within 15 days. The
final written factual report shall not include any interpretation of this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 332
SECTION C
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 15.7
Relationship to Dispute Settlement
1. The mediation procedure is without prejudice to the Parties' rights and obligations under
Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement).
2. The mediation procedure is not intended to serve as a basis for dispute settlement procedures
under this Agreement or any other agreement. A Party shall not rely on or introduce as evidence in
such dispute settlement procedures, nor shall an arbitration panel take into consideration:
(a) positions taken by a Party in the course of the mediation procedure;
(b) the fact that a Party has indicated its willingness to accept a solution to the measure subject to
mediation; or
(c) advice given or proposals made by the mediator.
EU/SG/en 333
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 6 of Article 15.5 (Rules of the Mediation Procedure), and
unless the Parties agree otherwise, all steps of the mediation procedure, including any advice that
may be given or solution that may be proposed, are confidential. However, each Party may disclose
to the public the fact that mediation is taking place.
ARTICLE 15.8
Time Limits
Any time limit referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual agreement between the
Parties.
ARTICLE 15.9
Costs
1. Each Party shall bear its own expenses arising from the participation in the mediation
procedure.
2. The Parties shall share equally the expenses that arise from organisational matters, including
the remuneration and expenses of the mediator. Remuneration of the mediator shall be in
accordance with that provided for in Rule 10(b) of Annex 14-A.
EU/SG/en 334
ARTICLE 15.10
Review
Five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall consult each other
on the need to modify the mediation procedure in light of their experience of using the mediation
procedure and in light of the development of a corresponding mechanism in the WTO.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 16.1
Trade Committee
1. The Parties hereby establish a Trade Committee, which shall comprise representatives of the
Parties.
2. The Trade Committee shall meet alternately in the Union or Singapore every two years or
without undue delay at the request of either Party. The Trade Committee shall be co-chaired by the
Member of the European Commission responsible for Trade and the Minister for Trade and
Industry of Singapore, or their respective delegates. The Trade Committee shall agree on its
meeting schedule and shall set its agenda.
EU/SG/en 335
3. The Trade Committee shall:
(a) ensure that this Agreement operates properly;
(b) supervise and facilitate the implementation and application of this Agreement, and shall
further its general aims;
(c) supervise the work of all specialised committees, working groups and other bodies established
under this Agreement;
(d) consider ways to further enhance trade relations between the Parties;
(e) without prejudice to Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) and Chapter Fifteen (Mediation
Mechanism), seek to solve problems which might arise in areas covered by this Agreement, or
to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of this
Agreement; and
(f) consider any other matter of interest relating to an area covered by this Agreement.
4. The Trade Committee may:
(a) decide to establish or dissolve specialised committees, or to allocate responsibilities to such
committees, except that powers granted to specialised committees to adopt legally binding
decisions or adopt amendments can only be modified pursuant to the procedure for
amendments set out in Article 16.5 (Amendments);
EU/SG/en 336
(b) communicate with all interested parties, including private sector and civil society
organisations;
(c) consider amendments to this Agreement, or amend provisions of this Agreement in cases
specifically provided for in this Agreement;
(d) adopt interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement, which shall be binding on the
Parties and on all bodies set up under this Agreement, including the arbitration panels referred
to in Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement);
(e) adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by this Agreement;
(f) adopt its own rules of procedure; and
(g) take any other action in the exercise of its functions as the Parties may agree.
5. The Trade Committee shall inform the Joint Committee set up under the Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement of the activities of the Trade Committee and those of its specialised
committees, as relevant, at regular meetings of the Joint Committee.
6. Recognising the importance of transparency and openness, the Parties affirm their respective
practices of considering the views of members of the public in order to draw on a broad range of
perspectives in the implementation of this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 337
ARTICLE 16.2
Specialised Committees
1. The following specialised committees are hereby established under the auspices of the Trade
Committee:
(a) the Committee on Trade in Goods;
(b) the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (the "SPS Committee");
(c) the Committee on Customs; and
(d) the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment and Government Procurement.
2. The composition, remit, tasks and, as the case may be, functioning of the specialised
committees, shall be as defined in the relevant provisions of this Agreement or by the Trade
Committee.
3. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the specialised committees shall normally
meet at an appropriate level, alternately in the Union or Singapore, every two years or without
undue delay at the request of either Party or the Trade Committee. They shall be co-chaired by
representatives of the Parties. The specialised committees shall agree on their meeting schedule and
set their agenda.
EU/SG/en 338
4. The specialised committees shall inform the Trade Committee of their schedule and agenda
sufficiently in advance of their meetings. They shall report to the Trade Committee on their
activities at each regular meeting of the Trade Committee. The creation or existence of a specialised
committee shall not prevent a Party from bringing any matter directly to the Trade Committee.
ARTICLE 16.3
Evolving WTO Law
If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into this Agreement is
amended, the Parties shall consult with each other, via the Trade Committee, with a view to finding
a mutually satisfactory solution, where necessary. As a result of such a review, the Parties may, by
decision in the Trade Committee, amend this Agreement accordingly.
ARTICLE 16.4
Decision-making
1. The Parties may take decisions in the Trade Committee or in a specialised committee, where
provided for in this Agreement. The decisions taken in such a committee shall be binding on the
Parties, which shall take the measures necessary to implement those decisions.
EU/SG/en 339
2. The Trade Committee and specialised committees may make appropriate recommendations,
where provided for in this Agreement.
3. The Trade Committee and specialised committees shall draw up their decisions and
recommendations by agreement between the Parties.
ARTICLE 16.5
Amendments
1. The Parties may agree to amend this Agreement. Amendments to this Agreement shall enter
into force after the Parties have exchanged written notifications certifying that they have completed
their respective applicable legal requirements and procedures, as set out in the instrument of
amendment.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Parties may, in the Trade Committee or a specialised
committee, adopt a decision amending this Agreement, where provided for in this Agreement.
ARTICLE 16.6
Taxation
1. This Agreement shall only apply to taxation measures insofar as such application is necessary
to give effect to the provisions of this Agreement.
EU/SG/en 340
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Union or any of its
Member States, or the rights and obligations of Singapore, under any tax agreement between the
Union and Singapore or between any of the Member States of the Union and Singapore. In the
event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such agreement, that agreement shall
prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax agreement between the Union and
Singapore or between any of the Member States of the Union and Singapore, the competent
authorities under that agreement shall have sole responsibility for determining whether any
inconsistency exists between this Agreement and that agreement.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent either Party from adopting or maintaining any
taxation measure which differentiates between taxpayers based on rational criteria, such as whether
taxpayers are in the same situation, in particular with regard to their place of residence or with
regard to the place where their capital is invested.1
4. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the adoption or maintenance of any measure aimed at
preventing the avoidance or evasion of taxes pursuant to the tax provisions of agreements for the
avoidance of double taxation or other tax arrangements or domestic fiscal legislation.
 1 For greater certainty, the Parties share an understanding that nothing in this Agreement shall
prevent any taxation measure aimed at social welfare, public health or other socio-community
objectives, or at macroeconomic stability; or tax benefits linked to place of incorporation and
not the nationality of the person owning the company. Taxation measures aimed at
macroeconomic stability are measures in reaction to movements and trends in the national
economy to address or to prevent systemic imbalances which seriously threaten the stability
of the national economy.
EU/SG/en 341
5. (a) Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Singapore from adopting or maintaining
taxation measures which are needed to protect Singapore's overriding public policy
interests arising out of its specific constraints of space.
(b) Singapore will notify the Union immediately upon taking such measures, which will be,
without delay, the object of consultations in the Trade Committee, with a view to
reaching a mutual understanding.
(c) Where such measures affect the overall balance of commitments agreed between the
Parties in this Agreement, the Parties may, by decision of the trade committee, alter the
Parties' schedules of specific commitments on account of such measures.
ARTICLE 16.7
Current Account and Capital Movements
1. The Parties shall authorise, in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, any payments and transfers in freely convertible
currency1 on the current account of the balance-of-payments between the Parties with regard to the
transactions which fall within the scope of this Agreement.
 1 "Freely convertible currency" means a currency which is widely traded in international
foreign exchange markets and widely used in international transactions.
EU/SG/en 342
2. The Parties shall consult each other with a view to facilitating the movement of capital
between them within the scope of this Agreement, in particular the progressive liberalisation of the
capital and financial account, with the aim of supporting a stable and secure framework for long
term investment.
ARTICLE 16.8
Sovereign Wealth Funds
Each Party shall encourage its sovereign wealth funds to respect the Generally Accepted Principles
and Practices  Santiago Principles.
ARTICLE 16.9
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
1. Where a Party is in serious balance-of-payments and external financial difficulties, or is under
threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures with regard to capital movements,
payments or transfers in relation to trade in goods, services and establishment.
EU/SG/en 343
2. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the application of the restrictive measures referred to in
paragraph 1. Any restrictive measures adopted or maintained under this Article shall be
non-discriminatory, shall be of a limited duration, and shall not go beyond what is necessary to
remedy the balance-of-payments and external financial difficulties. Such measures shall be in
accordance with the conditions established in the WTO Agreement and shall be consistent with the
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, as applicable.
3. A Party that maintains or has adopted restrictive measures, or that adopts any changes to such
measures, shall promptly notify the other Party thereof.
4. Where restrictions are adopted or maintained, consultations shall be held promptly in the
Trade Committee. Such consultations shall assess the balance-of-payments situation of the Party
concerned and the restrictions adopted or maintained under this Article, taking into account,
inter alia, such factors as:
(a) the nature and extent of the balance-of-payments and external financial difficulties;
(b) the external economic and trading environment; or
(c) alternative corrective measures which may be available.
The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictive measures with paragraphs 1 and 2.
All findings of statistical and other facts presented by the IMF in relation to foreign exchange,
monetary reserves or balance of payments shall be accepted, and the conclusions of the Trade
Committee shall be based on the assessment by the IMF of the balance-of-payments and the
external financial situation of the Party concerned.
EU/SG/en 344
ARTICLE 16.10
Temporary Safeguard Measures on Capital Movements and Payments
1. Where, in exceptional circumstances, a Party faces serious difficulties, or the threat thereof,
for the operation of that Party's economic and monetary policy or exchange rate policy, that Party
may temporarily impose safeguard measures with regard to capital movements, payments or
transfers. Such measures shall be strictly necessary, shall not exceed in any case a period of six
months1, and shall not constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination between a Party
and a non-Party in like situations.
2. The Party adopting the safeguard measures shall inform the other Party forthwith, and, as
soon as possible, shall present a time schedule for their removal.
ARTICLE 16.11
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:
(a) require either Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it considers contrary to
its essential security interests;
 1 The application of safeguard measures may be extended through their formal reintroduction in
case of continuing exceptional circumstances and after having notified the other Party
regarding the implementation of any proposed formal reintroduction.
EU/SG/en 345
(b) prevent either Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of
its essential security interests:
(i) connected with the production of or trade in arms, munitions and war materials, and
related to traffic in other goods and materials and to economic activities carried out
directly or indirectly for the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;
(ii) relating to the supply of services as carried out directly or indirectly for the purpose of
provisioning a military establishment;
(iii) relating to fissionable or fusionable materials, or to the materials from which they are
derived; or
(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations, or to protect critical
public infrastructure (this relates to communications, power or water infrastructure
providing essential goods or services to the general public) from deliberate attempts to
disable or disrupt it;
(c) prevent either Party from taking any action for the purpose of maintaining international peace
and security.
EU/SG/en 346
ARTICLE 16.12
Disclosure of Information
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to make available confidential
information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, would otherwise be contrary
to the public interest, or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular
enterprises, whether public or private.
2. Where a Party submits information to the Trade Committee or to specialised committees
which is considered as confidential under its laws and regulations, the other Party shall treat that
information as confidential, unless the submitting Party agrees otherwise.
ARTICLE 16.13
Entry into Force
1. This Agreement shall be approved by the Parties in accordance with their own procedures.
2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following that in
which the Parties exchange written notifications certifying that they have completed their respective
applicable legal requirements and procedures for the entry into force of this Agreement. The Parties
may agree on another date.
EU/SG/en 347
3. Notifications shall be sent to the Secretary General of the Council of the European Union and
to the Director, North America and Europe Division, Singapore Ministry of Trade and Industry, or
their respective successors.
ARTICLE 16.14
Duration
1. This Agreement shall be valid indefinitely.
2. A Party may notify in writing the other Party of its intention to terminate this Agreement.
3. This Agreement shall be terminated six months after the notification under paragraph 2.
4. Within 30 days of the delivery of a notification under paragraph 2, either Party may request
consultations regarding whether the termination of any provision of this Agreement should take
effect at a later date than that provided for under paragraph 3. Such consultations shall commence
within 30 days of a Party's delivery of such request.
EU/SG/en 348
ARTICLE 16.15
Fulfilment of Obligations
The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their obligations under this
Agreement. They shall see to it that the objectives set out in this Agreement are attained.
ARTICLE 16.16
No Direct Effect
For greater certainty, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as conferring rights or imposing
obligations on any persons, other than those rights and obligations created between the Parties
under public international law.
ARTICLE 16.17
Annexes, Appendices, Joint Declarations,
Protocols and Understandings
The Annexes, Appendices, Joint Declarations, Protocols and Understandings to this Agreement
shall form an integral part thereof.
EU/SG/en 349
ARTICLE 16.18
Relations with Other Agreements
1. This Agreement shall be an integral part of the overall relations between the Union and its
Member States, of the one part, and Singapore, of the other part, as governed by the Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement, and shall form part of a common institutional framework. It constitutes a
specific agreement giving effect to the trade provisions of the Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement.
2. For greater certainty, the Parties agree that nothing in this Agreement requires them to act in a
manner inconsistent with their obligations under the WTO Agreement.
ARTICLE 16.19
Future Accessions to the Union
1. The Union shall notify Singapore without undue delay of any request for accession of a third
country to the Union.
2. During the negotiations between the Union and a candidate country seeking accession, the
Union shall endeavour to:
(a) to the extent possible, provide to Singapore any information that Singapore requests regarding
any matter covered by this Agreement; and
EU/SG/en 350
(b) take into account any concerns expressed by Singapore.
3. The Union shall inform Singapore as soon as feasible about the outcome of accession
negotiations with a candidate country, and shall notify Singapore of the entry into force of any
accession to the Union.
4. In the context of the Trade Committee, and sufficiently in advance to the date of accession of
a third country to the Union, the Parties shall examine possible effects of such accession on this
Agreement. The Parties may, by decision in the Trade Committee, put in place any necessary
adjustments or transition arrangements.
ARTICLE 16.20
Territorial Application
1. This Agreement shall apply:
(a) with respect to the Union, to the territories in which the Treaty on European Union and the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union apply, under the conditions laid down in
those Treaties; and
(b) with respect to Singapore, to its territory.
EU/SG/en 351
References to "territory" in this Agreement shall be understood in this sense, except as otherwise
expressly provided.
2. As regards those provisions concerning the tariff treatment of goods, this Agreement shall
also apply to those areas of the Union customs territory not covered by subparagraph 1(a).
ARTICLE 16.21
Authentic Texts
This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English,
Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish,
Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish and Swedish languages, each of these texts
being equally authentic.
Done at  on 
For the European Union
For the Republic of Singapore

ANNEX TEXT: 


ANNEX 2-A
ELIMINATION OF CUSTOMS DUTIES
1. Pursuant to Article 2.6 (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties on Imports), each Party
shall eliminate all customs duties imposed on goods originating in the other Party as from the
date of the entry into force of this Agreement, except as otherwise provided in the respective
Party's Schedules included in this Annex.
2. The following staging categories apply to the elimination of customs duties by each Party
pursuant to Article 2.6 (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties on Imports) for those
customs duties not eliminated at the entry into force of this Agreement:
(a) customs duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category "3" in
a Party's Schedule shall be removed in four equal annual stages beginning on the date
this Agreement enters into force, and such goods shall thereafter be free of any customs
duty;
(b) customs duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category "5" in
a Party's Schedule shall be removed in six equal stages beginning on the date this
Agreement enters into force, and such goods shall thereafter be free of any customs
duty; and
EU/SG/Annex 2-A/en 2
(c) no obligations under this Agreement regarding customs duties shall apply with respect
to items in staging category "X".
3. In relation to goods under a particular tariff code, the base rate of the customs duty and the
staging category for determining the interim rate of the customs duty at each stage of
reduction are indicated for that tariff code in each Party's Schedule.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 2, rates of customs duties in the interim stages shall be rounded
down, at least to the nearest tenth of a percentage point or, in the case of the Union, to the
nearest euro cent, where applicable.
5. For the purposes of this Annex and a Party's Schedule, each annual reduction shall take effect
on the first day of the relevant year as defined in paragraph 6 of this Annex.
6. For the purposes of this Annex:
(a) "year one" means the twelve-month period beginning on the date this Agreement enters
into force;
(b) "year two" means the twelve-month period beginning on the first anniversary of the
entry into force of this Agreement;
(c) "year three" means the twelve-month period beginning on the second anniversary of the
entry into force of this Agreement;
(d) "year four" means the twelve-month period beginning on the third anniversary of the
entry into force of this Agreement; and
(e) "year five" means the twelve-month period beginning on the fourth anniversary of the
entry into force of this Agreement.
7. Appendices 2-A-1 (Tariff Schedule of the Union) and 2-A-2 (Tariff Schedule of Singapore)
form an integral part of this Annex. Appendix 2-A-2
TARIFF SCHEDULE OF SINGAPORE
1. The provisions of this Schedule are expressed in terms of the Singapore Trade Classification,
Customs and Excise Duties (hereinafter referred to as "STCCE"), and the interpretation of the
provisions of this Schedule, including the product coverage of subheadings of this Schedule,
shall be governed by the General Notes, Section Notes, Chapter Notes and subheading notes
of the STCCE. To the extent that provisions of this Schedule are identical to the
corresponding provisions of the STCCE, the provisions of this Schedule shall have the same
meaning as the corresponding provisions of the STCCE.
2. Pursuant to Article 2.6 (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties on Imports), Singapore
shall eliminate customs duties on all originating goods of the Union as of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement.
________________
EU/SG/Annex 2-B/en 1
ANNEX 2-B
MOTOR VEHICLES AND PARTS THEREOF
ARTICLE 1
General Provisions
1. This Annex shall apply to all forms of motor vehicles and parts thereof that are traded
between the Parties that fall under Chapters 40, 84, 85, 87 and 94 of the HS 2012 (hereinafter
referred to as "products covered by this Annex").
2. With regard to the products covered by this Annex, the Parties confirm the following shared
objectives and principles:
(a) eliminating and preventing non-tariff barriers to bilateral trade;
(b) promoting compatibility and convergence of regulations based on international
standards;
(c) promoting recognition of approvals based, in particular, on approval schemes applied
under the agreements administered by the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle
Regulations (hereinafter referred to as the "WP.29") within the framework of the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe (hereinafter referred to as "UNECE");
EU/SG/Annex 2-B/en 2
(d) establishing competitive market conditions based on the principles of openness, nondiscrimination and transparency;
(e) securing the protection of human health, safety and the environment; and
(f) enhancing cooperation to foster continued mutually beneficial development in trade.
ARTICLE 2
International Standards
1. The Parties recognise that the WP.29 is the relevant international standard-setting body for the
products covered by this Annex1.
2. If Singapore decides to introduce a type-approval system for products covered by this Annex,
Singapore will consider becoming a signatory of the Agreement concerning the Adoption of
Uniform Technical Prescriptions for Wheeled Vehicles, Equipment and Parts which can be
fitted and/or be used on Wheeled Vehicles and the Conditions for Reciprocal Recognition of
Approvals Granted on the Basis of these Prescriptions, done at Geneva on 20 March 1958.
 1 This paragraph is without prejudice to the Parties' rights to accept national standards or
technical regulations of other countries.
EU/SG/Annex 2-B/en 3
ARTICLE 3
Regulatory Convergence
1. (a) The Parties shall at all times refrain from introducing any new domestic technical
regulations that diverge from UNECE Regulations or Global Technical Regulations
(hereinafter referred to as "GTR") in areas covered by such UNECE Regulations or
GTR, or where the completion of such UNECE Regulations or GTR is imminent, unless
there are substantiated reasons, based on scientific or technical information, why a
specific UNECE Regulation is ineffective or inappropriate for ensuring road safety or
for the protection of the environment or public health1.
(b) A Party which introduces a new domestic technical regulation as referred to in
subparagraph (a), upon request of the other Party, shall identify the parts of the domestic
technical regulation which substantially deviate from the relevant UNECE Regulations
or GTR, and shall provide due justification as to the reasons for the deviation.
 1 Paragraphs 1(a) and 2 of Article 3 (Regulatory Convergence) and Article 6 (Other Measures
Restricting Trade) of this Annex are without prejudice to Singapore taking traffic
management measures such as electronic road pricing, on account of Singapore's specific
space constraints.
EU/SG/Annex 2-B/en 4
2. Insofar as a Party has introduced and maintains domestic technical regulations that diverge
from existing UNECE Regulations or GTR in accordance with paragraph 1, that Party shall
review those domestic technical regulations at regular intervals not exceeding five years, with
a view to increasing the convergence of those domestic technical regulations with the relevant
UNECE Regulations or GTR. When reviewing their domestic technical regulations, the
Parties shall consider whether the circumstances that gave rise to the divergence still exist.
The outcome of these reviews, including scientific and technical information used, shall be
notified to the other Party upon request.
3. Singapore shall accept new1 Union products covered by this Annex and which are covered by an
EC or UNECE type-approval certificate on its market as complying with its domestic technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures, without further testing or marking
requirements to verify or attest compliance with requirements covered by an EC2 or UNECE
type-approval. A certificate of conformity, in the case of whole vehicles, or an EC or UNECE
type-approval mark affixed to the product, in the case of components and separate technical
units, shall be considered sufficient proof of the type-approval certificate.
 1 For the purposes of this paragraph, where the term "new Union products covered by this
Annex" refers to whole vehicles, this term is understood to mean vehicles which have never
been registered before worldwide.
2 For greater clarity, the terms "EC type-approval", "EC type-approval certificate", "certificate
of conformity" and "EC type-approval mark" shall have the meanings assigned to them under
Union legislation, in particular Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and
their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such
vehicles (OJ EU L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1).
EU/SG/Annex 2-B/en 5
4. The competent administrative authorities of each Party may verify by random sampling in
accordance with its domestic legislation that the products comply with, as appropriate:
(a) all the domestic technical regulations of the Party; or
(b) the domestic technical regulations to which compliance has been attested by an
EC Certificate of conformity, in the case of whole vehicles, or an EC or UNECE mark
affixed to the product, in the case of components and separate technical units, as referred to
in paragraph 3.
Such verification shall be carried out in accordance with the domestic technical regulations
under subparagraphs (a) or (b), as the case may be. Each Party may require a supplier to
withdraw a product from its market where the product concerned does not comply with those
regulations and requirements.
ARTICLE 4
Products with New Technologies or New Features
1. Neither Party shall prevent or unduly delay the placing on its market of a product covered by
this Annex and approved by the exporting Party, on the ground that the product incorporates a
new technology or a new feature that the importing Party has not yet regulated, unless the
importing Party can demonstrate, based on scientific or technical information, that such new
technology or new feature creates a risk for human health, safety or the environment.
EU/SG/Annex 2-B/en 6
2. When a Party refuses the placing on its market, or requires the withdrawal from its market, of
a product of the other Party covered by this Annex on the grounds that it incorporates a new
technology or a new feature creating a risk for human health, safety or the environment, it shall
immediately notify this decision to the other Party and to the economic operators1 concerned.
The notification shall include all relevant scientific or technical information considered in the
Party's decision.
ARTICLE 5
Licensing
Neither Party shall apply automatic import licensing or non-automatic import licensing2 to the
products covered by this Annex.
 1 Where Singapore is the importing Party, "economic operator" shall mean the importer of the
product concerned.
2 The terms "import licensing", "automatic import licensing" and "non-automatic import
licensing" are defined in Articles 1 to 3 of the WTO Agreement on Import Licensing
Procedures.
EU/SG/Annex 2-B/en 7
ARTICLE 6
Other Measures Restricting Trade
Each Party shall refrain from nullifying or impairing the market access benefits accruing to the
other Party under this Annex through other regulatory measures specific to the sector covered by
this Annex. This is without prejudice to the right of each Party to adopt measures necessary for road
safety, the protection of the environment or public health and the prevention of deceptive practices,
provided such measures are based on substantiated scientific or technical information.
ARTICLE 7
Joint Cooperation
In the Committee on Trade in Goods, the Parties shall cooperate and exchange information on any
matters relevant for the implementation of this Annex.
________________
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 1
ANNEX 2-C
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS AND MEDICAL DEVICES
ARTICLE 1
General Provisions
The Parties confirm the following shared objectives and principles of:
(a) preventing and eliminating non-tariff barriers to bilateral trade;
(b) establishing competitive market conditions based on principles of openness,
non-discrimination and transparency;
(c) promoting innovation relating to safe and effective pharmaceutical products and medical
devices, and promoting timely access to such pharmaceutical products and medical devices,
through transparent and accountable procedures, without impeding a Party's ability to apply
high standards of safety, efficacy and quality; and
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 2
(d) enhancing cooperation between their respective health authorities, based on international
standards, practices and guidelines within the framework of relevant international
organisations such as the World Health Organization (hereinafter referred to as "WHO"), the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (hereinafter referred to as
"OECD"), the International Conference on Harmonisation (hereinafter referred to as "ICH"),
the Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation
Scheme (hereinafter referred to as "PIC/S") for pharmaceutical products and the Global
Harmonization Task Force (hereinafter referred to as "GHTF") for medical devices.
ARTICLE 2
International Standards
The Parties shall base their technical regulations on international standards, practices and guidelines
for pharmaceutical products and medical devices, including those developed by the WHO, the
OECD, the ICH, the PIC/S and the GHTF, unless there are substantiated reasons based on scientific
or technical information why such international standards, practices or guidelines would be
ineffective or inappropriate for the fulfilment of legitimate objectives pursued.
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 3
ARTICLE 3
Transparency
1. With respect to measures of general application relating to pharmaceutical products and
medical devices, each Party shall ensure that:
(a) such measures are readily available to interested persons and the other Party, in a nondiscriminatory manner, via an officially designated medium and, where feasible and
possible, via electronic means, in such manner as to enable interested persons and the
other Party to become acquainted with them;
(b) an explanation of the objective of and rationale for such measures is provided to the
extent possible; and
(c) there is reasonable time between publication and entry into force of such measures,
except where not possible on grounds of urgency.
2. In accordance with their respective domestic law, each Party shall, to the extent possible:
(a) publish in advance any proposal to adopt or amend any measure of general application
relating to the regulation of pharmaceutical products and medical devices, including an
explanation of the objective of and rationale for the proposal;
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 4
(b) provide reasonable opportunities for interested persons and the other Party to comment
on such proposed measures, allowing, in particular, for sufficient time for such
opportunities; and
(c) take into account the comments received from interested persons and the other Party
with respect to such proposed measures.
3. To the extent that a Party's health care authorities introduce or operate procedures for the
listing, pricing or reimbursement of pharmaceutical products, the Party shall:
(a) ensure that the criteria, rules, procedures, and where relevant, any guidelines, , that
apply to the listing, pricing or reimbursement of pharmaceutical products, are objective,
fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory, and are available to interested persons upon
request;
(b) ensure that decisions on all applications for the pricing of pharmaceutical products, or
for the approval of such products for reimbursement, are adopted and communicated to
the applicant within a reasonable and specified period, which shall be measured from
the date of the receipt of the application; if the information submitted by the applicant is
deemed inadequate or insufficient and the procedure is suspended as a result, the Party's
competent authorities shall notify the applicant of the additional information that is
required and shall resume the original decision-making process upon receipt of this
additional information;
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 5
(c) provide applicants with appropriate opportunities to provide comments at relevant
points in the decision-making process for pricing and reimbursement decisions, without
prejudice to the applicable domestic law on confidentiality;
(d) in case of a negative decision on listing, pricing or reimbursement, provide the applicant
with a statement of reasons that is sufficiently detailed for the applicant to understand
the basis of the decision, including the criteria applied and, if appropriate, provide any
expert opinions or recommendations on which the decision is based; in addition, the
applicant shall be informed of any remedies available under domestic law and of the
time limits for applying for such remedies.
ARTICLE 4
Regulatory Cooperation
The Committee on Trade in Goods shall:
(a) monitor and support the implementation of this Annex;
(b) facilitate cooperation and the exchange of information between the Parties, with a view to
furthering the objectives of this Annex;
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 6
(c) discuss ways to foster the compatibility of regulatory approval processes wherever possible;
and
(d) discuss ways to facilitate bilateral trade in active pharmaceutical ingredients.
ARTICLE 5
Definitions
For the purposes of this Annex:
(a) "pharmaceutical products" means:
(i) any substance or combination of substances presented for treating or preventing
diseases in human beings; or
(ii) any substance or combination of substances which may be administered to human
beings with a view to making a medical diagnosis or to restoring, correcting or
modifying physiological functions in human beings.
Pharmaceutical products include, for example, chemical medicinal products, biological
medicinal products (e.g. vaccines, (anti)toxins), including medicinal products derived from
human blood or human plasma, advanced therapy medicinal products (e.g. gene therapy
medicinal products, cell therapy medicinal products), herbal medicinal products, and
radiopharmaceuticals;
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 7
(b) "medical device"1 means any instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, appliance, implant,
in vitro reagent or calibrator, software, material, or other similar or related article, intended by
the manufacturer to be used, alone or in combination, for human beings for one or more of the
specific purpose(s) of:
(i) the diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease;
(ii) the diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of, or compensation for, an injury;
(iii) the investigation, replacement, modification or support of the anatomy or of a
physiological process;
(iv) the control of conception;
(v) supporting or sustaining life;
(vi) the disinfection of medical devices;
(vii) providing information for medical or diagnostic purposes by means of in vitro
examination of specimens derived from the human body;
 1 For greater clarity, medical device does not achieve its primary intended action in or on the
human body by pharmacological, immunological or metabolic means, but may be assisted in
its function by such means.
EU/SG/Annex 2-C/en 8
(c) "a Party's health care authorities" means entities that are part of or have been established by a
Party to operate or administer its health care programmes, unless otherwise specified; and
(d) "manufacturer" means the legal right holder of the product in the respective Party's territory.
________________
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 1
ANNEX 4-A
ELECTRONICS
ARTICLE 1
General Provisions
1. The Parties confirm the following shared objectives and principles:
(a) eliminating and preventing non-tariff barriers to bilateral trade;
(b) basing their standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures,
wherever appropriate, on relevant international standards;
(c) eliminating duplicative and unnecessarily burdensome conformity assessment
procedures; and
(d) enhancing cooperation to foster the development of their bilateral trade in electronics.
2. This Annex shall apply only to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures of either Party that relate to the safety and electromagnetic compatibility
(hereinafter referred to as "EMC") of electrical and electronic equipment, electrical household
appliances and consumer electronics, as defined in Appendix 4-A-1 (hereinafter referred to as
"covered products").
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 2
ARTICLE 2
International Standards and Standard-setting Bodies
1. The Parties recognise that the International Organization for Standards (hereinafter referred to
as "ISO"), the International Electrotechnical Commission (hereinafter referred to as "IEC")
and the International Telecommunication Union (hereinafter referred to as "ITU") are the
relevant international standard-setting bodies for EMC and for the safety of products covered
by this Annex1.
2. Where relevant international standards established by ISO, IEC and ITU exist, the Parties
shall use such international standards or the relevant parts of such standards as a basis for any
standard, technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure, except for cases where
such international standards or relevant parts would be an ineffective or inappropriate means
for the fulfilment of legitimate objectives pursued by a Party. In such cases, upon the request
of a Party, the other Party shall identify the parts of the respective standard, technical
regulation or conformity assessment procedure which substantially deviate from the relevant
international standard, and shall justify the deviation.
 1 The Parties may, by decision of the Committee on Trade in Goods, agree on any new
international standard-setting bodies which they deem relevant for the purposes of
implementing this Annex.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 3
3. Without prejudice to Article 2.3 of the TBT Agreement, insofar as a Party maintains technical
regulations that deviate from existing relevant international standards as referred to in
paragraph 2, that Party shall review such technical regulations at regular intervals, which shall
not exceed five years, in order to assess whether the circumstances that gave rise to the
deviation from the relevant international standard still exist. The outcome of such reviews
shall be communicated to the other Party upon request.
4. The Parties shall encourage their standard-setting bodies to participate in the development of
international standards in the ISO, IEC and ITU, and to consult within the framework of those
international standard-setting bodies, with a view to establishing common approaches.
ARTICLE 3
Innovation
1. No Party shall prevent or unduly delay the placing of a product on its market on the grounds
that the product incorporates a new technology or a new feature which has not yet been
regulated.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not prejudice the right of the importing Party, where it demonstrates duly
substantiated concerns to the supplier of a product referred to in paragraph 1, to require
evidence that the new technology or new feature concerned does not create a risk for safety or
EMC or for any other legitimate objective as listed in Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 4
ARTICLE 4
Conformity Assessment Procedures
1. The Parties shall not prepare, adopt or apply conformity assessment procedures with the
purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade with the other Party. In principle,
Parties should avoid requiring mandatory third-party conformity assessments to prove that
covered products comply with applicable technical regulations on safety and/or EMC, and
instead should consider the use of a supplier's declaration of conformity and/or post-market
surveillance mechanisms to ensure that products conform with relevant standards or technical
requirements.
2. Except as provided in Article 5 (Safeguard Measures), Article 6 (Exceptions) and
Appendix 4-A-2, insofar as a Party requires a positive assurance of conformity with domestic
technical regulations on the safety and/or EMC of covered products, each Party shall accept
products on its market on the basis of one or more of the following:
(a) a supplier's declaration of conformity, where intervention by a conformity assessment
body or the testing of the product by a recognised test laboratory is not mandatory and,
if testing is undertaken, such testing can be carried out by the manufacturer itself or by a
competent body of its choice; or
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 5
(b) a supplier's declaration of conformity that is based on a test report issued by a
Certification Body ("CB") Testing Laboratory of the other Party under the CB Scheme
of the Worldwide System for Conformity Testing and Certification of Electrotechnical
Equipment and Components (IECEE) (hereinafter referred to as "IECEE CB Scheme"),
and that is accompanied by a valid CB Test Certificate that was issued in accordance
with the rules and procedures of the IECEE CB Scheme and with the commitments by
the Parties thereunder; or
(c) a supplier's declaration of conformity that is based on a test report issued by any testing
laboratory or is based on a certificate issued by any certification body in the other Party
that has concluded voluntary arrangements for the mutual acceptance of test reports or
certificates with one or more conformity assessment bodies designated by the importing
Party.
The choice of basis under this paragraph shall rest with the supplier.
3. The supplier's declaration of conformity referred to in paragraph 2 shall be in accordance with
ISO/IEC 17050. The Parties shall accept that the supplier is solely responsible for issuing,
changing or withdrawing the declaration of conformity, for preparing the technical
documentation which shall enable the assessment whether the products concerned conform
with the applicable technical regulations, and for affixing any required markings. The Parties
may require that the declaration of conformity be dated and identify the supplier or the
supplier's authorised representative in their territories, that the person empowered by the
manufacturer or his authorised representative sign the declaration, the products covered by the
declaration, and the applied technical regulations to which the declaration of conformity
relates.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 6
4. In addition to paragraphs 1 to 3, no Party shall require any form of registration of products or
of suppliers, where such registration could prevent or otherwise delay the placing on the
market of products that comply with the Party's technical regulations. Where a Party reviews
the supplier's declaration, such review shall be limited solely to verifying, on the basis of the
documentation submitted, that the test was done in accordance with the Party's relevant
technical regulations, and that the information contained in the documentation is complete.
Such reviews shall not cause undue delay for the placing of the products on the Party's
market, and the Party shall accept the declaration, without exceptions, if the products comply
with the Party's technical regulations and the documentation submitted is complete. In the
event that a Party rejects a declaration, that Party shall communicate its decision to the
supplier, together with an explanation of the grounds for the rejection. At the request of the
supplier, the Party shall provide information or guidance, as appropriate, on how to rectify the
shortcomings, as well as an explanation of possibilities for appealing the decision.
ARTICLE 5
Safeguard Measures
Notwithstanding Article 4 (Conformity Assessment Procedures), either Party may introduce
requirements for mandatory third-party testing or certification of the EMC or safety of covered
products, or may introduce administrative procedures for approving or reviewing test reports, for
particular covered products under the following conditions:
(a) there exist compelling reasons related to the protection of human health or safety that justify
the introduction of such requirements or procedures, supported by substantiated technical or
scientific information;
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 7
(b) such requirements or procedures are not more trade-restrictive than necessary to fulfil the
Party's legitimate objectives, taking into account the risks that non-fulfilment would create;
and
(c) the Party could not have reasonably foreseen the need for introducing such requirements or
procedures at the time of entry into force of this Agreement.
Without prejudice to Article 2.10 of the TBT Agreement, before introducing the requirements or
procedures, each Party shall notify the other Party and, following consultations, shall take the
comments of the other Party into account to the greatest extent possible in devising such
requirements or procedures. Any requirements that are introduced shall comply with this Annex to
the greatest extent possible. Once adopted, any requirement or procedure that is introduced shall be
regularly reviewed, and shall be repealed if the reasons for introducing that requirement or
procedure no longer exist.
ARTICLE 6
Exceptions
1. Pursuant to Singapore's agreement to substantially reduce the list of products for which it
requires a positive assurance of conformity with its mandatory safety and/or EMC
requirements, in the form of third-party certification, at the time of entry into force of this
Agreement, Singapore shall only require such third-party certification for the product
categories listed in Appendix 4-A-2.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 8
2. By the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Singapore shall have undertaken a review of
its Consumer Protection (Safety Requirements) Registration Scheme with a view to reducing
the number of products categories that are covered by the scheme and listed in
Appendix 4-A-2. Such review shall examine the necessity of maintaining that scheme in its
existing form, or whether that scheme's desired outcomes of ensuring human health and safety
in Singapore can be achieved with simplified procedures that better facilitate trade1.
3. The review referred to in paragraph 2 shall include a risk assessment for each of the products
covered by the Consumer Protection (Safety Requirements) Registration Scheme to ascertain
whether moving towards post-market surveillance in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 4
(Conformity Assessment Procedures) or accepting a positive assurance of conformity in
accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 4 (Conformity Assessment Procedures) would create
unreasonable risks for human health and safety. The risk assessment shall be conducted on the
basis of available scientific and technical information, such as consumer reports on safety
accidents and the non-conformity rate of product inspection. The risk assessment shall also
consider whether the products had been used for their intended end-uses and whether those
products had been used with reasonable and usual care.
 1 For example, Singapore will review the administrative procedures associated with the
Consumer Protection (Safety Requirements) Registration Scheme, including the procedures
for accepting and reviewing test reports and certificates of conformity.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 9
4. Depending on the outcome of the review referred to in paragraph 3, Singapore may maintain
its requirements for the positive assurance of conformity by means of third-party certification
for those products that are covered by the Consumer Protection (Safety Requirements)
Registration Scheme, and are listed in Appendix 4-A-2, where the results of the risk
assessment referred to in paragraph 3 demonstrate that adopting the procedures in paragraph 2
of Article 4 (Conformity Assessment Procedures) for such products would create
unreasonable risks for human health and safety, or where it would not be possible to set up the
post-market surveillance system to address such risks effectively.
5. Singapore shall table the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 3 for discussion at the first
meeting of the Committee on Trade in Goods. Following the review carried out by Singapore,
the Parties, by decision in the Committee on Trade and Goods may modify Appendix 4-A-2
as appropriate.
6. Insofar as Singapore continues to require positive assurances of conformity with its
mandatory safety and/or EMC requirements in the form of third-party certification for
covered products, Singapore shall accept certificates of conformity with its technical
regulations that have been issued by a conformity assessment body in the Union that was
designated by Singapore.
1 Singapore shall also ensure that, for the purposes of issuing such
certification, the conformity assessment bodies designated by Singapore accept test reports
issued:
 1 Singapore shall comply with this requirement within three years of the entry into force of this
Agreement.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 10
(a) in accordance with the rules and procedures of the IECEE CB Scheme, and in
accordance with the commitments of the Parties thereunder, by one of the Recognised
CB Testing Laboratories or Recognised CB Manufacturer's Testing Laboratories of
the Union;
(b) in accordance with relevant international standards, guides and recommendations
(including ISO/IEC 17025), by any testing laboratory of the Union that has been
accredited by an accreditation body which is a signatory to the Mutual Recognition
Arrangement of the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation or one of its
regional bodies' mutual recognition agreements to which Singapore is a Party; or
(c) by any testing laboratory in the Union that has concluded voluntary arrangements for
mutual acceptance of test reports with one or more conformity assessment bodies
designated by Singapore.
7. Five years after the entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter at regular intervals that
shall not exceed five years, Singapore shall review Appendix 4-A-2 again, with the aim of
reducing the number of product categories listed therein. Such reviews shall include the risk
assessments laid out in paragraph 3. Singapore shall submit such risk assessments for
discussion at the Committee on Trade in Goods.
8. Following the review carried out by Singapore, the Parties, by decision in the Committee on
Trade and Goods, may modify Appendix 4-A-2 as appropriate.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 11
ARTICLE 7
Joint Cooperation
1. The Parties shall closely cooperate to promote common understanding on regulatory issues
and shall consider any request of the other Party regarding the implementation of this Annex.
2. This cooperation shall take place within the framework of the Committee on Trade in Goods.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 12
Appendix 4-A-1
SCOPE
1. Annex 4-A shall cover those products listed in paragraph 2 of Article 1 (General Provisions)
of Annex 4-A which, in the case of the Union's obligations, at the date of signature of this
Agreement, fall within the scope of Directive 2014/35/EU of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of Member States relating
to the making available on the market of electrical equipment designed for use within certain
voltage limits, or Directive 2014/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of
26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to
electromagnetic compatibility, or of the provisions on safety or electromagnetic compatibility
of Directive 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on
the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the
market of radio equipment and repealing Directive 1999/5/EC.
For products under the scope of Directive 2014/53/EU, the Union shall be able to require
additional requirements, other than safety and EMC, in accordance with Article 3 of
that Directive.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 13
Where a supplier has not applied or has only applied in part the harmonised standards referred
to in Article 16 of Directive 2014/53/EU, radio equipment within the scope of Article 10(4) of
Directive 2014/53/EU shall be subject to the procedures described in either of Annexes III
or IV of Directive 2014/53/EU, at the choice of the supplier. Where the supplier's declaration
of conformity has to be accompanied by test reports, the supplier may use the procedures
described in subparagraphs 2(b) and 2(c) of Article 4 (Conformity Assessment Procedures) of
Annex 4-A.
2. Annex 4-A shall also cover those products listed in paragraph 2 of Article 1 (General
Provisions) of Annex 4-A which, in the case of Singapore's obligations, at the date of
signature of this Agreement, fall within the scope of the Consumer Protection (Consumer
Goods Safety Requirements) Regulations 2011, the Consumer Protection (Safety
Requirements) Regulations 2004, the Telecommunications Act, Chapter 323 and the
Telecommunications (Dealers) Regulations 2004.
For products under the Telecommunications Act, Chapter 323 and the Telecommunications
(Dealers) Regulations 2004, Singapore shall be able to require additional requirements, other
than safety and EMC.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 14
3. The Parties understand that the products covered by the domestic laws listed in this Appendix,
which include all the products to which Annex 4-A applies, are intended to cover all
electronics products. It is understood that in case a product is not covered by Annex 4-A for a
Party but is covered for the other Party, or at the time of signature of this Agreement or
subsequently, is subject to mandatory third-party certification by a Party but not by the other
Party, the other Party can subject such product to a similar treatment as may be necessary for
the protection of human health and safety. Before such measures are implemented, the Party
wishing to introduce them shall notify the other Party of its intentions and provide for a period
of three months for consultations.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 15
Appendix 4-A-2
PRODUCT CATEGORIES
Cooking range intended for household use, namely, a device for cooking and includes separate
stationary ovens and grills, cooking table cookers, hob elements, grills and griddles which form part
of cooking ranges, and ovens and grills for installation in walls, except a cooking range having a
mass of less than 18 kg.
Hairdryer, namely, an electrically operated appliance intended to be used for the drying of hair of
persons and incorporating heating elements.
High-fidelity set, namely, an electronic device for reproduction of sounds, with little distortion,
connected to the supply mains as the only energy source, intended for domestic and similar general
indoor use with a rated supply voltage not exceeding 250 volts RMS at 50 Hz.
Audio product (other than a high-fidelity set), namely, an electronic device for the reproduction of
sound, connected to the supply mains, either directly or indirectly.
Iron, namely, an electrically operated appliance with a heated soleplate for the ironing of clothes,
for household and similar purposes.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 16
Kettle, namely, an electrically operated household appliance for the heating of water for
consumption, having a rated capacity not exceeding 10 litres.
Microwave oven, namely, an electrically operated appliance for heating food and beverages using
electromagnetic energy (microwaves) in one or more of the I.S.M. frequency bands between
300 MHz and 30 GHz, and intended for household use. These appliances may also incorporate a
browning function.
Rice cooker, namely, an electrically operated household appliance for cooking rice.
Refrigerator, namely, a self-contained assembly consisting of a thermally insulated cabinet for the
storage and preservation of foodstuffs above 0 C (32 F) and a refrigerating unit operating on the
vapour compression principle that is arranged to extract heat from within the cabinet, with or
without one or more freezer compartments.
Room air-conditioner, namely, a self-contained assembly designed as a unit, primarily for mounting
in a window or through the wall or as a console. It is designed primarily to provide free delivery of
conditioned air to an enclosed space, room or zone (conditioned space). It includes a prime source
of refrigeration for cooling and dehumidification and a system for the circulation and the cleaning
of air, and a drain arrangement for collecting or disposing any condensate. It may also include
systems for humidifying, ventilating or exhausting air.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 17
Table or standing fan, namely, an electrically operated appliance for agitating air, with an
associated regulator, intended for use on single-phase AC or DC circuits not exceeding 250 volts,
and intended for household use and similar purposes.
Television or video display unit, namely, an electronic device for receiving and displaying
information from a transmitting station or local source, connected to the supply mains, either
directly or indirectly, and intended for domestic and similar general indoor use, other than a cathode
ray tube television receiver.
Vacuum cleaner, namely, a machine which removes dirt and dust by the suction produced by a
motor-driven air pump, and intended for household use and similar purposes.
Washing machine, namely, an electrically operated appliance intended for washing clothes and
textiles (whether or not with a mechanism for water heating), for extracting water from clothes or
for drying clothes.
Table lamp or standing lamp, namely, a portable general purpose luminaire, other than a hand lamp,
for use with tungsten filament, tubular fluorescent or other discharge lamps, connected to the supply
mains, either directly or indirectly.
Toaster, grill, roaster, hotplate and similar appliances, namely, electric appliances connected to the
supply mains, which make use of direct or indirect heat (e.g. heated medium such as air and
cooking oil) for food preparation and intended for household use.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 18
Wall fan or ceiling fan, namely, an electric fan and its associated regulator intended, for mounting
on the wall or ceiling, and for use on a single phase AC or DC circuit not exceeding 250 volts for
household and similar purposes.
Adaptor, namely, a device designed to supply AC or DC power from an AC or DC source, either by
itself or as part of an accessory, for uses such as computers, telecommunication equipment, home
entertainment equipment or toys.
Coffee maker, slow cooker, steam boat and similar appliances, namely, electrically operated
appliances that heats up water to high temperatures in the course of food and beverage preparation.
Laser disc set, namely, an electronic device for video recording and play-back or for play-back
only, connected to the supply mains, either directly or indirectly, and intended for domestic and
similar general indoor use, other than a laser disc (LD) player or video.
Mixer, blender, mincer and similar appliances, namely, electrically operated machines for food and
beverage preparation and intended for household use.
Air cooler, namely, an electrically operated appliance for agitating the air equipped to use water as a
cooling medium and its associated regulator intended for use on single phase AC and DC circuits
not exceeding 250 volts for household and similar purposes.
Home computer system (inclusive of monitor, printer, speaker and other mains operated
accessories), namely, a microprocessor based data system with compact, local computing and
calculating power on high definition graphics and with flexible data communication interfacing.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 19
Decorative lighting fixture, namely, lighting chains fitted with a series or parallel connected
incandescent lamps for either indoor or outdoor use on supply voltages not exceeding 250 volts.
3-pin rectangular type 13-ampere plug, namely, a portable fused device having projecting pins
designed to engage with the contacts of a corresponding socket-outlet. A plug also incorporates a
means for the electrical connection and the mechanical retention of a suitable flexible cord.
Fuse (13-ampere or less) for use in a plug, namely, a device that, by the fusion of one or more of its
specially designed and proportioned components, opens the circuit in which it is inserted and breaks
the current when this exceeds a given value for a sufficient time. The fuse comprises all the parts
that form the complete device.
3-pin round type 15-ampere plug, namely, a device carrying 3 metallic plug pins substantially
cylindrical in form, intended for engagements with corresponding socket contacts, arranged for
connection to a suitable flexible cord.
Multi-way adaptor, namely, an adaptor having more than one set of socket contacts (the socket
contacts may or may not be of the same type or rating as the plug pin portion).
3-pin portable socket-outlet, namely, an accessory having a set of 3 socket-contacts designed to
engage with the pins of a corresponding plug and having means for the electrical connection of
appropriate cables or flexible cords, for connection to, or integral with, a flexible cord, and which
can be easily moved from one place to another while connected to the supply.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 20
Portable cable reel, namely, a device comprising a flexible cable or cord attached to a reel, so
constructed that the flexible cable may be completely wound onto the reel, and provided with a plug
and one or more socket outlets.
Instantaneous electric water heater, namely, an electrically operated stationary appliance for
household and similar purposes and intended for heating water below boiling temperature, with its
rated voltage not more than 250 V for single-phase appliances and 480 V for other appliances.
Mains pressure electric storage water heater, namely, an electrically operated stationary appliance
for household and similar purposes, and intended for storing and heating water below boiling
temperature, with its rated voltage not more than 250 V for single-phase appliances and 480 V for
other appliances.
Residual Current Circuit Breaker (RCCB), namely, a device intended to protect persons against
indirect contact, the exposed conductive parts of the installation being connected to an appropriate
earth electrode.
3-pin 13-ampere socket-outlet, namely, a 13 A shuttered socket-outlet in single or multiple
arrangements with associated controlling switches, for flush mounting in suitable box or for surface
or panel mounting. The socket-outlet is suitable for the connection of portable appliances,
sound-vision equipment, luminaries, etc., in AC circuits only operating at voltage not exceeding
250 V RMS at 50 Hz.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 21
3-pin round type 15-ampere socket-outlet, namely, a 15 A shuttered socket-outlet which contains a
switch connected between the current carrying contact of the socket-outlet and the relevant supply
terminal, for flush mounting in suitable box or for surface or panel mounting. The socket-outlet is
suitable for the connection of electrical appliances in AC circuits only operating at voltage not
exceeding 250 V RMS at 50 Hz.
Domestic electric wall switch, namely, a manually operated general purpose switch for AC only,
with a rated voltage not exceeding 440 V and a rated current not exceeding 63 A, intended for
household and similar fixed-electrical installations, either indoors or outdoors.
Ballast for tubular fluorescent lamp, namely, a unit inserted between the supply and one or more
fluorescent lamps which, by means of inductance, capacitance, or a combination of inductance and
capacitance or electronic circuitry, serves mainly to limit the current of the lamp(s) to the required
value.
Isolating transformer for downlight fitting, namely, a transformer with input and output windings of
which are electrically separated to limit hazards due to accidental simultaneous contact with earth
and live parts or metal parts which may become live in the event of an insulation failure.
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 22
Appendix 4-A-3
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of Annex 4-A, the following definitions shall apply:
"safety of electrical equipment" means that equipment, having been constructed in accordance with
good engineering practice in safety matters, does not endanger the safety of persons, domestic
animals or property when properly installed, maintained and used in applications for which it was
made;
"electromagnetic compatibility" means that equipment is designed and manufactured, having regard
to the state of the art, so as to ensure that:
(a) the electromagnetic disturbance generated does not exceed the level above which radio and
telecommunications equipment or other equipment cannot operate as intended; and
(b) the equipment has a level of immunity to the electromagnetic disturbance that is to be
expected in its intended use, which allows it to operate without unacceptable degradation of
the performance of the equipment when used as intended.
"electromagnetic disturbance" means any electromagnetic phenomenon which may degrade the
performance of equipment, including electromagnetic noise, an unwanted signal or a change in the
propagation medium itself;
EU/SG/Annex 4-A/en 23
"immunity" means the ability of equipment to perform as intended and without degradation of
performance in the presence of an electromagnetic disturbance;
"declaration of conformity" means the issuance of a statement, based on a decision following
review, that fulfilment of specified requirements has been demonstrated;
"supplier" means a manufacturer or its authorised representative in the territory of the importing
Party, or where neither is present in the territory of the importing Party, the responsibility for the
presentation of the supplier's declaration shall rest with the importer; and
"testing laboratory" means a conformity assessment body that performs testing services and has
received attestation conveying a formal demonstration of its competence to carry out these specific
tasks.
The definitions of "standard", "technical regulation" and "conformity assessment procedures" are
the same as those provided in Annex I of the TBT Agreement.
________________
EU/SG/Annex 5-A/en 1
ANNEX 5-A
COMPETENT AUTHORITIES
ARTICLE 1
Competent Authorities of the Union
The competent authorities of the Union include the Member States' administrations and the
European Commission. In this respect, the following applies:
(a) as regards exports to Singapore, the Member States' administrations are responsible for the
control of the production circumstances and requirements, including statutory inspections and
issuing health (or animal welfare) certifications attesting to the agreed standards and
requirements;
(b) as regards imports from Singapore, the Member States' administrations are responsible for the
control of the compliance of imports with the Union's import conditions;
(c) the European Commission is responsible for the overall coordination, inspection and audits of
inspection systems and the necessary legislative action to ensure the uniform application of
standards and requirements within the Internal Market of the Union.
EU/SG/Annex 5-A/en 2
ARTICLE 2
Competent Authorities of Singapore
The Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (hereinafter referred to as "AVA") is responsible for
ensuring a resilient supply of safe and wholesome food, safeguarding the health of animals, fish and
plants, and facilitating trade in food and agricultural products.
In this respect, the following applies:
(a) the AVA is the competent authority responsible for import and export inspections and
quarantines;
(b) the AVA is the national authority responsible for food safety for both primary and processed
food, ensures the safety of all food, from production to just before retail, adopts a
science-based risk analysis and management approach based on international standards to
evaluate and ensure food safety; and
(c) the AVA is the national authority responsible for animal and plant health, it administers a
comprehensive programme to prevent the introduction of animal diseases of agricultural,
economic and public health importance, and also a comprehensive programme to control, as
well as to prevent, the incursion of diseases and pests of economic and plant health
importance.
________________
EU/SG/Annex 5-B/en 1
ANNEX 5-B
REQUIREMENTS AND PROVISIONS FOR APPROVAL
OF ESTABLISHMENTS FOR PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN
1. The competent authorities of the importing Party shall draw up lists of approved
establishments and shall make these lists publicly available.
2. The requirements and procedures for the approval of establishments by the importing Party
are as follows:
(a) The animal product which the establishment intends to export to the importing Party
shall have been authorised by the competent authorities of the importing Party. This
authorisation shall include the import and certification requirements.
(b) The competent authorities of the exporting Party shall have approved the establishments
that intend to export the animal product concerned, and shall have provided the
importing Party with the sanitary guarantees required by the importing Party that the
establishments meet the relevant requirements of the importing Party.
(c) The competent authorities of the exporting Party shall have the power to suspend or
withdraw the export approval of an establishment in the event of non-compliance.
EU/SG/Annex 5-B/en 2
(d) The importing Party may carry out verifications in accordance with Article 5.8
(Verifications) as part of the approval procedure.
Verifications as part of the approval procedure shall concern the structure, organisation
and powers of the competent authority responsible for the approval of the establishment,
and the sanitary guarantees regarding the compliance with the importing Party's
requirements.
Verifications may include on-the-spot inspections of a certain number of representative
establishments that appear on the lists of approved establishments provided by the
exporting Party.
Taking into account the specific structure and responsibilities within the Union, such
verification in the Union may concern individual Member States.
(e) The importing Party may carry out verifications in accordance with Article 5.8
(Verification) at any time. Based on the results of such verifications, the importing Party
may amend the lists of approved establishments which the importing Party had drawn
up under paragraph 1 of this Annex.
EU/SG/Annex 5-B/en 3
3. The provisions in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall initially be limited to the following categories of
establishments:
(a) all establishments for fresh meat of domestic species;
(b) all establishments for fresh meat of wild and farmed game;
(c) all establishments for poultry meat;
(d) all establishments for meat products of all species;
(e) all establishments for other products of animal origin for human consumption (e.g.,
casings, meat preparations, minced meat);
(f) all establishments for milk and milk products for human consumption; and
(g) processing establishments and factory/freezer vessels for fishery products for human
consumption, including bivalve molluscs and crustaceans.