CONVENTION ESTABLISHING THE EUROPEAN CENTRE FOR
MEDIUM-RANGE WEATHER FORECASTS
CONSIDERING the importance for the European economy of a considerable
improvement in medium-range weather forecasts;
CONSIDERING that the scientific and technical research carried out for this
purpose will provide a valuable stimulus to the development of meteorology
in Europe;
CONSIDERING that the improvement of medium-range weather forecasts will
contribute to the protection and safety of the population;
CONSIDERING that, to achieve these objectives, resources on a scale
exceeding those normally practicable at national level are needed;
CONSIDERING that it appears from the report submitted by the Working
Party responsible for preparing a project on the subject that the establishment
of an autonomous European centre with international status is the appropriate
means to attain these objectives;
CONSIDERING that such a centre could also assist in the post-university
training of scientists;
CONSIDERING that the activities of such a centre will, moreover, make a
necessary contribution to certain programmes of the World Meteorological
Organisation (WMO), in particular the world system of the World Weather
Watch (WWW) and the Global Atmospheric Research Programme (GARP),
undertaken by the World Meteorological Organisation in conjunction with the
International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU);
CONSIDERING the importance that the establishment of such a centre can
have for the development of European industry in the field of data-processing,
Have decided to establish a European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts and to define the conditions under which it should operate and to
this end have designated as their Plenipotentiaries:
His Majesty the King of the Belgians: Mr. Joseph van der Meulen, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of Belgium
to the European Communities;
Her Majesty the Queen of Denmark: Mr. Niels Ersb011, Ambassador Extra
ordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of Denmark to
the European Communities;
The President of the Federal Republic of Germany: Mr. Ulrich Lebsanft,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative
of the Federal Republic of Germany to the European Communities;
The Head of State of Spain: Mr. Alberto Ullastres Calvo, Ambassador Extra
ordinary and Plenipotentiary, Head of the Mission of Spain to the European
Communities;
The President of the French Republic: Mr. Emile Cazimajou, Deputy Permanent
Representative of France to the European Communities;
The President of the Republic of Greece: Mr. Byron Theodoropoulos,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Delegate of
Greece to the European Economic Community;
The President of Ireland: Mr. Brendan Dillon, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of Ireland to the European
Communities;
The President of the Italian Republic: Mr. Giorgio Bombassei Frascani de
Vettor, Ambassador of Italy, Permanent Representative of Italy to the
European Communities;
The Head of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: Mr. Petar Miljevic,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Head of the Mission of
Yugoslavia to the European Communities;
Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands: Mr. E. M. J. A. Sassen, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands to the European Communities;
The President of the Portuguese Republic: Mr. Fernando de Magalhaes Cruz,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Head of the Mission of
Portugal to the European Communities;
The President of the Swiss Confederation: Mr. Paul Henri Wurth, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Head of the Swiss Mission to the
European Communities;
The President of the Republic of Finland: Mr. Pentti Talvitie, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Head of the Mission of Finland to the
European Communities;
His Majesty the King of Sweden: Mr. Erik von Sydow, Ambassador Extra
ordinary and Plenipotentiary, Head of the Mission of Sweden to the
European Communities;
Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland: Sir Michael Palliser, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the European
Communities;
Who, having exchanged their Full Powers, found in good and due form,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I. 1. A European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts,
hereinafter referred to as "the Centre", is hereby established,
2. The organs of the Centre shall be the Council and the Director. The
Council shall be assisted by a Scientific Advisory Committee and a Finance
Committee. Each organ and committee shall carry out its functions within the
limits and conditions laid down in this Convention.
3. The members of the Centre, hereinafter referred to as "Member States",
shall be the States parties to this Convention.
4. The Centre shall have legal personality in the territory of each Member
State. It shall in particular have the capacity to contract, to acquire and
dispose of movable and immovable property and to be party to legal proceedings.
5. The headquarters of the Centre shall be at Shinfield Park near Reading
(Berkshire), in the territory of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
6. The official languages of the Centre shall be Dutch, English, French,
German and Italian.
Its working languages shall be English, French and German.
The Council shall determine the extent to which the official and working
languages shall respectively be used.
Article 2. 1. The objectives of the Centre shall be:
(<<) to develop dynamic models of the atmosphere with a view to preparing
medium-range weather forecasts by means of numerical methods;
(b) to prepare, on a regular basis, the data necessary for the preparation of
medium-range weather forecasts;
(c) to carry out scientific and technical research directed towards improving the
quality of these forecasts;
(el) to collect and store appropriate meteorological data;
(e) to make available to the meteorological offices of the Member States, in the
most appropriate form, the results of the studies and research provided for
in (<<) and (c) and the data referred to in (b) and (</);
(/) to make available to the meteorological offices of the Member States for
their research, priority being given to the field of numerical weather fore
casting, a sufficient proportion of its computing capacity, such proportion
being determined by the Council;
(g) to assist in implementing programmes of the World Meteorological Organ
isation;
(h) to assist in advanced training for the scientific staff of the meteorological
offices of the Member States in the field of numerical weather forecasting.
2. The Centre shall establish and operate the installations necessary for
the achievement of the objectives defined in paragraph 1.
3. As a general rule, the Centre shall publish or otherwise make available,
under the conditions laid down by the Council, the scientific and technical
results of its activities, inasmuch as these results are not covered by Article 15.
Article 3. 1. In order to attain its objectives, the Centre shall co-operate
to the largest extent possible, in accordance with international meteorological
traditions, with the Governments and national agencies of the Member States,
with States which are not members of the Centre and with governmental or
non-governmental international scientific and technical organisations whose
activities are related to its objectives.
2. Moreover, the Centre may conclude co-operation agreements:
(<<) with States, under the conditions laid down in Article 6 (1) (e),
(b) with the national scientific and technical agencies of the Member States and
with the international organisations referred to in paragraph 1, under the
conditions laid down in Article 6 (3) (k).
3. The co-operation agreements referred to in paragraph 2 may make part
of the Centre's computing capacity available only to public agencies of the
Member States.
Article 4. 1. The Council shall have the powers and shall adopt the
measures necessary to implement this Convention.
2. The Council shall be composed of not more than two representatives
from each Member State, one of whom should be a representative of his
national meteorological service. These representatives may be assisted at Council
meetings by advisers.
A representative of the World Meteorological Organisation shall be invited
to take part in the work of the Council as an observer.
3. The Council shall elect from among its members a President and a
Vice-President who shall be appointed for one year and who may not be
re-elected more than twice in succession.
4. The Council shall meet at least once a year. It shall be convened at
the request of the President or at the request of at least one third of the
Member States. Meetings of the Council shall be held at the headquarters
of the Centre unless the Council decides otherwise in exceptional cases.
5. The President and Vice-President may call on the assistance of the
Director in the performance of their duties.
6. The Council may set up advisory committees and shall determine the
composition and duties thereof.
Article5. 1. The presence of the representatives of the majority of
Member States entitled to vote shall be necessary to constitute a quorum at
meetings of the Council.
2. Each Member State shall have one vote in the Council. A Member
State shall lose its right to vote in the Council if the amount of its unpaid
contributions exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it, under
Article 13, for the current financial year and for the preceding financial year.
The Council, acting in accordance with Article 6 (3) (m), may nevertheless
authorise the Member State to vote.
3. Between meetings of the Council, the Council may dispose of any
matter which is urgent by means of a postal vote. In such cases, the majority
of the Member States entitled to vote shall constitute the quorum.
4. In determining unanimity and the various majorities provided for in this
Convention, only votes cast for or against a decision and, in cases where the
Council acts in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 6 (2), the
financial contributions of the Member States taking part in the vote shall be
taken into account.
Article 6. 1, The Council, acting unanimously, shall:
(a) fix the ceiling of expenditure for implementing the programme of the
activities of the Centre over the five years following the entry into force
of this Convention;
(b) decide on the admission of new members, in accordance with Article 23,
and lay down the conditions for such admissions in accordance with
Article 13 (3);
(c) decide, in accordance with Article 20, on the withdrawal of membership
from a State, that State not participating in the vote on this matter;
(d) decide on the dissolution of the Centre, in accordance with Article 21(1)
and (2);
(c) authorise the Director to negotiate co-operation agreements with States; it
may authorise him to conclude such agreements;
() conclude, with one or more of the Member States, in accordance with
Article 22 of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities provided for in
Article 16, any additional agreements for the purpose of implementing that
Protocol.
2. The Council, acting by a majority of two-thirds of the Member States,
and provided that the sum of the contributions from these States represents
at least two-thirds of the total contributions to the budget of the Centre, shall:
(a) adopt the Financial Regulations of the Centre;
(b) adopt, in accordance with Article 12 (3), the annual budget and the table
of the staff requirements of the Centre annexed thereto and, if necessary,
supplementary or rectifying budgets, and approve the overall estimate of
expenditure and revenue for the next three financial years; if the Council
has not yet adopted the budget, it shall authorise the Director to incur
expenditure and make payments, within a given month, exceeding the limit
provided for in the first subparagraph of Article 12 (5);
(c) acting on a proposal from the Director, take decisions concerning any
immovable property and equipment whose acquisition or renting by the
Centre involves considerable expenditure;
(d) decide on the measures to be taken in the event of denunciation of this
Convention within the meaning of Article 19;
(e) decide that the Centre shall not be dissolved in the event of denunciation
of this Convention within the meaning of Article 21 (1), the denouncing
Member States not taking part in the vote on this matter;
(f) determine, in accordance with Article 21 (3), the conditions for winding up
the Centre in the event of its dissolution.
3. The Council, acting by a majority of two-thirds:
(a) shall adopt its Rules of Procedure;
(b) shall adopt the Staff Regulations and the scale of the staff salaries of the
Centre and shall determine the nature of the additional benefits the staff
shall enjoy and the rules for granting them; it shall also determine the
rights of officials regarding industrial property rights and copyright relating
to work done by them in the course of their duties;
(c) shall approve the agreement to be concluded, in accordance with Article 16,
between the Centre and the State in whose territory the headquarters of the
Centre are located;
(d) shall appoint the Director of the Centre and his deputy for a period not
exceeding five years, their appointments being renewable one or more
times, for a period not exceeding five years each time;
(e) shall determine the number of auditors, the length of their appointment,
the amount of their remuneration, and shall appoint them in accordance
with Article 14 (2);
(f) may terminate or suspend the appointment of the Director or his deputy,
account being taken of the provisions of the Staff Regulations which are
applicable to them;
(g) shall approve the Rules of Procedure of the Scientific Advisory Committee
in accordance with Article 7 (4);
(h) shall adopt the scale of financial contributions of the Member States in
accordance with Article 13 (1) and (3) and shall decide to reduce temporarily
the contribution of a Member State because of special circumstances in
that State, in accordance with Article 13 (2);
(i) shall adopt, subject to paragraph (1) (a), the programme of the activities
of the Centre, in accordance with Article 11;
(j) shall consider annually the accounts of the previous financial year, together
with the balance sheet of the assets and liabilities of the Centre, after
taking note of the auditors' report, and shall give a discharge to the
Director in respect of the implementation of the budget;
(k) shall authorise the Director to negotiate co-operation agreements with the
national scientific and technical agencies of the Member States and with
governmental or non-governmental international scientific and technical
organisations whose activities are related to the objectives of the Centre;
it may authorise him to conclude such agreements;
(l) shall determine the conditions under which licences granted to the Member
States pursuant to Article 15 (1) and (2) may be extended to applications
other than weather forecasting;
(m) shall decide, in the case provided for in Article 5 (2), that a Member
State may retain the right to vote, the Member State in question not taking
part in the vote on this matter;
(n) shall recommend to Member States, in accordance with Article 18, amend
ments to this Convention;
(o) shall determine, in accordance with Article 17 of the Protocol on Privileges
and Immunities provided for in Article 16, the categories of staff members to
which Articles 13 and 15 of that Protocol shall apply, in whole or in part,
and the categories of experts to which Article 14 of that Protocol shall
apply.
4. When a special majority is not specified, the Council shall act by a
simple majority.
Article 7. 1. The Scientific Advisory Committee shall be composed of
twelve members appointed in their personal capacity by the Council for a period
of four years. The Committee shall be renewed by one quarter every year.
Each member may be appointed for only two terms of office in succession.
A representative of the World Meteorological Organisation shall be invited
to take part in the work of the Committee.
The members of the Committee shall be selected from among the scientists
of the Member States and shall represent as broad a range as possible of the
disciplines relating to the activities of the Centre. The Director shall submit
a list of candidates to the Council.
2. The Committee shall draw up, for submission to the Council, opinions
and recommendations on [the] draft programme of the activities of the Centre
drawn up by the Director and on any matter submitted to it by the Council. The
Director shall keep the Committee informed concerning the implementation of
the programme. The Committee shall give opinions on the results obtained.
3. The Committee may invite experts, in particular persons belonging to
services using the Centre, to take part in its work when there are specific
problems to be solved.
4. The Committee shall draw up its Rules of Procedure. These Rules of
Procedure shall enter into force after approval by the Council acting in
accordance with Article 6 (3) (g).
Articles. 1. The Finance Committee shall be composed of:
(a) one representative of each of the four Member States paying the highest
contributions;
(h) three representatives of the other Member States, appointed by them for
a period of one year; each of these States may not be represented on the
Committee more than twice in succession.
2. Under the conditions laid down in the Financial Regulations, the
Committee shall draw up, for submission to the Council, opinions and recommen-
dations on all financial matters submitted to the Council and shall exercise the
financial powers delegated to it by the Council.
Article 9. The Director shall be the chief executive officer of the
Centre. He shall represent the Centre in dealings with third parties. He shall
be responsible to the Council for the execution of the tasks assigned to the
Centre. He shall take part, without the right to vote, in all meetings of the
Council.
The Council shall appoint the person who is to act as Director ad interim.
2. The Director shall:
(<<) take all measures necessary for the proper functioning of the Centre;
(h) exercise the powers accorded to him under the Staff Regulations, subject
to Article 10 (4);
(c) submit to the Council the draft programme of the activities of the Centre,
together with the opinions and recommendations of the Scientific Advisory
Committee;
(d) prepare and implement the budget of the Centre in accordance with the
Financial Regulations;
(e) keep a precise record of all the revenue and expenditure of the Centre in
accordance with the Financial Regulations;
(/) submit annually for the approval of the Council, the accounts relating to
the implementation of the budget and the balance sheet of assets and
liabilities, drawn up in each case in accordance with the Financial Regula
tions, and the report on the activities of the Centre;
(g) conclude, in accordance with Article 6 (1) (<<) and Article 6 (3) (k), the
co-operation agreements necessary for attaining the objectives of the Centre.
3. In carrying out his tasks, the Director shall be assisted by the other
staff of the Centre.
Article 10. 1. Subject to the second subparagraph, the staff of the Centre
shall be subject to the Staff Regulations adopted by the Council acting in
accordance with Article 6 (3) (b).
If the terms of employment of a staff member of the Centre do not fall
under these Staff Regulations, they shall be subject to the law applicable in
the State in which the person concerned carries out his duties.
2. The recruitment of staff shall be based on personal qualifications,
account being taken of the international character of the Centre. No post may
be reserved for nationals of a particular Member State.
3. The Centre may employ staff from national agencies of the Member
States seconded to the Centre for a specified period.
4. The Council shall approve the appointment and dismissal of officials
in the upper grades defined in the Staff Regulations, and of the Financial
Comptroller and his deputy.
5. Disputes arising out of the implementation of the Staff Regulations or
the execution of the contracts of employment of the staff shall be settled in
accordance with the Staff Regulations.
6. Every person who works at the Centre shall be subject to the authority
of the Director and shall conform with all the general rules approved by the
Council.
7. Each Member State shall be required to respect the international
character of the responsibilities of the Director and the other officials of the
Centre. In the performance of their duties, the Director and the other officials
shall neither seek nor accept instructions from any Government or authority
outside the Centre.
Article II. The programme of activities of the Centre shall be adopted
by the Council acting on a proposal from the Director in accordance with
Article 6 (3) (i).
The programme shall cover, in principle, a four-year period and shall be
adapted and supplemented each year for an additional period of one year.
It shall fix the ceiling of expenditure for the duration of the programme and
shall contain, in addition, an estimate of the expenditure arising out of its
implementation in respect of each year and each major category.
The ceiling of expenditure may only be amended in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 6 (3) (/).
Article 12, 1. The budget of the Centre shall be drawn up for each
financial year before the beginning of that year, under the conditions laid down
in the Financial Regulations.
The expenditure of the Centre shall be met from the financial contributions
of the Member States and any other revenue of the Centre.
The revenue and expenditure shown in the budget shall be in balance. The
budget shall be drawn up in the currency of the State in which the headquarters
of the Centre are located.
2. All expenditure and revenue of the Centre shall be the subject of detailed
estimates to be drawn up for each financial year and shall be shown in the
budget.
Commitment appropriations relating to a period extending beyond the
financial year may be authorised under the conditions laid down in the Financial
Regulations.
In addition, an overall estimate of expenditure and revenue in each major
category for the next three financial years shall be drawn up.
3. The Council, acting in accordance with Article 6 (2) (/?), shall adopt
the budget for each financial year and the table of the posts of the Centre
annexed thereto and any supplementary or rectifying budgets and approve the
overall estimate of expenditure and revenue for the next three financial years.
4. The adoption of the budget by the Council shall:
(a) oblige each Member State to make available to the Centre the financial
contributions determined in the budget;
(h) authorise the Director to enter into commitments and make payments within
the limits of the appropriations authorised for these purposes.
5. If the budget has not been adopted by the Council by the beginning of
a financial year, the Director may, each month, enter into commitments and
make payments in each chapter up to one twelfth of the appropriations in the
budget of the preceding financial year, provided that he shall not have at his
disposal appropriations in excess of one-twelfth of those provided for in the
draft budget.
Member States shall pay each month, on a provisional basis and in
accordance with the scale provided for in Article 13, the amounts necessary for
the application of the first subparagraph.
6. The budget shall be implemented under the conditions laid down in the
Financial Regulations.
Article 13. 1. Each Member State shall pay an annual contribution to
the Centre, in convertible currency, based on the scale which shall be adopted
every three years by the Council acting in accordance with Article 6 (3) (h).
This scale shall be based on the average gross national product of each
Member State over the last three calendar years for which there are statistics.
2. The Council, acting in accordance with Article 6 (3) (h), may decide
to reduce temporarily the contribution of a Member State because of special
circumstances in that State. Special circumstances shall in particular be
considered to exist where a Member State has a per capita gross national
product lower than an amount which shall be determined by the Council
acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 6 (3).
3. If, after the entry into force of this Convention, a State becomes a
party to this Convention, the scale of contributions shall be modified by the
Council according to the basis for calculation laid down in paragraph 1. The
new scale shall take effect when the State concerned becomes a party to this
Convention.
A State which becomes a party to this Convention after 31 December of
the year during which it enters into force shall be required to pay, in addition
to the contribution laid down in paragraph 1, a single additional contribution
to the expenditure previously incurred by the Centre. The amount of this
additional contribution shall be determined by the Council, acting in accordance
with the procedure laid down in Article 6(1).
Unless the Council decides otherwise, acting in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 6 (1), any additional contribution paid pursuant
to the second subparagraph shall be deducted from the contributions of the
other Member States. This reduction shall be calculated on a pro rata basis
according to the contributions actually paid by each Member State prior to the
current financial year.
4. If, after the entry into force of this Convention, a State ceases to be
a party to this Convention, the scale of contributions shall be modified by the
Council according to the basis for calculation laid down in paragraph 1. The
new scale shall take effect when the State concerned ceases to be a party to
this Convention.
5. The methods of payment of the contributions shall be determined in the
Financial Regulations.
Article 14. 1. The accounts of all revenue and expenditure shown in
the budget and the balance sheet of the assets and liabilities of the Centre
shall, under the conditions laid down in the Financial Regulations, be submitted
for audit to auditors whose independence is beyond doubt. The purpose of the
audit, which shall be based on records and if necessary performed on the spot,
shall be to establish that all revenue has been received and all expenditure
incurred in a lawful and regular manner and that the financial management of
the Centre has been sound. The auditors shall submit a report on the annual
accounts to the Council.
2. The Council, acting on a proposal from the Finance Committee in
accordance with Article 6 (3) (e), shall determine the, number of auditors, the
length of their appointment, the amount of their remuneration, and shall appoint
them. i
3. The Director shall give the auditors any information and assistance
needed for the audit referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 15. 1. Each Member State shall be granted, free of charge, for its
own requirements in the field of weather forecasting, a non-exclusive licence
and any other non-exclusive right of use, in respect of industrial property
rights, computer programs and technological Information which result from
work carried out pursuant to this Convention and which belong to the Centre.
2. Where the Centre does not possess the rights referred to in paragraph 1,
it shall attempt to obtain the necessary rights, under the conditions determined
by the Council.
3: The conditions under which the licences referred to in paragraph 1
may be extended to applications other than weather forecasting shall be the
subject of a decision of the Council acting in accordance with Article 6 (3) (/).
ii t , 1 Article 16. The privileges and immunities which the Centre, the represen
tatives of the Member States, the staff and the experts of the Centre enjoy
in the territories of the Member States shall be determined in a protocol which
shall be annexed to this Convention and which shall form an integral part
thereof, and in an agreement to be concluded between the Centre and the
State in whpse territory the headquarters of the Centre are located. This
agreement shall be approved by the Council acting in accordance with Arti
cle 6 (3),% ' U
Article 1,7. 1. Any dispute between Member States or between one or
more fy[ember States and the Centre concerning the interpretation of applica
tion of Jhis Convention, including the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities
provided for in Article 16 or relating to one of the cases provided for in
Article 24 of that Protocol, which can not be settled by the good offices of the
Council shall, on a request made by one party to the dispute to the other,
be referred to an arbitration tribunal, set up in accordance with the first
subparagraph of paragraph 2, unless the parties to the dispute agree within
three months on another form of settlement.
i
2. Each party to the dispute, whether constituted by one or more Member
States, shall appoint one member of the arbitration tribunal within two months
from the date on which the request referred to in paragraph 1 is received.
These members shall, within two months of the appointment of the second
member, appoint a third member who shall be the chairman of the tribunal,
and who shall not be a national of a State which is a party to the dispute.
If the appointment of any of the three members of the tribunal has not been
made within the prescribed period, it shall be made by the President of the
International Court of Justice at the request of one of the parties.
The arbitration tribunal shall take decisions by a majority. Its decisions shall
bind the parties to the dispute. Each party shall bear the costs of the member
of the tribunal appointed by it and those relating to its representation at
proceedings before the tribunal. Each party to the dispute shall bear an equal
share of the costs relating to the chairman of the tribunal and any other
expenses, unless the tribunal decides otherwise. The tribunal shall determine
its other rules of procedure.
Article 18. 1. Each Member State may transmit proposals for amending
this Convention to the Director. The Director shall submit such proposals to
the other Member States at least three months before they are to be examined
by the Council. The Council shall examine the proposals and may, acting in
accordance with Article 6 (3) (<<), recommend the Member States to accept the
proposed amendments.
2. Amendments recommended by the Council may only be accepted by
the Member States in wirting. They shall enter into force thirty days after
receipt by the Secretary-General of the Council of the European Communities
of the lasj written notification of acceptance.
Article 19. 1. Any Member State may denounce this Convention after
it has.Jbeen. in force for five years by giving notice to the Secretary-General of
the [Council of the European Communities. Denunciation shall take effect at the
end^of .the second financial year following the year during which notice is given.
2. A Member State which has denounced this Convention shall remain
bound to/coritribute towards. financing all commitments entered into by the
Centrej before such denunciation and to respect the obligations which it
contracted itself as a Member State vis-a-vis the Centre before the denunciation.
3. A Member State which has denounced this Convention shall lose its
rights to the assets, of the Centre and must indemnify the Centre, under the
conditions laid down by the Council acting in accordance with Article 6 (2) (d),
for any loss for the Centre of property in the territory of such a State, unless
a special agreement is concluded guaranteeing the Centre the use of such
property.
Article 20. Any Member State which does not fulfil its obligations under
this Convention may be deprived of its membership by a decision of the Council
acting in accordance with Article 6 (l),.(c). In such an event Article 19 (2)
and (3) shall be applicable mutatjs vmutandis. ;
Article 21. 1. Unless the Council acting in accordance with Article 6 (2) (e)
decides otherwise, the Centre shall be dissolved if denunciation of this Conven
tion by one or more Member State results in the levels of contributions of
the other Member States being increased by one-fifth over their initial levels, <
2. ' In addition to the case referred to in paragraph 1, the Centre may be
dissolved at any time by the Council acting in accordance with Article 6(1) (d).
3. In the event of dissolution of the Centre, the Council shall appoint a
liquidator.
Unless the Council acting in accordance with Article 6 (2) (e) decides
otherwise, any surplus shall be distributed among the Member States at the time
of dissolution on a pro rata basis according to the contributions actually paid
by them during the time in which they have been parties to this Convention.
Any deficit shall be met by the Member States on a pro rata basis
according to their contributions fixed for the current financial year.
Article 22. 1. This Convention shall be open for signature by the European
States mentioned in the Annex until 11 April 1974 at the General Secretariat
of the Council of the European Communities.
It shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. The instruments
of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited in the archives of the
General Secretariat of the Council of the European Communities.
2. This Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the second
month following the date of its ratification, acceptance or approval by no less
than two-thirds of the signatory States, including the State in whose territory
the headquarters of the Centre are located, provided that the total contributions
by these States amounts to at least 80% of the total contributions in accordance
with the scale contained in the Annex.
For any other signatory State, this Convention shall enter into force on the
first day of the second month following the date of the deposit of its instrument
of ratification, acceptance or approval.
Article 23. After the entry into force of this Convention, any State which
is not a Signatory and is mentioned in the Annex may accede to this Convention,
subject to the consent of the Council acting in accordance with Article 6(1) (b).
Instruments of accession shall be deposited in the archives of the General
Secretariat of the Council of the European Communities.
For each acceding State, this Convention shall enter into force on the first
day of the second month following the deposit of its instrument of accession.
Article 24. The Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Communities shall notify the signatory and acceding States of:
(a) any signature to this Convention;
(b) the deposit of all instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession;
(c) the entry into force of this Convention;
(d) any written notification of acceptance of an amendment to this Convention;
(e) the entry into force of any amendment;
(f) any denunciation of this Convention or loss of membership of the Centre.
As soon as this Convention enters into force, the Secretary-General of the
Council of the European Communities shall register it with the General
Secretariat of the United Nations, in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Article 25. 1. The first financial year shall run from the entry into force
of this Convention until 31 December following. In the event of this period
beginning during the second half of a calendar year, it shall run until 31 Decem
ber of the following year.
2. States which have signed this Convention but have not ratified,
accepted or approved it may be represented at meetings of the Council and take
part in its work without the right to vote for a period of twelve months after
the entry into force of this Convention. This period may be extended for a
further period of six months by the Council, acting in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 6 (3).
3. At its first meeting the Scientific Advisory Committee shall determine,
by drawing lots, the nine members of the Committee whose terms of office
shall expire, in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 7 (1), at the
end of the first, second and third years of operation of the Committee.
Article 26. This Convention, drawn up in a single original in the Dutch,
English, French, German and Italian languages, all five texts being equally
authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the General Secretariat of the
Council of the European Communities, which shall transmit a certified copy
to the Government of each signatory or acceding State.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have signed this
Convention.
DONE at Brussels on this eleventh day of October in the year one thousand
nine hundred and seventy-three.



PROTOCOL ON THE PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF THE
EUROPEAN CENTRE FOR MEDIUM-RANGE WEATHER FORECASTS
The States parties to the Convention establishing the European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, signed at Brussels on 11 October 1973,
Wishing to define the privileges and immunities necessary for the proper
functioning of this Centre,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. 1. Subject to the provisions of this Protocol, the premises of the
Centre shall be inviolable.
2. The authorities of the State in which the headquarters of the Centre
are located may not enter the premises of the Centre except with the consent
of the Director or person nominated by him. In case of fire or other disaster
requiring prompt preventive action, the consent of the Director may be assumed.
3. The Centre shall prevent its premises from becoming a refuge for
persons seeking to avoid arrest or service of legal papers.
Article 2. The archives of the Centre shall be inviolable.
Article 3. 1. Within the scope of its official activities, the Centre shall
have immunity from jurisdiction and execution except:
(a) to the extent that, by decision of the Council, the Centre waives it in a
particular case. However, the Centre shall be deemed to have waived this
immunity if, upon receiving a request to waive immunity submitted by the
national authority before which the case is .brought or by the opposing
party, it has not given notice, within fifteen days after receipt of the
request, that it does not waive such immunity;
(b) in respect of a civil action by a third party for damage arising from an
accident caused by a vehicle belonging to or operated on behalf of the
Centre or in respect of a traffic offence;
(c) in respect of an enforcement of an arbitration award made either under
Article 23 of this Protocol or Article 17 of the Convention establishing the
Centre, hereinafter referred to as "the Convention";
(d) in the event of the attachment, pursuant to a decision by the administrative
or judicial authorities, of the salaries, wages and emoluments owed by the
Centre to a member of its staff.
2. In any dispute involving a staff member or an expert of the Centre
for whom immunity from jurisdiction is claimed under Article 13 or Article 14,
the responsibility of the Centre shall be substituted for that of the staff member
or expert concerned.
3. Subject to paragraph I, the Centre's property and assets wherever
situated shall be immune from any form of administrative or provisional judicial
constraint such as requisition, confiscation, expropriation or attachment, except
in so far as may be temporarily necessary in connection with the prevention
of and investigation into accidents involving vehicles belonging to or operated
on behalf of the Centre.
Article 4. 1. Within the scope of its official activities, the Centre and its
property and income shall be exempt from all direct taxes.
2. When the Centre makes purchases of substantial value or uses services
of substantial value which are strictly necessary for the exercise of its official
activities and when the price of such purchases or services includes duties or
taxes, the Member State which has levied the duties and taxes shall take
appropriate measures to remit or reimburse the amount of the identifiable
duties and taxes.
3. No exemption shall be accorded in respect of duties and taxes which
are no more than payments for public utility services.
Article 5. Goods imported or exported by the Centre and strictly necessary
for the exercise of its official activities shall be exempt from all customs duties,
taxes and all customs charges except those charges which are no more than
payments for services. Such goods shall also be exempt from all prohibitions
and restrictions on import and export. The Member States shall take all
appropriate steps within their respective powers to effect customs clearance
with the minimum of delay for such goods.
Article 6. No exemption shall be accorded under Article 4 or Article 5 in
respect of goods purchased and imported for the personal needs of the staff
members of the Centre or of experts within the meaning of Article 14.
Article 7. Goods acquired under Article 4 or imported under Article 5 may
not be sold, given away or hired out except in accordance with the conditions
laid down by the regulations of the State which has granted the exemptions.
Article 8. 1. The Centre may receive and hold any kind of funds or
currency. It may dispose of them freely for the exercise of its official activities
and may hold accounts in any currency to the extent required to meet its
obligations.
2. Within the scope of its official activities and without prejudice to
paragraph 1, the Centre may also receive, hold and dispose of securities, sub
ject to any provisions concerning exchange regulations which are applicable to
other inter-governmental organisations in the Member State concerned.
Article 9. The circulation of publications and other information material
sent by or to the Centre within the scope of its official activities shall not be
restricted in any way.
Article 10. 1. With regard to the transmission of data within the scope of
its official activities, the Centre shall enjoy, in the territory of each Member
State, treatment as favourable as that accorded by that State to its national
meteorological service, taking into account the international obligations of that
State in respect of telecommunications.
2. With regard to its official communications and the transfer of all its
documents, the Centre shall enjoy treatment as favourable as that accorded
by each Member State to other international organisations, taking into account
the international obligations of that State in respect of telecommunications.
3. No censorship shall be applied to official communications of the Centre
by whatever means of communication.
Article II. Member States shall take all appropriate measures to facilitate
the entry, stay and departure of representatives of Member States, staff members
of the Centre and experts within the meaning of Article 14.
Article 12. Representatives of Member States taking part in the work of
the organs and committees of the Centre shall enjoy, while performing their
duties and in the course of their journeys to and from the place of meeting,
the following privileges, immunities and facilities:
(o) immunity from arrest and detention and from seizure of their personal
luggage, except when found committing, attempting to commit, or just having
committed an offence;
(b) immunity from jurisdiction, even after the termination of their mission, in
respect of acts, including words spoken or written, performed by them in
their official capacity and within the limits of their authority; this immunity
shall not apply in the case of a traffic offence committed by a representative
of a Member State nor in the case of damage caused by a vehicle belonging
to or driven by such a person;
(c) inviolability for all their official papers and documents;
(d) exemption from all measures restricting aliens' entry and from aliens'
registration formalities;
(e) the same customs facilities as regards their personal luggage and the same
privileges in respect of currency and exchange regulations as are accorded
to the representatives of foreign Governments on temporary official missions.
Article 13. The staff members of the Centre shall enjoy, within the limits
provided for in this Protocol, the following privileges, immunities and facilities:
(a) immunity from jurisdiction, even after they have left the service of the
Centre, in respect of acts, including words spoken or written, performed
by them in their official capacity and within the limits of their authority;
this immunity shall not apply in the case of a traffic offence committed
by a staff member, nor in the case of damage caused by a vehicle belonging
to or driven by such a person;
(h) exemption from all obligations in respect of military service;
(c) inviolability for all their official papers and documents;
(d) together with members of their families forming part of their households,
the same exceptions regarding measures restricting immigration and governing
aliens' registration as are normally accorded to staff members of interna
tional organisations;
(e) the same privileges in respect of monetary and exchange regulations as are
normally accorded to staff members of international organisations;
(/) together with members of their families forming part of their households,
the same facilities as regards repatriation in time of international crisis as
are normally accorded to staff members of international organisations;
(g) the right to import free of duty furniture and personal effects at the time
of taking up a post for a period of at least one year in the State concerned
and the right on the termination of their functions in the said State to
export free of duty furniture and personal effects, subject in both cases to
the conditions considered necessary by the Government of the State in whose
territory the right is exercised and with the exception of property acquired
in that State and subject to an export prohibition therein.
Article 14. Experts who are not staff members and who perform duties
at the Centre or who carry out missions on its behalf, shall enjoy, while
performing their duties or while on missions and during journeys made in the
course of such duties or missions, the following privileges, immunities and
facilities to the extent that they are necessary for the performance of their
duties or for the accomplishment of their missions.
(a) immunity from jurisdiction, even after they have left the service of the
Centre, in respect of acts, including words spoken and written, performed
by them in their capacity as experts and within the limits of their authority;
this immunity shall not apply in the case of a traffic offence committed by
an expert nor in the case of damage caused by a vehicle belonging to or
driven by such a person;
(b) inviolability for all their official papers and documents;
(c) the same customs facilities as regards their personal luggage and the same
privileges in respect of currency and exchange regulations as are accorded
to persons sent by foreign Governments on temporary official missions.
Article 15. 1. Subject to the conditions and following the procedure laid
down by the Council acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in
Article 6 (2) of the Convention within a period of one year after the Convention's
entry into force, the staff members of the Centre shall, within the limits provided
for in this Protocol, be subject to a tax for the benefit of the Centre on salaries,
wages and emoluments paid by the Centre. From the date on which this tax
is applied such salaries, wages and emoluments shall be exempt from national
income tax, the Member States retaining the right to take such salaries, wages
and emoluments into account when assessing the amount of taxation to be
applied to income from other sources.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to pensions and similar payments paid by
the Centre.
Article 16. No Member State shall be obliged to accord the privileges,
immunities and facilities referred to in Article 12, Article 13 (b), (e), (/), and
(g) and Article 14 (c) to its representatives, its nationals or persons who, at
the time of taking up their duties at the Centre, are permanent residents pf
that State.
Article 17. The Council, acting in accordance with the procedure laid
down in Article 6 (3) (o) of the Convention, shall determine the categories of
staff members to which Articles 13 and 15 shall apply in whole or in part and
the categories of experts to which Article 14 shall apply. The names, titles and
addresses of persons included in such categories shall be communicated peri
odically to the Member States.
Article 18. If the Centre establishes its own social security scheme or
joins that of another international organisation under the conditions laid down
in the Staff Regulations, the Centre and its staff members shall be exempt from
all compulsory contributions to national social security shemes, subject to
agreements to be concluded to that end with the Member States concerned
under the conditions laid down in Article 22.
Article 19. 1. The privileges, immunities and facilities provided for in this
Protocol are granted solely in the interests of the Centre, and of the Member
States, and not for the personal advantage of those enjoying them.
2. The competent authorities have not only the right but also the duty to
waive an immunity where such immunity is impeding the course of justice and
where it can be waived without prejudicing the purposes for which it was
accqrded.
3. The competent authorities referred to in paragraph 2 are:
-the Member States, in the case of their representatives,
-the Council, in [the] case of the Director,
-the Director, in the case of the other staff members and experts within the
meaning of Article 14.
Article 20. 1. The Centre shall co-operate at all times with the competent
authorities of the Member States in order to facilitate the proper administration
of justice, to ensure the observance of police regulations and regulations con
cerning public health and labour inspection and similar legislation, and to prevent
any abuse of the privileges, immunities and facilities provided for in this
Protocol.
2. The co-operation procedures may be defined in the supplementary
agreements provided for in Article 22. (
Article 21. The provisions of this Protocol shall not prejudice the right of
each Member State to take all precautionary measures necessary in the interests
of its security.
Article 22. The Centre may, on decision by the Council acting unanimously,
conclude supplementary agreements with any Member State to implement this
Protocol and may make any other arrangements to ensure the smooth running
of the Centre and the safeguarding of its interests.
Article 23. 1. The Centre shall be obliged in all written contracts-other
than those concluded in accordance with the Staff Regulations-into which it
enters and relating to matters in which it enjoys immunity from jurisdiction,
to include an arbitration clause whereby any dispute arising out of the interpre
tation or execution of the contract shall, at the request of either party, be
submitted to arbitration.
2. The Centre shall be obliged to submit to arbitration, at the request of
the injured party, by means of a compromise any other dispute arising out of
loss or damage caused by the Centre to persons or property.
3. The arbitration clause or the compromise shall specify the method of
appointing the arbitrators a,nd the third arbitrator, the law applicable and the
country where the arbitrators shall sit. The procedure of the arbitration shall
be that of that country. ,
4. The enforcement of the arbitration award shall be governed by the
rules,in force in the State in which the award is to be enforced.
Article 24. 1. Any Member State may submit to the arbitration tribunal
provided for in Article 17 of the Convention any dispute:
-arising out of damage caused by the Centre;
-involving any other non-contractual liability of the Centre; or
-involving a staff member or an expert of the Centre and in which the person
concerned can claim immunity from jurisdiction under Article 13 or Article 14,
if this immunity is not waived in accordance with Article 19.
2. If a Member State intends to submit a dispute to arbitration it shall
notify the Director who shall forthwith inform each Member State of such
notification.
3. The procedure laid down in paragraph 1 shall not apply to disputes
between the Centre and staff members in respect of their conditions of service.
4. No appeal shall lie against the award of the arbitration tribunal, which
shall be final; it shall be binding on the parties. In case of dispute concerning
the import or scope of the award, it shall be incumbent upon the arbitration
tribunal to interpret it at the request of either party.
Article 25. For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) "official activities of the Centre" shall include its administration and its
activities carried out in pursuance of its objectives as defined in Article 2
of the Convention;
(b) "staff members" shall include the Director of the Centre.
Article 26. This Protocol shall be interpreted in the light of its primary
objective of enabling the Centre fully and efficiently to fulfil its objectives and
carry out the functions assigned to it by the Convention.
