
EUROPEAN AGREEMENT CONCERNING THE
INTERNATIONAL CARRIAGE OF DANGEROUS GOODS
BY ROAD (ADR). DONE AT GENEVA, ON 30 SEPTEMBER
1957
The Contracting Parties,
Desiring to increase the safety of international transport by road,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
For the purpose of this Agreement,
(a) The term "vehicle" shall mean motor vehicles, articulated vehicles,
trailers and semitrailers, as defined in article 4 of the Convention on Road
Traffic of 19 September 1949, other than vehicles belonging to or under the
orders of the armed forces of a Contracting Party;
(b) The term "dangerous goods" shall mean those substances and articles
the international carriage by road of which is prohibited by, or authorized only
on certain conditions by, annex A and B,
(c) The term "international transport" shall mean any transport operation
performed on the territory of at least two Contracting Parties by vehicles defined
in (a) above.
Article 2
1. Subject to the provisions of article 4, paragraph 3, dangerous goods barred
from carriage by annex A shall not be accepted for international transport.
2. International transport of other dangerous goods shall be authorized
subject to compliance with :
(a) The conditions laid down in annex A for the goods in question, in
particular as regards their packaging and labelling, and
(b) The conditions laid down in annex B, in particular as regards the
construction, equipment and operation of the vehicle carrying the goods
in question, subject to the provisions of article 4, paragraph 2.
Article 3
The annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof.
Article 4
1. Each Contracting Party shall retain the right to regulate or prohibit, for
reasons other than safety during carriage, the entry of dangerous goods into its
territory.
2. Vechicles in service on the territory of a Contracting Party at the time of
entry into force of this Agreement or brought into service on such territory
within two months after its entry into force shall be allowed, for a period of three
years from such entry into force, to perform the international transport of
dangerous goods even if their construction and equipment do not entirely
conform to the requirements laid down in annex B for the transport operation in
question. Under special clauses of annex B, however, this period may be
reduced.
3. The Contracting Parties shall retain the right to arrange, by special
bilateral or multilateral agreements, that certain of the dangerous goods which
under this Agreement are barred from all international transport may, subject to
certain conditions, be accepted for international transport on their territories, or
that dangerous goods which under this Agreement are acceptable for international
transport only on specified conditions may be accepted for international transport
on their territories under conditions less stringent than those laid down in the
annexes to this Agreement. The special bilateral or multilateral agreements
referred to in this paragraph shall be communicated to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, who shall communicate them to the Contracting Parties
which are not signatories to the said agreements.
Article 5
The transport operations to which this Agreement applies shall remain
subject to national or international regulations applicable in general to road
traffic, international road transport and international trade.
Article 6
1. Countries members of the Economic Commission for Europe and
countries admitted to the Commission in a consultative capacity under paragraph
8 of the Commission's terms of reference may become Contracting Parties
to this Agreement :
(a) By signing it;
(b) By ratifying it after signing it subject to ratification;
(c) By acceding to it.
2. Such countries as may participate in certain activities of the Economic
Commission for Europe in accordance with paragraph 11 of the Commission's
terms of reference may become Contracting Parties to this Agreement by acceding
to it after its entry into force.
3. The Agreement shall be open for signature until 15 December 1957.
Thereafter, it shall be open for accession.
4. Ratification or accession shall be effected by the depositing of an instrument
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 7
1. This Agreement shall enter into force one month after the date on which
the number of countries mentioned in article 6, paragraph 1, which have signed
it without reservation of ratification or have deposited their instruments of
ratification or accession has reached a total of five. However, the annexes
thereto shall not apply until six months after the entry into force of the Agreement
itself.
2. For any country ratifying or acceding to this Agreement after five of the
countries referred to in article 6, paragraph 1, have signed it without reservation
of ratification or have deposited their instruments of ratification or accession,
this Agreement shall enter into force one month after the said country has
deposited its instrument of ratification or accession and the annexes thereto shall
apply for the said country either on the same date, if they are already in force by
that date, or, if they are not in force by that date, on the date on which they
apply under the provisions of paragraph 1 of this article.
Article 8
1. Any Contracting Party may denounce this Agreement by so notifying
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Denunciation shall take effect twelve months after the date of receipt by
the Secretary-General of the notification of denunciation.
Article 9
1. This Agreement shall cease to have effect if, after its entry into force, the
number of Contractin'g Parties is less than five during twelve consecutive months.
2. In the event of the conclusion of a world-wide agreement for the regulation
of the transport of dangerous goods, any provision of this Agreement which
is contrary to any provision of the said worldwide agreement shall, from the date
on which the latter enters into force, automatically cease to apply to relations
between the Parties to this Agreement which become parties to the worldwide
agreement, and shall automatically be replaced by the relevant provision of the
said worldwide agreement.
Article 10
1. Any country may, at the time of signing this Agreement without reservation
of ratification or of depositing its instrument of ratification or accession or
at any time thereafter, declare by notification addressed to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations that this Agreement shall extend to all or any of the territories
for the international relations of which it is responsible. The Agreement
and the annexes thereto shall extend to the territory or territories named in the
notification one month after it is received by the Secretary-General.
2. Any country which has made a declaration under paragraph 1 of this
article extending this Agreement to any territory for whose international relations
it is responsible may denounce the Agreement separately in respect of the said
territory in accordance with the provisions of article 8.
Article 11
1. Any dispute between two or more Contracting Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of this Agreement shall so far as possible be settled
by negotiation between them.
2. Any dispute which is not settled by negotiation shall be submitted to
arbitration if any one of the Contracting Parties in dispute so requests and shall
be referred accordingly to one or more arbitrators selected by agreement between
the Parties in dispute. If within three months from the date of the request for
arbitration the Parties in dispute are unable to agree on the selection of an
arbitrator or arbitrators, any of those Parties may request the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to nominate a single arbitrator to whom the dispute shall
be referred for decision.
3. The decision of the arbitrator or arbitrators appointed under paragraph 2
of this article shall be binding on the Contracting Parties in dispute.
Article 12
1. Each Contracting Party may, at the time of signing, ratifying, or acceding
to, this Agreement, declare that it does not consider itself bound by article 11.
Other Contracting Parties shall not be bound by article 11 in respect of any
Contracting Party which has entered such a reservation.
2. Any Contracting Party having entered a reservation as provided for in
paragraph 1 of this article may at any time withdraw such reservation by notifying
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 13
1. After this Agreement has been in force for three years, any Contracting
Party may, by notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
request that a conference be convened for the purpose of reviewing the text of
the Agreement. The Secretary-General shall notify all Contracting Parties of
the request and a review conference shall be convened by the Secretary-General
if, within a period of four months following the date of notification by the
Secretary-General, not less than one-fourth of the Contracting Parties notify
him of their concurrence with the request.
2. If a conference is convened in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article,
the Secretary-General shall notify all the Contracting Parties and invite them to
submit within a period of three months such proposals as they may wish the
Conference to consider. The Secretary-General shall circulate to all Contracting
Parties the provisional agenda for the conference, together with the texts of
such proposals at least three months before the date on which the conference
is to meet.
3. The Secretary-General shall invite to any conference convened in
accordance with this article all countries referred to in article 6, paragraph 1,
and countries which have become Contracting Parties under article 6, paragraph
2.
Article 14
1. Independently of the revision procedure provided for in article 13, any
Contracting Party may propose one or more amendments to the annexes to this
Agreement. To that end it shall transmit the text thereof to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. The Secretary-General may also propose
amendments to the annexes to this Agreement for the purpose of ensuring
concordance between those annexes and other international agreements concerning
the carriage of dangerous goods.
2. The Secretary-General shall transmit any proposal made under paragraph
1 of this article to all Contracting Parties and inform thereof the other
countries referred to in article 6, paragraph 1.
3. Any proposed amendment to the annexes shall be deemed to be accepted
unless, within three months from the date on which the Secretary-General
circulates it, at least one-third of the Contracting Parties, or five of them if onethird
exceeds that figure, have given the Secretary-General written notification
of their objection to the proposed amendment. If the amendment is deemed
to be accepted, it shall enter into force for all the Contracting Parties, either
on the expiry of a further period of three months or, in cases where similar
amendments have been or are likely to be made to the other international
agreements referred to in paragraph 1 of this article, on the expiry of a period
the duration of which shall be determined by the Secretary-General in such a way
as to allow, wherever possible, the simultaneous entry into force of the amendment
and those that have been or are likely to be made to such other agreements;
such period shall not, however, be of less than one month's duration.
4. The Secretary-General shall, as soon as possible, notify all Contracting
Parties and all the countries referred to in article 6, paragraph 1, of any objection
which may be received from the Contracting Parties to a proposed amendment.
5. If the proposed amendment to the annexes is not deemed to be accepted.
but if at least one Contracting Party other than the Contracting Party which
proposed the amendment has given the Secretary-General written notification of
its agreement to the proposal, a meeting of all the Contracting Parties and all
the countries referred to in article 6, paragraph 1, shall be convened by the
Secretary-General within three months after the expiry of the period of three
months within which, under paragraph 3 of this article, notification must be
given of objection to the amendment. The Secretary-General may also invite
to such meeting representatives of:
(a) Inter-governmental organizations which are concerned with transport
matters;
(b) International non-governmental organizations whose activities are
directly related to the transport of dangerous goods in the territories of
the Contracting Parties.
6. Any amendment adopted by more than half the total number of Contracting
Parties at a meeting convened in accordance with paragraph 5 of this article
shall enter into force for all Contracting Parties in accordance with the procedure
agreed at such meeting by the majority of the Contracting Parties attending it.
Article 15
In addition to the notifications provided for in articles 13 and 14, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify the countries referred to
in article 6, paragraph 1, and the countries which have become Contracting
Parties under article 6, paragraph 2, of:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions in accordance with article 6;
(b) The dates on which this Agreement and the annexes thereto enter into
force in accordance with article 7;
(c) Denunciations in accordance with article 8;
(d) The termination of the Agreement in accordance with article 9;
(e) Notifications and denunciations received in accordance with article 10;
(f) Declarations and notifications received in accordance with article 12,
paragraphs 1 and 2;
(g) The acceptance and date of entry into force of amendments in accordance
with article 14, paragraphs 3 and 6.
Article 16
1. The Protocol of Signature of this Agreement shall have the same force,
effect and duration as the Agreement itself, of which it shall be considered to be
an integral part.
2. No reservation to this Agreement, other than those entered in the Protocol
of Signature and those made in accordance with article 12, shall be permitted.
Article 17
After 15 December 1957, the original of this Agreement shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall transmit certified
true copies thereof to each of the countries referred to in article 6, paragraph 1.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have
signed this Agreement.
DONE at Geneva, this thirtieth day of September one thousand nine hundred
and fifty-seven, in a single copy, in the English and French languages for the text
of the Agreement proper, and in the French language for the annexes, each text
being equally authentic for the Agreement proper.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is requested to prepare an
authoritative translation of the annexes in the English language and attach it to
the certified true copies referred to in article 17.
