PROTOCOL ON ENERGY
             
PREAMBLE:
 
WE, the Representatives of the Government of:
The Republic of Angola
The Republic of Botswana
The Republic of Lesotho
The Republic of Malawi
The Republic of Mauritius
The Republic of Mozambique
The Republic of Namibia
The Republic of South Africa
The Kingdom of Swaziland
The United Republic of Tanzania
The Republic of Zambia
The Republic of Zimbabwe

GUIDED and BOUND by the principles set forth hereinafter, do 
hereby state that:

RECOGNISING the objectives and principles set forth in 
previous declarations, agreements and treaties governing the 
Region including but not limited to:

- The Declaration titled "Southern Africa: Towards Economic 
Liberation - A declaration by the Governments of Southern 
Africa", 1 April 1980 in Lusaka, Zambia;
- "The Lagos Plan of Action and the Final Act of Lagos" of 
April 1980, and the "Treaty Establishing the African Economic 
Community" signed at Abuja, Nigeria, on 3 June, 1991;
- The Declaration and Treaty establishing the Southern African 
Development Community (SADC) signed by Heads of State or 
Government on 17 August 1992, in Windhoek, Republic of Namibia;
- and, such other agreement in the SADC Region regarding the 
development and use of energy.

TAKING COGNISANCE of the recommendations contained in the 1982 
Document "SADCC: Towards an Energy Policy for Southern Africa" 
and the "Proceedings of the Workshop on Community Building 
Programme: SADC Energy Sector", held in Windhoek, Namibia, 
11-15 April 1994;

RECOGNISING the need for the coordinated approach to energy 
strategy formulation and planning for the SADC Region;

INTENDING to promote the harmonious development of our 
national energy policies and matters of common interest for 
the balanced and equitable development of energy throughout 
the SADC Region;

RECOGNISING the diversity of energy resources and the 
different endowments of these resources among Member States of 
the SADC Region;

RECOGNISING the multi-sectoral nature and character of issues 
related to energy development and use in the SADC Region;

DETERMINED to ensure, through collective action, the progress 
and well-being of the people of SADC Region through the 
provision and use of energy for people throughout the SADC 
Region, particularly ensuring that low income residents have 
access to energy;

DETERMINED FURTHER to promote the economic and social 
development and integration of our economies with a view 
towards achieving an increased measure of regional energy 
self-sufficiency and self-sustainment;
RECOGNISING the necessity for co-operation in energy 
development and use between SADC Member States and non-SADC 
States;

COGNISANT of the principles of International Law governing 
relations between the Member States;

HAVE DECIDED to establish a Protocol of energy co-operation in 
the Region (hereinafter referred to as the "Protocol"), in 
accordance with Article 22 of the Treaty establishing SADC 
based on the following rules:

ARTICLE 1

DEFINITIONS
In this Protocol, unless the context indicates otherwise, the 
following terms shall mean:
"Committee" the Committee of Ministers of Member States 
responsible for energy matters and as established under 
Article 11(2)(g) of the Treaty or existing under Article 38 of 
the Treaty;
"Community" the Southern African Development Community
"Council" the Council of Ministers of SADC established by 
Articles 9 and 11 of the Treaty;
"Director" the Head of the Technical Unit of the Commission;
"Energy Commission" the body duly constituted hereunder, as 
set in Article 1, 9 and 12 of the Treaty, to guide (herinafter 
and coordinate co-operation and harmonisation of) energy 
policies and programmes;
"Energy Pooling" co-operation among parties or entities in 
development, transmission, conveyance and storage of energy in 
order to obtain optimum reliability of service, economy of 
operation, and equitable sharing of costs and benefits;
"International Law" those laws governing the legal relations 
between States; rules and principles of general application 
dealing with the conduct of States and of international 
organisations and with some of their relations with persons, 
whether natural or legal;
"Member State" a State which is a member of SADC, which 
ratifies or accedes to this Protocol;
"Organisation" a corporation, governmental subdivision or 
agency; or any other legal or commercial entity having a joint 
or common interest in furtherance of the specific or broad 
objectives of the Protocol;
"Region" the geographic area of the Member States of SADC;
"SADC" the international organisation of Southern African 
States established by the Treaty of the Southern African 
Development Community;
"Secretariat of SADC" the principal executive institution of 
SADC that, among other things, is responsible for financial 
and general administration, strategic planning and management 
of programmes and other duties set forth in Article 14 of the 
Treaty;
"Senior Officials" members appointed as senior representatives 
by Member States to officially represent them in the Committee 
of Senior Officials as set forth in Article 4(3) of this 
Protocol;
"Signatory" means a member of SADC which has signed this 
Protocol, and by signing this document, expresses its 
intention to be bound by the terms herein;
"Sub-Committee" the Committee within a sub-Sector representing 
stakeholders in that particular area of activities as set 
forth in Article 4(6) of this Protocol;
"Summit" means the Summit of the Heads of State or Government 
of SADC, established by Article 9 of the Treaty;
"Technical Unit" the executing organ of the Commission as set 
forth in Article 4(4) of this Protocol;
"Treaty" the Treaty establishing SADC signed in Windhoek, 
Republic of Namibia, on 17 August 1992;
"Tribunal" the Tribunal of SADC established pursuant to 
Article 9 of the Treaty.
   
ARTICLE 2

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
For the purpose of this Protocol, Member States shall:
1. Use energy to support economic growth and development, 
alleviation of poverty and the improvement of the standard and 
quality of life throughout the Region.
2. Use energy to promote collective self-reliance among Member 
States.
3. Ensure that the development and use of energy takes 
cognisance of the gender realities of the Region.
4. Encourage the development and transfer of science and 
technology related to energy through the promotion of research 
and development and the evolution and use of comparable 
methods and standards.
5. Fully accept the responsibility to share the costs 
associated with institutional mechanisms created for the 
effective implementation of this Protocol.
6. Settle all disputes peacefully, amicably and in accordance 
with procedures set forth hereunder in Article 12.
7. Promote and encourage the direct participation of citizens 
and communities in the development and use of energy.
8. Ensure that the development and use of energy is 
environmentally sound.
9. Create a conducive environment for the private sector to 
participate fully in energy development in the Region.
10. Ensure that sectoral and sub-sectoral regional energy 
policies and programmes shall be in harmony with the overall 
policies and programmes of SADC and with the strategies and 
programmes of other SADC sectors.

ARTICLE 3

OBJECTIVES
The objectives of energy co-operation in the Region shall be 
to:
1. Strive to harmonise national and regional energy policies, 
strategies and programmes on matters of common interest based 
on equity, balance and mutual benefit.
2. Co-operate in the development of energy and energy pooling 
to ensure security and reliability of energy supply and the 
minimisation of costs.
3. Co-operate in the development and utilisation of energy in 
the Region in the following sub-sectors: woodfuel, petroleum 
and natural gas, electricity, coal, new and renewable energy 
sources, energy efficiency and conservation, and other 
cross-cutting themes of interest to Member States.
4. Strive to ensure the provision of reliable, continued and 
sustainable energy services in the most efficient and 
cost-effective manner.
5. Promote joint development of human resources and 
organisational capacity building in the energy sector.
6. Co-operate in the research, development, adaptation, 
dissemination and transfer of low-cost energy technologies.
7. Strive to achieve standardisation in appropriate energy 
development and application including the use of common 
methods and other techniques.
  
ARTICLE 4

INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM
1. The Commission
a) Pursuant to Articles 9 and 12 of the Treaty, there shall be 
established a Commission to be responsible for the 
implementation of this Protocol.
b) The Commission shall comprise the following organs:

(i) The Committee of Ministers;
(ii) The Committee of Senior Officials;
(iii) The Technical Unit;
(iv) Sub-Committees established by the Committee of Ministers 
for electricity, petroleum, coal, woodfuel, new and renewable 
sources of energy, energy efficiency and conservation, energy 
planning and for other areas or tasks when and where 
appropriate pursuant to Article 4(2)(a) (xii) hereunder.
c) The Commission shall have the following functions:
(i) co-ordinate regional energy activities;
(ii) formulate a coordinated approach to regional energy 
policy, strategy and plans;
(iii) facilitate regional energy project conceptualisation, 
initiation, preparation and implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation;
(iv) establish and maintain a regional energy data base and 
facilitate information exchange;
(v) liaise with other SADC sectors and with national, regional 
and international organisations;
(vi) formulate and implement strategies for human resources 
development in the energy sector in the Region;
(vii) establish procedures and criteria for the approval of 
SADC energy projects;
(viii) mobilise finance for implementing SADC energy 
programmes and projects;
(ix) promote research and development in the energy sector in 
the Region;
(x) identify and formulate common standards and procedures in 
energy technology development and application, as well as 
common information and documentation practices; and
(xi) provide upon request and in furtherance of the objectives 
of the Protocol, technical assistance to Member States, 
organisations and communities referred to under Article 8 of 
this Protocol.
d) In accordance with Article 18 of the Treaty, the quorum for 
all meetings of the Commission shall be two-thirds of the 
Member States.
e) Pursuant to Article 19 of the Treaty, decisions of the 
Commission shall be taken by consensus.
2. The Committee of Ministers
a) The Committee of Ministers shall have the following 
functions:
(i) establish the policy and strategy of the Commission;
(ii) revise areas of co-operation as provided in Article 3 of 
this Protocol;
(iii) appoint and remove the Director;
(iv) consider and recommend for approval by the Council the 
business plan, budget, annual reports and financial statements 
of the Commission;
(v) consider and approve recommendations on projects and 
programmes;
(vi) consider and recommend to Council for approval rules and 
regulations governing the Commission;
(vii) recommend to the Council the location of the 
Headquarters and branches of the Technical Unit;
(viii) consider any matter having a bearing on the objectives, 
direction and/or implementation of the Protocol brought to its 
attention by a Member State, the Committee of Senior 
Officials, the Technical Unit or the sub-Committee;
(ix) recommend to the Council amendments to the Protocol 
and/or changes or modifications to the structure of the 
Commission;
(x) decide on the venue and dates of the meetings;
(xi) consider any matter referred, to the Committee of 
Ministers by the Council;
(xii) create such other organs as may be necessary for the 
implementation of this Protocol;
(xiii) identify and introduce new areas of co-operation which 
shall be deemed to be areas of co-operation in terms of 
Article 3 of this Protocol;
(xiv) add to or eliminate an area or areas of co-operation as 
provided for in Article 3 of this Protocol;
(xv) recommend to the Summit through the Council of Ministers 
the adoption of subsidiary agreements to regulate co-operation 
in any particular area of co-operation; however such 
subsidiary agreement shall not be inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Protocol; and
(xvi) decide, without prejudice to Article 3 of this Protocol 
that this Protocol be implemented together with Protocols of 
other sectors of SADC.
b) The Committee of Ministers shall meet annually on dates to 
be agreed upon. The Committee of Ministers shall hold 
extraordinary meetings upon the consent of two-thirds of the 
Member States.
c) The chairperson of the Committee of Ministers shall be 
appointed from the Member State coordinating the Sector.
d) The Committee of Ministers may, from time to time, acquire 
the advice of prominent individuals who are citizens of SADC 
Member States on issues related to the Protocol.
3. The Committee of Senior Officials
a) The Committee of Senior Officials shall comprise of 
representatives appointed by Member States. Each Member State 
shall appoint one such representative.
b) The Committee of Senior Officials shall meet at least once 
a year.
c) The chairperson of the Committee of Senior Officials shall 
be appointed from the Member State coordinating the Sector.
d) The Committee of Senior Officials shall have the following 
functions:
(i) Advise the Committee of Ministers and the Technical Unit 
on the activities of the Commission and any other organ of the 
Commission;
(ii) Recommend the agenda, provisional work programmes, 
studies and projects proposed by the Technical Unit for the 
consideration of the Committee of Ministers; and
(iii) Perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by 
the Committee of Ministers.
4 The Technical Unit
a) There shall be established a Technical Unit which shall be 
the executing organ of the Commission.
b) The Technical Unit shall be headed by a Director.
c) The Technical Unit shall be the administrative and 
coordinating organ responsible for implementing the Protocol 
and promoting and facilitating all activities under Article 4 
of the Protocol. The Technical Unit shall in addition be 
responsible for:
(i) implementing the decisions of the Committee of Ministers;
(ii) facilitating the establishment and operation of the 
Sub-Committee;
(iii) organising and managing Commission meetings; and
(iv) overseeing financial and general administration.

5. The Director
a) The Director shall be appointed by the Committee of 
Ministers. In doing so, the Committee of Ministers shall be 
guided by the need to ensure the highest standards of 
efficiency, professional competence and integrity.
b) The Director shall have the following functions and duties:
(i) prepare annual reports and draft budgets and other 
financial statements and business plans for consideration by 
the Committee of Ministers;
ii) act as secretary to the meetings of the Committee of 
Ministers and Committee of Senior Officials, prepare 
documents, agenda and work programmes;
(iii) organise, as appropriate, meetings of the Committee of 
Ministers and the Committee of Senior Officials;
iv) prepare internal rules and regulations of the Commission 
for the consideration of the Committee of Minister;
(v) mobilise and collect financial and other contributions 
from Member States and other sources;
(vi) appoint staff of the Technical Unit in accordance with 
the rules and regulations prescribed by the Council;
(vii) recommend to the Committee of Senior Officials and to 
the Committee of Ministers any matter of interest to the 
Commission;
(viii) convene groups and panels of experts considered 
necessary to advise the Commission on policies, strategies, 
work programme and implementation of activities of the 
Commission; and
(ix) perform such other functions that may from time to time 
be assigned by the Committee of Ministers.
6. The Sub-Committees
a) The Sub-Committees shall form an integral part of the SADC 
structure.
b) The Sub-Committees shall have a specific mandate and the 
following functions:
(i) address a regional energy need;
(ii) unless special circumstances dictate otherwise, they 
shall be established for the duration of their specific task.
c) Each Sub-Committee shall be coordinated by a part-time 
programme manager, who is also the Chairperson appointed for a 
specific period of time who will be based in his/her own 
country and will be seconded and funded by his/her respective 
Member State.
d) The Sub-Committees shall have the following obligations and 
rights:
(i) the Sub-Committees shall have terms of reference clearly 
setting out objectives and conditions of membership and this 
shall be approved by the Committee of Ministers;
(ii) the Sub-Committees shall keep the Committee of Ministers 
informed of their membership and activities via the Technical 
Unit and members of the Technical Unit shall be entitled to 
attend all formal meetings of the Sub-Committees;
(iii) the Sub-Committees shall meet at least once a year;
(iv) the Sub-Committees shall undertake to adequately consult 
the organs of the Commission on matters of common interest;
(v) the members of the Sub-Committees are responsible for 
their own expenses, as well as the joint expenses of the 
Sub-Committees for projects, studies, secretarial services etc;
(vi) the Sub-Committees may in order to further their 
objectives, form working groups, commission studies, hire 
experts, arrange conferences etc. under their conditions and 
shall be responsible for related activities and costs. Such 
formed working groups shall report to the Sub-Committee. 
Members of the working groups need not be members of the 
respective Sub-Committees.
(vii) the Sub-Committees may call upon the Technical Unit to 
facilitate their establishment and operation, including 
formulating objectives, drawing up of constitutions, forming 
of working groups, commissioning of studies, project 
appraisals and implementation and following up of secretarial 
services, contacting donors etc. The Technical Unit may charge 
a cost-related fee for these services, including, where 
necessary, the hiring of consultants;
(viii) the Sub-Committees shall make representations to the 
organs of the Commission, including the Committee of Ministers;
(ix) the Sub-Committees shall decide on the scope, location 
and timing of their various activities in the field of 
regional energy;
(x) the Sub-Committee may lobby for donor funding to achieve 
regional energy objectives; and
(xi) the Sub-Committees shall restructure or dissolve 
themselves with approval of the Committee of Ministers.
e) Stakeholders shall retain control of the Sub-Committee 
while liaising with the Commission through the Technical Unit. 
Sub-committees shall report regularly to the Technical Unit on 
their work.
f) Relevant stakeholders may include government departments, 
parastatals, private sector organisations, institutes, 
communities etc. Those who are unable to adequately represent 
themselves e.g. rural communities, should be consulted and 
assisted, and may be represented by government bodies, NGOs 
etc.
           

ARTICLE 5

FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
1. Member States shall contribute towards the budget of the 
Technical Unit in the manner set forth in Article 28 of the 
Treaty.
2. Members of the Sub-Committees shall meet their own expenses.
3. Projects, programmes, special studies, etc. shall have 
individual funding arrangements from various sources such as 
stakeholder, donors and special contributions by Member States.
4. The Commission may accept gifts, grants, legacies, and 
donations from any source provided they are consistent with 
the objectives of the Protocol. Information related to any of 
the above assistance shall be conveyed to the Committee of 
Ministers.
5. The Committee of Ministers shall consider and approve 
arrangements proposed by the Technical Unit for 
self-generation of funds by the Commission.
6. Articles 5(1), 5(4) and 5(5) shall not be construed as 
prohibiting subsidiary agreements envisaged under Article 4 
for purposes of adopting any other financing arrangements, 
provided they are based on equity, balance and mutual benefit.
7. Member States in arrears in payment of contributions in 
terms of this Protocol shall be dealt with in accordance with 
Article 33 of the Treaty.
               
ARTICLE 6

REPORTING OF DATA AND INFORMATION EXCHANGE
1. Member States shall make energy data freely available in 
the Region. To this end, Member States agree to set up a 
regional energy data base to facilitate the exchange of 
information among institutions and in order to facilitate 
regional energy policy formulation and planning.
2. The exchange of agreed upon energy information between 
Member States, the Commission and SADC shall be obligatory.
3. Notwithstanding Article 6(2) above, a Member State shall 
not be obliged to divulge any information not previously 
agreed and the disclosure of which may not be in the interest 
of that Member State.
           
ARTICLE 7

CO-OPERATION WITH NON-SADC STATES AND ORGANISATIONS
In recognition of the fact that energy development transcends 
national and regional boundaries, co-operation between Member 
States and non-SADC states and organisations in energy 
development and use, shall be encouraged. In furtherance 
thereof, SADC and its Member States may enter into agreements 
with non-SADC states and organisations, provided that such 
agreements shall not:
1. be inconsistent with the overall objectives and other 
provisions of this Protocol;
2. create obligations upon a Member State who is not a party 
to such agreements; and
3. impede a Member State from fulfilling its obligations under 
this Protocol.
               
ARTICLE 8

NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS
In accordance with Article 23 of the Treaty, the Commission 
shall co-operate with Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), 
as well as the business and industrial communities, provided 
that their objectives and activities are not at variance with 
the objectives of this Protocol. The Commission shall 
establish working relationships with such NGOs and communities 
and make such arrangements as may be necessary to ensure 
effective co-operation.
             
ARTICLE 9

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING
Pursuant to Article 21(3)(d) of the Treaty, the Commission and 
Member States shall actively encourage and promote scientific 
research, development and training activities related to 
energy. Accordingly, the Commission and Member States shall:
1. actively involve existing facilities and institutions;
2. promote the development of centres of excellence in energy 
supply and utilisation throughout the Region;
3. co-operate and collaborate with regional and international 
professional and scientific research organisations;
4. utilise available manpower in the Region to the maximum 
extent; and
5. co-operate with and involve relevant NGOs in the Region in 
energy related scientific research and development.
                
ARTICLE 10

ANNEXES
1. Any subsidiary agreement adopted in accordance with Article 
4 of this Protocol shall be annexed to this Protocol.
2. Annexes to this Protocol may be amended or terminated by 
the Council.
          
ARTICLE 11

LEGAL STATUS AND LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY
1. The Commission, in accordance with Article 3 of the Treaty, 
may enter into contracts, sue or be sued and generally execute 
all activities necessary to attain its authorised goals and 
objectives.
2. In performing their official missions and functions, the 
Commission and its staff shall enjoy immunities and privileges 
conferred by Article 31 of the Treaty and other relevant 
provisions.
               
ARTICLES 12

SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
1. Any dispute arising between two or more Member States from 
the interpretation or application of this Protocol, which 
cannot be settled amicably, shall be referred to the Tribunal 
established under Article 9 of the Treaty for adjudication.
2. If a dispute pertaining to this Protocol arises between 
SADC and a Member State, a request shall be made by the 
Council for an advisory opinion in accordance with Article 16 
of the Treaty.
           
ARTICLE 13

WITHDRAWAL
1. Any Member State may withdraw from this Protocol upon the 
expiration of twelve (12) months from the date of giving 
written notice to that effect to the Executive Secretary of 
SADC.
2. Such Member State shall cease to enjoy all rights and 
benefits under this Protocol upon the withdrawal becoming 
effective, but shall remain bound by the obligations hereunder 
for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of withdrawal.
               
ARTICLE 14

SAVING PROVISIONS
Nothing contained in this Protocol shall derogate or be 
construed to derogate from existing agreements entered into 
between two or more Member States or a Member State and a 
non-SADC State and /or Organisation concerning energy 
development and use, provided that Member States shall 
endeavour to give effect to such agreements and any rights 
acquired or obligations assumed thereunder in conformity with 
the general principles prescribed in Article 2 of this 
Protocol.
                 
ARTICLE 15

SIGNATURE
This Protocol shall be signed by duly authorised 
representatives of the Member States listed in the Preamble.
                 
ARTICLE 16

RATIFICATION
This Protocol shall be subject to ratification by the 
Signatories in accordance with their respective constitutional 
procedures.
                  
ARTICLE 17

ACCESSION
This Protocol shall remain open for accession by any State 
which is a Member of SADC and is not listed in the Preamble.

           
ARTICLE 18

AMENDMENTS
1. Any Member State may propose an amendment to this Protocol.
2. Proposals for amendments to this Protocol may be made to 
the Director who shall duly notify all Member States of the 
proposed amendments at least thirty (30) days in advance of 
consideration of the amendments by the Committee of Ministers. 
Such notice period may be waived by the Member States.
3. An amendment of this Protocol shall be adopted by a 
decision of three-quarters of all the Members of the Summit.
                
ARTICLE 19

ENTRY INTO FORCE
This Protocol shall enter into force thirty (30) days after 
the deposit of the instruments of ratification or accession by 
two-thirds of the Member States.
                  
ARTICLE 20

TERMINATION
This Protocol may be terminated in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 35 of the Treaty.
                  
ARTICLE 21
DEPOSITARY
1. The original texts of this Protocol and all instruments of 
ratification and accession shall be deposited with the 
Executive Secretary of SADC, who shall transmit certified 
copies to all Member States.
2. The Executive Secretary of SADC shall register this 
Protocol with the Secretariat of the United Nations 
Organisation and the Organisation of African Unity.

                  
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, WE, the Heads of States or Government or 
duly Authorised Representatives of SADC Member States have 
signed this Protocol.
DONE at Maseru on the 24th day of August 1996 in two 
(2)original texts in the English and Portuguese languages, 
both texts being equally authentic.

REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA 
REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA
KINGDOM OF LESOTHO
REPUBLIC OF MALAWI
REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE

ANNEX 1
GUIDELINES FOR CO-OPERATION
Pursuant to Articles 3 and 10 of the Energy Protocol of the 
Southern African Development Community, the following sets 
forth guidelines for co-operation in the Energy Commission 
(hereinafter the "Commission"). It should be noted that the 
Energy Protocol should be implemented within the context of 
the principles of a regional cooperation policy and strategy 
(hereinafter "the Policy"). The Technical Unit shall propose 
and when necessary update the Policy for the approval by the 
Committee of Ministers. The Policy shall emphasise the 
development of energy in the support of regional integration 
and socio-economic development and address, inter alia, the 
following issues:
- Energy trade
- Integrated resource planning
- Energy efficiency and conservation
- Demand-side management
- Energy pricing
- Private sector and NGO involvement
- Competition
- Training and organisation capacity building
- Gender
- Research and development and funding
- Energy investment and funding
- Environment
- Information collection, processing and dissemination
- Inter-sectoral and intra-sectoral issues, and
- Other cross-cutting issues.
To the extent possible, the Policy shall complement national 
energy policies of Member States. It shall be the primary 
mission of each sub-sector to enhance the provision of energy 
co-operation and integration.
Presently, the sub-sectors within the Energy Sector include 
the following: Electricity, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Coal, 
Wood fuel, New and Renewable Energy sources and Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation. The list of sub-sectors is not 
exclusive and, when appropriate, could be extended to include 
other relevant sub-sectors or cross-cutting themes of interest 
to stakeholders, Member States and the Commission as set forth 
in Article3.

1. Electricity
The electricity sub-sector of SADC shall strive towards an 
integrated power system that would be productively used and 
optimally managed in an environmentally sound manner. Within 
this context, the following sets forth guidelines for regional 
integration and co-operation:
a) Promote electricity trading and power pooling such as that 
described in the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP), 
Intergovernmental Memorandun of Understanding, the SAPP 
Agreement between Operating Members, all as adopted by the 
b) Promote integrated resource planning in the electricity 
sub-sector to take advantage of economies of scale and 
optimisation of investment and equitable sharing of benefits.
c) Coordinate the development and regular updating of a 
regional electricity master plan.
d) Promote the evolution of common regional standards, rules 
and procedures relevant to the generation, transmission and 
distribution of electricity, including the standardisation of 
electrical manufacturing facilities, particularly in areas in 
which the Region holds a comparative advantage.
e) Develop and utilise electricity in an environmentally sound 
manner, and subject electricity projects to environmental 
impact assessments in conformity with agreed basic 
environmental standards.
f) Emphasise the provision of universal and affordable service 
to all citizens and the importance of quality customer service 
in national electricity policies.
g) Encourage agreements between Member States and non-Member 
States, and on regional electricity development and trade, so 
long as such agreements are in accordance with Article 4 of 
the Protocol.

2. Petroleum and Natural Gas

Member States should promote co-operation in the development 
of all aspects of the Region's petroleum resources. Likewise, 
natural gas continues to grow in importance and is a resource 
that exists variously throughout the Region such as in Angola, 
Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Tanzania. Hence, 
regional co-operation will be necessary in the development and 
use of natural gas. Combining these two broad objectives, the 
following sets forth applicable guidelines.
a) Petroleum Exploration (Upstream)
(i) Member States should take an integrated approach towards 
the exploration of geological structures which transgress 
national borders. This may invariably necessitate joint 
negotiations with petroleum companies.
(ii) Member States should coordinate, and where possible, 
jointly undertake promotional activities.
(iii) The Commission shall facilitate exploration activities 
in the Region.

(iv) The Commission should strive to harmonise laws, 
regulations and agreements governing exploration activities in 
order to support exploration programmes. Particular emphasis 
should be placed on matters relating to the environment, 
health, safety and security.
(v) A regional petroleum database shall be established.

(b) Petroleum Exploration Downstream
(i) Member States should create an enabling legal and fiscal 
environment which promotes, enhances and facilitates 
cross-border trade and transport of petroleum and natural gas.
(ii) The Commission should devise procedures relating to the 
introduction of new petroleum products, product specifications 
and, where appropriate, technologies that may have a 
significant regional impact.
(iii) The Commission should promote the joint procurement of 
petroleum products to take advantage of economies of scale.
(iv) The Commission should encourage joint development and 
establishment of refining, storage and transmission facilities 
and sharing of excess capacity.
(v) The Commission shall promote extensive exchange of 
information relative to petroleum and natural gas through the 
development of a regional data bank, staff exchange and 
interaction, and closer institutional liaison.
3. Coal
The Region has an abundance of coal, primarily located in 
Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, 
Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The supplies are generally 
site-specific and often bulky to transport. The guideline that 
should be followed are:
a) More deliberate efforts should be implemented to substitute 
coal for woodfuel. To this end, the Commission shall develop a 
strategy for expanded coal untilisation considering such 
issues as cost, efficient coal stove development, coal 
briquetting, coal gasification and the use of coal bed methane.
b) Clean coal technologies available in the world markets 
which may improve efficiency in operation and mitigate 
environmental degradation should be sought.
4. Woodfuel
Woodfuel is recognised as a predominant source of energy 
throughout the Region, presently and in the future. 
Accordingly, the goal of the Commission should be to develop, 
enhance and facilitate co-operation at a regional level 
relative to the provision and use of woodfuel in a 
sustainable, rational and environmentally benign manner. In 
doing so, it should be recognised that biomass has several 
end-uses, such as the provision of fuel, fodder, food, 
farming, construction and forestry products.
Moreover, most problems in the woodfuel sector are local and 
site-specific in character and therefore, solutions to the 
biomass problems would emanate largely from local communities. 
In light of this, the following sets forth guidelines for 
regional co-operation:
a) Promote local community participation in policy formulation 
and implementation with special attention on the gender 
dimension.
b) Strengthen institutional capacity in the wood fuel 
sub-sector, particularly with respect to training, data 
collection and information dissemination.
c) Encourage applied research.
d) Improve woodfuel end-use efficiency and seek acceptable 
alternatives to wood fuel.
5 New and Renewable Sources of Energy
Like woodfuel and coal, new and renewable sources of energy 
(hereinafter "NRSE") are generally site-specific. Applications 
often take the form of biogas, windmills, mini-hydroplants, 
passive solar design of buildings, photovoltaics, solar 
thermal, and solar stoves and water heaters. The potential is 
great for use of renewables in the Region. The following lists 
the guidelines of strategy to promote increased production and 
use of renewables in an economically and socially acceptable 
manner:
a) The Commission shall develop appropriate financing 
mechanisms suitable for the development of NRSE.
b) Member States shall consider the implementation of suitable 
tax regimes that promote the development and use of NRSE.
c) Member States shall strive to create an enabling 
environment for private sector involvement in NRSE.
d) The Commission shall provide, upon request and to the 
extent possible, technical support to governments and 
non-governmental organisations involved in the NRSE sub-sector.
e) Member states shall include cost-effective NRSE 
applications in their public investment programmes.

6. Energy Efficiency and Conservation
As energy resources in the Region are not inexhaustible, 
everyone should be encouraged to use energy judiciously and 
efficiently, regardless of which source of energy is consumed. 
Energy efficiency and conservation applications have minimal 
adverse impact on the environment, relative to other energy 
applications. Moreover, these applications reduce the amount 
of capital investment in energy development. Also, energy 
conservation cuts across various energy sectors. In view of 
this, it is important that this sub-sector increase its 
visibility and importance. Therefore, the following sets forth 
the guidelines for this sub-sector:
a) Encourage the development of national energy efficiency and 
conservation plans;
b) Develop increased training opportunities for energy 
efficiency and conservation;
c) Target reduction in commercial energy intensity by an 
achievable and measureable percentage per annum;
d) Encourage the involvement of independent energy managers 
and energy services in energy conservation;
e) Involve utilities and other energy providers in energy 
efficiency schemes through demand side management and other 
appropriate means of energy conservation;
f) Utilise pricing as an instrument of energy efficiency and 
conservation where appropriate; and
g) Identify and minimise constraints for more efficient use of 
energy.
