CONVENTION BETWEEN SPAIN AND PORTUGAL ON FISHING AT
SEA AND CO-OPERATION IN MATTERS OF FISHERIES
The Governments of Spain and Portugal,
Having in view the conclusion of a Convention between the two countries on
fishing at sea and co-operation in matters of fisheries;
Taking into account the provisions of the London Fisheries Convention of
9 March 1964, 2 to which both States are parties;
Without prejudice to their views regarding the principles of international law
applicable to the delimitation of the maritime spaces adjacent to their coasts; and
Desiring to strengthen the good relations which have always existed between
their fishery authorities and their fishermen,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. 1. Portuguese fishing vessels shall have the right to engage in
fishing in the off-shore belt of sea between 6 and 12 miles from the Atlantic coast of
the Spanish mainland, measured from the baseline adopted by Spain for the delimi
tation of its reserved fishing belt.
2. The right established in the preceding paragraph shall not be exercised in
off-shore belts of sea north of the parallel passing through Cape Finisterre or east of
the meridian passing through the Tarifa point (Strait of Gibraltar).
Article 2. 1. Spanish fishing vessels have the right to engage in fishing in the
off-shore belt of sea between 6 and 12 miles from the coast of the Portuguese main
land, measured from the baseline adopted by Portugal for the delimitation of its ter
ritorial sea.
2. The right established in the preceding paragraph shall not be exercised in
belts of sea off the coasts of the Azores and Madeira.
Article 3. 1. In the belt between 0 and 6 miles, measured from the baselines
referred to in this Convention, fishing shall be reserved for nationals of each Party in
the waters under its jurisdiction.
2. However, in the belts of sea at the mouths of the rivers Minho and Guadiana,
the competent fishery authorities may agree on measures of mutual tolerance
with respect to fishing in accordance with the traditional relations between fishermen
on both sides of the border.
Article 4. 1. Straight baselines or bay closing lines for the delimitation of the
fishing belts described in the preceding articles shall be drawn in accordance with ar
ticle 6 of the London Fisheries Convention of 9 March 1964.
2. To that end, each Party shall give the other Party adequate advance notice
of its intention to draw any straight baselines or bay closing lines, or to modify any
existing lines, in order that the last-mentioned Party may formulate such comments
as it deems necessary.
3. In the Bay of Setubal, the Portuguese State shall adopt, for the delimitation
of the fishing belt referred to in article 2, a straight baseline not exceeding 24 miles in
length, drawn from Pedra do Arcangil (on Cape of Espichel) towards the opposite
shore of the bay in the Barrocal.
Article 5. 1. Within the fishing belts described in articles 1 and 2, fishing
vessels of both countries shall be required to comply with the fishery legislation in
force in the said belts, provided that there shall be no discrimination in form or in
fact as between vessels of the two countries.
2. Each Party shall consult the other Party whenever it proposes to modify its
domestic fishery legislation in such a way as might affect the rights accorded under
this Convention.
Article 6. 1. In order to facilitate the application of the rules laid down in this
Convention, there shall be established a Spanish-Portuguese Technical Fisheries
Commission, the composition of which shall be agreed upon through the diplomatic
channel.
2. The Commission shall meet alternately in Lisbon and Madrid at least once a
year, and in any event, should the circumstances make it desirable, at the request of
either Party.
3. The Technical Fisheries Commission shall have the following powers:
(a) to propose to the Governments a limitation of the fishing effort to be carried out
by nationals of the two countries in exercise of the rights accorded under articles 1
and 2 of this Convention by laying down the annual gross register tonnage per
mitted both for trawling and for fishing by ring net (cerco);
(b) to propose measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the belts of sea
adjacent to their coasts;
(c) to monitor any consultations under the provisions of article 5, paragraph 2; and
(d) to serve as a channel for co-operation between the two countries in matters of
fisheries.
Article 7. This Convention shall remain in force for a term of 20 years.
After the expiration of that term, it shall be automatically extended for suc
cessive periods of five years, unless one of the Parties gives the other Party at least
one year's notice of its intention not to extend the Convention.
Article 8. This Convention shall enter into force as soon as the two Govern
ments notify each other, by an exchange of notes, that the constitutional procedures
prescribed for its approval have been completed.
Transitional provision. Within six months of the entry into force of this Con
vention, the Technical Fisheries Commission referred to in article 6 shall lay down
the limits of the fishing effort that may be carried out by each Party during the fol
lowing five years in the belts defined in articles 1 and 2 of this Convention. Such
limits shall be set on the basis of the fishing effort carried out during the five years
preceding the entry into force of the Convention.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the duly authorized representatives of the Government of
Spain and the Government of Portugal have signed the present Convention.
DONE at Madrid on 9 December 1969, in duplicate, in the Spanish and Portu
guese languages, the tw; texts being equally authentic.
For the Spanish Government:
Gregorio Lopez Bravo
Minister for Foreign Affairs
For the Portuguese Government:
Manuel Rocheta
Ambassador of Portugal to Spain
