AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF FINLAND AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
ESTONIA ON COOPERATION IN THE AREA OF WATER PROTECTION
The Government of the Republic of Finland and the Government of the Republic
of Estonia, hereinafter referred to as "the Contracting Parties",
Taking into account the Agreement signed on 7 November 1991 between the
Government of the Republic of Finland and the Government of the Republic of
Estonia regarding cooperation in the area of environmental protection,
Recognizing the importance of developing and strengthening bilateral cooperation
in the area of water conservation,
Being Contracting Parties to the Convention on the Protection of the Marine
Environment of the Baltic Sea Area (Helsinki Agreement) signed on 22 March 1974,
Aware that the Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the
Baltic Sea Area signed on 9 April 1992 will supersede the 1974 Helsinki Agreement
upon its entry into force,
Convinced that the improvement of environmental conditions in the Gulf of
Finland and the Baltic Sea is crucial to the nature, economy, culture and well-being
of both countries,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
PURPOSE OF THE AGREEMENT
The purpose of this Agreement is to provide a continuing guarantee of the
promotion of water conservation and other related environmental protection in Finland
and Estonia. The Contracting Parties shall seek to reduce and prevent overburdening
of the water supply, in particular the Gulf of Finland, particularly through
the application of the best available technology and environmentally sound practices.
Article 2
DULY APPOINTED COMPETENT OFFICIALS
1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall
notify each other through the diplomatic channel of the designation of their duly
appointed competent officials who will be responsible for the implementation of this
Agreement and of the scope of their jurisdiction. The Contracting Parties shall also
inform each other of any changes with regard to the duly appointed competent
officials.
2. The duly appointed competent officials shall enter into direct contact with
each other concerning matters relating to this Agreement.
Article 3
COMMUNITIES
1. Both Contracting Parties shall take the necessary action with regard to
wastewater treatment in their communities and shall ensure that, by the year 1996,
the wastewater treatment capacity in communities with more than 5,000 residents
reaches 90 per cent with regard to organic materials and phosphorus and at least
BOD7 15 mg/l and total phosphorus 1.5 mg/l, including spillage and leakage. At the
same time, preparations shall be made for the removal of nitrogen. Estonia, however,
may in specific cases and for specific reasons, prepare a report by the end of 1994
concerning facilities in which these goals will not be reached until the end of 1998.
The competent officials of both Contracting Parties shall negotiate before such a
report is prepared.
2. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to improve the operation of their water
treatment facilities, particularly through pretreatment, post-treatment and chemical
precipitation, by limiting defective pretreatment of wastewater which runs into municipal
water-treatment plants and by improving the equipment and adaptability of
such facilities.
3. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to ensure that wastewater treated in
sewage works is processed with as little spillage as possible. Sewage systems shall
be maintained effectively and regularly.
4. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to reduce the health and environmental
risks resulting from hazardous materials.
5. On the basis of joint research, the competent officials of the Contracting
Parties shall, by the end of 1996, draw up plans extending to 2005 with regard to the
following matters:
(a) Upgrading the treatment capacity of existing water-treatment facilities to a
level equal to that of new ones;
(b) The need to eliminate nitrogen in water-treatment facilities situated in
coastal cities with more than 5,000 residents;
(c) Improvement of treatment capacity with a view to reducing nitrogen emissions
by 50 to 70 per cent in those treatment facilities referred to in subparagraph (b)
whose emissions have been shown, by the aforementioned joint research, to cause
nitrogen pollution problems;
(d) Improved treatment of wastewater which runs into hydrologic systems that
are especially important by reason of the ways in which they are used or their
environmental protection value.
Article 4
INDUSTRY AND ENERGY PRODUCTION
1. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to ensure that when new factories are
established, the best available technology and environmentally sound practices are
used.
2. Both Contracting Parties shall begin to take measures in all industrial facilities
to reduce the amount of materials having a negative effect on the ecosystem,
especially heavy metals, poisonous and non-degradable organic compounds and
nutrient emissions, by improving production processes and wastewater treatment.
The goal shall be to reduce total emissions of such materials by 1996 to approximately
50 per cent of 1987 levels.
3. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to improve the pretreatment of industrial
wastewater which runs into their municipal sewage-treatment plants.
4. In order to ensure that by 2005 the water pollution caused by nutrients and
harmful compounds is essentially the same as in 1995, the competent authorities of
the Contracting Parties shall determine what changes are needed in existing production
and water-treatment processes and shall prepare related plans by 1996.
Article 5
FISH FARMING
By 1996, both Contracting Parties shall develop and begin to use new types of
facility, new treatment methods, new qualities of feed and feeding methods and new
methods of facility use and management, so that water pollution resulting from fish
farming will be reduced to a minimum.
Article 6
AGRICULTURE
1. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to reduce phosphorus pollution by setting
as their goal the reduction, by 1996, of pollution caused by combined emissions
from animal husbandry and crop cultivation to approximately 50 per cent of 1987
levels. In addition, both Contracting Parties shall seek to reduce combined nitrogen
emissions, including ammonia emissions, into the air.
2. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to improve the storage of processed
liquids and manure generated by animal husbandry and promote their use as fertilizers.
The Contracting Parties shall seek also to ensure that, when necessary, separate
treatment equipment and facilities are installed at large animal husbandry units
and that fertilizer storage facilities are large enough to eliminate the need to spread
fertilizer on frozen ground during the winter.
3. The competent officials of the Contracting Parties shall, in cooperation and
by 1996, draw up programmes and recommendations for agricultural water conservation
through the use of sound farming practices. These programmes and recommendations
shall include recommended courses of action for reducing erosion and
nutrient leaching, increasing vegetation cover, preventing condensation, creating
protective strips and ending the excessive use of chemicals.
Article 7
FORESTRY AND PEAT PRODUCTION
1. Both Contracting Parties shall seek to reduce forestry-related water pollution
by setting as their goal the reduction, by 1996, of solid material and nutrient
emissions by approximately 50 per cent of 1987 levels.
2. In addition, both Contracting Parties shall seek to ensure that water conservation
requirements are taken into consideration in connection with drainage, fertilization,
felling, tilling and pesticide use in forestry.
3. The competent officials of the Contracting Parties shall, by 1996, draw up
forestry and peat production programmes with a view to improving water conservation
in each Contracting Party and recommendations concerning efficient forestry
and peat production techniques that are conducive to water conservation.
Article 8
WASTE TREATMENT
Both Contracting Parties shall take action to prevent and reduce harm to the
environment caused by dumping sites. The treatment of waste products, especially
hazardous waste products, shall be improved in order to prevent and reduce emissions
of poisonous and dangerous materials.
Article 9
ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS
1. If any plan or activity in the territory of one Contracting Party might have
a significant direct or indirect negative effect on the marine environment within the
territory of the other Contracting Party, the competent officials of the first Contracting
Party shall notify the competent officials of the other Contracting Party of
that possibility. The notification shall state whether or not officials or nationals of
the latter Contracting Party will be able to participate in the environmental impact
assessment, and describe the modalities of such participation.
2. Both Contracting Parties shall ascertain the environmental effects of any
plan or activity referred to in paragraph 1 of this article in accordance with their
national legislation and binding international agreements. The competent authorities
of the State concerned shall inform the competent officials of the other Contracting
Party of any such effects before the plans are implemented or the activities undertaken.
Article 10
REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS, UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES
AND INCIDENTS
1. The competent officials of each Contracting Party shall inform the competent
officials of the other Contracting Party of any accident or special circumstances
having a negative effect on the marine environment and of measures taken to prevent
such negative environmental effects. Unusual changes in the marine environment
shall, whenever possible, be reported, and both parties shall then work jointly to find
their causes.
2. The obligation of the Contracting Parties to inform each other of the situations
referred to in paragraph 1 of this article shall not, however, apply to accidental
contamination which is covered by the Agreement between Finland and Estonia
concerning cooperation in the prevention of accidental contamination.
Article 11
PROMOTION OF RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND EXCHANGE
OF INFORMATION
1. The Contracting Parties shall engage in oceanographic cooperation with
regard to the Gulf of Finland. A joint research project, lasting no less than three and
no more than five years, shall be started in 1995 for the purpose of studying the
development of conditions in the Gulf of Finland. The research institutes of both
countries shall, whenever possible, participate in the planning and execution of the
joint study.
2. The Contracting Parties shall promote water conservation by developing
related research, education and exchange of information. Research shall also be
conducted on the development of practical means of water conservation.
3. The Contracting Parties shall ensure that in their education systems particular
attention is paid to education in the areas of water conservation administration,
the law of the sea, environmental effects and treatment requirements with
regard to wastewater generated by communities, industry, agriculture and forestry,
and drainage and sewage plant maintenance.
Article 12
MONITORING OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT
1. Every three years the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall
prepare follow-up reports which shall include information regarding water quality
and usability. The follow-up policies of the Helsinki Commission shall be taken into
account in the preparation of both the separate and joint follow-up reports of the
Contracting Parties. The first reports shall be drafted by the end of 1994 and shall
deal with water quality from 1987 to 1991.
2. Both Contracting Parties shall monitor the quality of their own coastal
waters in accordance with their own policies. Specific attention shall be paid to the
most polluted coastal waters. The competent officials of the Contracting Parties
shall assess the adequacy of water conservation activities and on the basis of the
results consider the possible need to strengthen such activities.
3. Every three years the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall
exchange information regarding emissions, water pollution and other activities related
to the implementation of this Agreement. At that time the competent authorities
shall inform each other of any changes in general water conservation standards
and the water conservation measures taken in various areas within the three-year
period. In addition to the information provided by individual facilities, the compe-
tent authorities of Finland and Estonia shall, by separate means, provide information
regarding overall pollution, including pollution resulting from agricultural and
forestry emissions in the catchment areas of their main hydrologic system.
Article 13
FINAL PROVISIONS
1. This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after the date on which the
Contracting Parties have notified each other that they have completed the necessary
constitutional procedures for entry into force of this Agreement.
2. This Agreement shall remain in force indefinitely. Either Contracting Party
may denounce the Agreement by sending written notification to the other Contracting
Party. The denunciation shall enter into force 12 months after receipt of the
notification.
DONE at Tallinn, on 2 July 1993, in duplicate, in the Finnish and Estonian languages,
both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of the Republic of Finland:
SIRPA PIETIKAINEN
For the Government of the Republic of Estonia:
Andres Tarand
