AGREEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF ESTONIAN REPUBLIC AND GOVERNMENT OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION ON COLLABORATION IN FIELD OF CONSERVATION AND USE OF FISH RESOURCES IN PEIPSI (CHUDSKOE), LAMMI (TJOPLOE) AND PIHKVA (PSKOVSKOE) LAKES 
Unofficial translation 
4 May 1994. 
Government of Estonian Republic and Government of the Russian Federation named further  "Parties ":
ACCEPTING their common responsibilities for conservation of living resources of the Peipsi, Pihkva, and Lammi Lakes;
PROCEEDING FROM mutual interests in rational use of fish resources of the Lakes;
WILLING to join efforts in conservation, rational use and management of fish resources, as well as to provide favourable legislative and economic conditions for fishing activity of every Party;
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT traditional fishing business of fishermen of Estonia and Russia in the mentioned Lakes;
FORESEEING future possibilities for supplements to the Agreement between the Parties; 
Have Agreed as follows
Article 1
The Goal of the Agreement is to establish a regime of a common use of fish resources of the Peipsi, Lammi and Pihkva Lakes.
Article 2
1. For purposes of the Agreement the Parties establish the Intergovernmental Commission on Fisheries in the Peipsi, Lammi and Pihkva Lakes; named further  "the Commission. "
2. Every Party appoints its Representative and Vice-Representative to the Commission. Parties invite required number of experts and advisors to work for the Commission. 
3. The Commission holds its meetings at least twice in a year by turns on territories of the Parties.
4. The Chairperson of a session represents the Party that hosts the meeting. The Party that hosts the Session on its territory is responsible for all the direct expenses on organisation of and carrying out the Session. 
5. The Parties are responsible for the expenses associated with participation of its representatives, experts and advisors in work of the Commission.
6. The Commission can set up working groups and other auxiliary bodies to fulfill its functions. It can also define their staff and competence.
7. To fulfill its functions, the Commission uses an official information given by the Parties.
8. At the first session the Commission defines rules of the procedure that it considers necessary for its activity.
9. The working languages of the Commission are Estonian and Russian.
Article 3
The Commission is a consultative body. Its functions include development of recommendations regarding:
(1) concordance of activities of the Parties in the questions of management of fish stocks;
(2) co-ordination of research of the state of fish resources;
(3) possibilities and an order of carrying out fishing by one Party in waters of the other Party, exchange of quotas on the basis of reciprocity and in accordance with legislations of both Parties;
(4) Setting up a common fishing limit (CFL) according to fish species and distribution of the limit between the Parties;
(5) Regulation of tools and methods of fishing; minimal allowable sizes of fishes to be fished out; a percentage of offsprings of these fishes;
(6) Setting up prohibited periods and areas for the business;
(7) Improvement of a state and increase of an amount of living resources, including an artificial reproduction of fish;
(8) resolution of disputes and incidents connected with fishing activities;
(9) admittance to fishing organizations of third countries;
(10) Control of the decisions that have power for the Parties;
(11) Other measures directed to conservation and rational use of living resources of Peipsi, Lammi and Pihkva lakes.
Article 4
The Parties adopt all necessary measures regarding their residents and organizations to provide fulfillment of the standings of the Agreement and recommendations of the Commission.
Article 5
Parties adopt recommendations of the Commission in accordance between Representatives of the Parties. Recommendations enter into force not later than thirty days since the day of its adoption if no one of the Parties expresses during this period its objectives. In the case of objectives, a Party can cancel its objectives any time; then recommendations of the Commission enter into force starting from the moment of their cancellation but not earlier than in the established thirty-days period.
Article 6
In the case a Party adopts new laws, rules and conditions that are significant for carrying out fishing in Peipsi, Lammi, and Pihkva lakes, it notifies the other Party about it.
Article 7
Nothing in the Agreement should be considered as inflicting harm on positions or points of view of the Parties regarding their rights and responsibilities in other international agreements where they take part as Parties.
Article 8
1. The Agreement enter into force since the day of its signing and will be in force during five years.
2. Performance of the Agreement will be extended automatically to the next 5 years if no one of the Parties declares about its desire to cancel its performance not later than three months before the end of a respective period.
Written in two copies in Estonian and Russian languages. Both copies -- in Estonian and Russian languages -- have equal power.

