AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF FINLAND AND THE GOVERNMENT OF UKRAINE ON
EARLY NOTIFICATION OF NUCLEAR ACCIDENTS AND ON
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND EXPERIENCE IN THE
FIELD OF NUCLEAR SAFETY AND RADIATION PROTECTION
The Government of the Republic of Finland
and the Government of Ukraine, hereinafter
referred to as "Contracting Parties".
aware of the importance of comprehensive
and early exchange of information and experience
on nuclear safety and radiation protection
with a view to upgrade the security
of the population of both Contracting Parties.
applying the Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident of 26 September
1986, hereinafter referred to as "the
  Convention").
have agreed as follows:
Scope of application
Article I
This Agreement regulates the early notification
of nuclear accidents as well as exchange
of information and experience on
nuclear safety and radiation protection. It
applies to the facilities and activities subject
to Article I of the Convention.
Ewiy Notificaion
Article 2
1. The Contracting Parties shall immediately
notify each other of the accidents referred
to in Article I of the Convention.
2. The notification is effected directly pursuant
to Article 5 of the Convention.
3. The Contracting Parties shall inform
each other through exchange of notes of the
competent authorities responsible for the
transmission of the early information.
Article 3
The Contracting Parties shall inform each
other in the same way of the events, other
than those specified in Article I of the Convention,
which may entail radioactive contamination
of the environment, as well as of
the measured abnormally high radiation
levels if the above-mentioned events or measurement
results provide immediate grounds
to prepare actions aimed at ensuring safety
of the population.
Exchange of information and experience
Article 4
1. The Contracting Parties shall inform
each other of the overall development of the
peaceful use of atomic energy as well as of
their legal regulations on the safety of nuclear
facilities and on radiation protection.
2. The Contracting Parties shall inform
each other of the relevant experience gained
through the construction and operation of
nuclear facilities as well as of the measures
regarding nuclear safety and radiation protection
and of the measures to limit releases
of radioactive materials provided that this is
useful in the evaluation of the eventual consequences
of the accidents specified in Article
I of the Convention.
3. The exchange of information under
paragraph I and 2 of this Article shall take
place periodically. In case of special events
that are rated to 3 and above of the International
Nuclear Events Scale (INES) the other
Party shall be informed immediately. Information
on other events shall be submitted on
request by the other Party.
Article 5
1. The information provided and documentation
exchanged under Article 4 of this
Agreement may be used without restriction.
except when such information is provided in
confidence by the notifying Party. The retransmission
of the confidential information
or documents to a third party shall take
place only with common consent.
2. The commitments regarding the transmission
of information under Article 4 are
valid with due regard to the respective restrictions
of the national legislation of each
Contracting Party.
Article 6
1. The Contracting Parties shall inform
each other through exchange of notes of the
competent authorities responsible for the
exchange of information and experience (coordinators).
2. The exchange of documents and experience
under Article 4 is effected through the
co-ordinators. unless, in particular cases.
other channels for the transmission of information
have become pertinent. The modalities
for such procedures shall be agreed
upon between the co-ordinators.
3. When necessary, the co-ordinators may
propose meetings of the competent authorities
of the Contracting Parties or joint expert
meetings.
Costs
Article 7
Expenses relating to the mutual exchange
of information in accordance with this
Agreement are not subject to any reimbursement.
If the delivery of documents implicates
considerable costs, the corresponding
expenses shall be borne, as previously
agreed upon in each case, by the requesting
Party.
Rnal provisions
Article 8
1. The present Agreement shall enter into
force 30 days after the date on which the
Contracting Parties have notified each other
in writing that the necessary internal procedures
for the entry into force of this Agreement
have been completed.
2. This Agreement shall remain in force
for an unlimited period of time. Each Contracting
Party may denounce this Agreement
by notifying the other Contracting Party in
writing. The denunciation shall become
effective six months after the notification
thereof was received by the other Contracting Party.
3. This Agreement shall cease to be in force
on the day on which the Convention is terminated with
regard to the territory of one of the Contracting Parties.
Done at Helsinki on 8 February 1996 in
two originals, both in the Finnish, Ukrainian
and English languages, all three texts being
equally authentic. In case of discrepancies
between the texts, the English version shall
prevail.
For the Government
of Finland:
TARJA HALONEN
For the Government
of Ukraine:
JuRi KOSTENKO
