CONVENTION BETWEEN
FINLAND AND RUSSIA
REGARDING FISHING AND
SEALING IN THE TERRITORIAL
WATERS OF BOTH
COUNTRIES, IN THE ARCTIC
OCEAN, SIGNED AT HELSINGFORS,
OCTOBER 21, 1922.

The GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
FINLAND and the GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN
FEDERAL SOCIALIST SOVIET REPUBLIC have
decided, in pursuance of Article 7 of the Treaty
of Peace, signed at Dorpat on October 14,
1920, to conclude an agreement regarding
the conditions and regulations entitling nationals
of the Contracting States to carry on fishing
and sealing and to sail fishing-vessels in the
territorial waters of the other Contracting
State in the Arctic Ocean; they have delegated
the task of drawing up and signing the above
Convention to the Mixed Finnish-Russian
Central Committee, and have for that purpose
appointed as their plenipotentiary representatives:
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE FINNISH REPUBLIC:
A. AHONEN,
P. J. HYNNINEN,
A. E. ALFTHAN,
V. HUPLI,
Y. W. PUHAKKA; and
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN
FEDERAL SOCIALIST SOVIET REPUBLIC:
S. M. FRANKFURT,
A. M. SMIRNOFF,
A. M. IGNATJEFF,
N. P. KOLTSHANOVSKIJ;
who, after having exchanged their full powers,
which were found in good and due form, have
agreed as follows:

Article 1.
Finland shall grant to Russian nationals,
and to Russian organisations and associations
which employ Russian nationals for purposes
of trade, the right to carry on fishing and
sealing in common with its own nationals
in Finnish territorial waters, except in the
Customs area of the Arctic Ocean ceded by
Russia to Finland under the Treaty of Peace
of October 14, 1920.
Russia, for her part, shall grant to Finnish
nationals, and to Finnish organisations and
associations which employ Finnish nationals
for purposes of trade, the right to carry on
fishing and sealing in Russian territorial waters,
except in the coastal waters remaining in
Russian possession on the northern and eastern
side of Fiskarhalvbn as far as Cape Scharapov.

Article 2.
In the waters referred to in the previous
article, nationals, organisations and associations
of both Contracting States shall be entitled
to carry on fishing and sealing at all seasons
of the year and may employ all methods and
appliances which 'their own nationals are
allowed to use; they may further carry on
these operations either from shore or from
shipboard, irrespective of the size, rig or equipment
of the vessel.

Article 3.
The fishing-vessels of each country shall
be entitled to navigate freely in all the territorial
waters referred to in Article i, provided that
they conform to the existing or to any future
general regulations regarding navigation and
the safeguarding of sea-going traffic in the
territorial waters in question.
Fishing-vessels shall be entitled to seek
shelter, from stress of weather or in any other
emergency, in any of the harbours, fjords
or bays of either country.

Article 4.
Nationals, organisations and associations of
one Contracting State, when carrying on
fishing or sealing in the waters referred to
in Article I belonging to the other State,
shall, in the circumstances referred to above,
be entitled on the same terms as nationals
of the latter country to land on the coasts
of such waters and to carry out necessary
repairs to their vessels or nets, beach their
vessels or nets, unload their catch, salt, dry
or prepare it and keep it there until their
departure.

For this purpose, they may erect on the
shore, at a suitable distance from the water's
edge, structures such as sheds, drying-sheds,
hutments, etc., and they may, if necessary,
remove or transport such structures to another
site in the same Customs area. For health purposes
these structures shall be subject to inspection
by the local authorities and shall accordingly
be in conformity with the regulations in force
regarding similar structures belonging to nationals
of the country.

Article 5.
Nationals, organisations and associations of
the one Contracting State, which carry on
fishing or sealing in the waters referred to
in Article 1 belonging to the other Contracting
State, shall be subject to the same taxes and
other dues as nationals of the latter country.
They shall be entitled to take away their
catch, including bait and prepared products,
without payment of Customs or other duties.

Article 6.
Fishing-vessels, when proceeding to the
waters reterred to in Article 1, shall be provided
with numbers and letters, which must be clear
and plainly visible, denoting their nationality.
They shall also be provided with papers showing
their nationality, owner, port of registry
and distinctive marks.

Article 7.
The Contracting States undertake to inform
each other of all orders and regulations which
may be issued in respect of the waters or
coasts thereof referred to in Article 1, and
which apply to fishing and the supervision
of fishing, the navigation and safety of fishing
or other vessels, coastal defence and Customs
supervision.
Any amendments or additions to such
orders or regulations shall be notified as soon
as possible to the other Contracting State.

Article 8.
Each Contracting State shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the carrying out of the
present Convention and to see that its provisions
are strictly observed in its own territory
and territorial waters.
Any person, working in the territory or
territorial waters of the other Contracting
State or carrying on fishing or sealing therein,
under the terms of the present Convention,
who commits a breach of the laws or regulations
of that State, shall be sentenced by the courts
of the State in question and shall be punished
in accordance with its laws.

Article 9.
In all matters not specified in the present
Convention, the nationals of either Contracting
State, when engaged in fishing or sealing
in the territory or territorial waters of the
other State, shall be subject to the same laws
and regulations as those in force for other
foreigners.

Article 10.
The present Convention shall be ratified
and the instruments of ratification shall be
exchanged as soon as possible in Moscow.

Article 11.
The present Convention shall remain in
force for ten years from the date of the exchange
of the instruments of ratification, and shall
be renewed for a further period of ten years,
unless denounced by either of the Parties not
less than a year before the expiration of a
ten-yearly period.

Article 12.
The present Convention is done in duplicate,
in the Finnish, Swedish and Russian languages,
and all texts are equally authentic.
In witness whereof, the plenipotentiary
representatives of each of the Contracting
States have signed the present Convention
and thereto affixed their seals.
HELSINGFORS, October 21, 1922.
