CONVENTION BETWEEN FINLAND AND NORWAY
REGARDING NEW REGULATIONS FOR FISHING IN THE TANA
RIVER (TANAELVA). SIGNED AT OSLO, APRIL 2IST, 1938.

His MAJESTY THE KING OF NORWAY and THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND
have decided to conclude a Convention regarding new fishery regulations for the fishing area of the
Tana river, and for this purpose have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries
His MAJESTY THE KING OF NORWAY:
M. Halvdan KOHT, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND :
M. Waino WUOLIJOKI, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to His Majesty
the King of Norway;
Who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed upon the
following Articles:

Article 1.
In Norway and Finland fishery regulations shall be issued - as far as possible simultaneously
- for the fishing area of the Tana river, in Norway in accordance with the annexed Norwegian
text, and in Finland in accordance with the annexed Finnish text.
The fishery regulations shall come into force in both countries on May 1st, 1938.

Article 2.
The fishery regulations shall remain in force until further notice. Should one of the two countries
desire to terminate the regulations in force, or to amend them, notice to this effect shall be given
to the other country at least one year before such termination or amendment takes effect.

Article 3.
The competent Norwegian and Finnish district bailiffs (lensmenn) are authorised to enter
into direct communication with each other if either of them has obtained information from a
reliable source that fishing is taking or has taken place in the parts of the rivers forming the frontier
on the territory of the other country in violation of the fishery regulations and under such conditions
that the inspection authorities of the country concerned cannot be assumed to be aware of the
fact.

Similarly, the competent district bailiffs shall communicate with each other if they are informed
by their own authorities that the fishery regulations have been waived in accordance with the
provisions in  18 of the Norwegian Regulations or  17 of the Finnish Regulations at a place at
which the rivers form the frontier.

Article 4.
In the part of the fishing area which forms the frontier persons not entitled to engage in fishing
may obtain the right to fish with a rod or hand line. Such right may be acquired in either country
against payment of the following amounts:
For persons living permanently within the river valleys of the fishing area in the communes
of Polmak, Karasjok and Utsjok, 2 kr. in Norway and 23 marks in Finland, per calendar year.

For all other persons:
In Norway, 2 kr. per day, or 50 kr. per calendar year; and in Finland, 23 marks per day, or
575 marks per calendar year.
Fishing cards issued in each of the two countries in accordance with these provisions shall
be made out in the name of the person concerned, and shall state the exact time for which they
are valid. They shall also contain a provision to the effect that they must be shown on demand,
even to the inspection authorities in the other country.
The chief of police (politimester) at Vadso and the district bailiff in the district of Petsamo
shall be authorised to enter into direct communication with each other regarding the detailed rules
laid down in their respective countries for the issue of the fishing cards in question.

Article 5.
The present Convention may be terminated by either country at one year's notice.

Done at Oslo, in duplicate, this 21st day of April, 1938.
(L. S.) (Signed) Halvdan KOHT.
(L. S.) (Signed) W. WUOLIJOKI.

FISHERY REGULATIONS FOR THE FISHING AREA OF THE TANA RIVER.

CHAPTER I.
THE EXTENT OF THE FISHING AREA.

 I.
Text of Norwegian Regulations.
The fishing area of the Tana river comprises
the Norwegian parts of the Skiettsjamjokka,
Anarjokka, and the Tana river as far as its
mouth, together with the tributaries flowing
into these rivers as far up as salmon are
known to go.

 I.
Text of Finnish Regulations.
The fishing area of the Tana river comprises
the Norwegian parts of the Skiettsjamjokka,
Anarjokka, and the Tana river, together with
the tributaries flowing into these rivers as
far up as salmon are known to go.

CHAPTER II.
THE CATCHING OF SALMON AND SEA TROUT.
2.
Subject to the restrictions resulting from the following regulations, it is permissible to use the
following tackle for catching salmon and sea trout: barriers with hook nets, and/or fish traps, seine
nets, drift nets, bar nets, or rods and hand lines.


3.
Knotted tackle, including fish traps of any construction and connecting nets, may not have
a smaller mesh than 58 mam. between the knots, counting from the middle of each knot when the
tackle is wet.
Breakwaters in the barriers shall consist for the most part of wood.

4.
Text of Norwegian Regulations.
No person entitled to fish may use more than
two barriers.
Hook nets, fish traps and connecting nets
shall be taken on land before September Ist,
and bundles of branches, posts and rams before
September 15th. Should it be impossible to
take up the tackle on account of frost or other
natural phenomena, the posts remaining shall
be marked by bundles of branches of such a
height as to be always above the level of the
water. Similarly, from August 1st inclusive,
all posts below the level of the water, and the
end posts of barriers, shall be marked by
bundles of branches in the same manner.

 4.
Text of Finnish Regulations.
No person entitled to fish may use more than
two barriers.
Hook nets, fish traps and connecting nets
shall be taken on land before September Ist,
and bundles of branches, posts and rams before
September 15th. Should it be impossible to
take up the tackle on account of accumulation
of sand or other natural phenomena, the posts
remaining shall be marked by bundles of
branches of such a height as to be always above
the level of the water. Similarly, from August
1st inclusive, all posts below the level of the
water, and the end posts of barriers, shall be
marked by bundles of branches in the same
manner.

5.
Seine nets may be used only at the places hitherto used for the purpose, and the distance
between the place at which the seine net is cast out and the place at which it is taken in may not
exceed 250 metres, measured on the bank of the river. If a casting place is destroyed through a
change in the river-bed, a new casting place may be used instead. Information to this effect shall
be sent immediately to the competent district official.
Seine nets may not exceed 100 metres in length, and not more than four boats may be used for
casting out a seine net.

 6.
Drift nets may not exceed 45 metres in length, and when in use the distance between two drift
nets shall at no point be less than 200 metres.
When in use, no part of the drift net may come nearer any part of the barrier than ioo metres.
Drifting may not take place for a greater distance than 500 metres at one time, and only one boat
may be used.
From June 15th inclusive to April 3oth inclusive drift nets may not be used.

 7.
Seine nets or drift nets may not be drawn against artificial barriers (goldem).
 8.
Bar nets may not exceed 30 metres in length, and when fishing is being carried on with this
tackle, artificial breakwaters may not be used.

 9.
Text of Norwegian Regulations.
In the part of the fishing area lying north of
the present southern boundary of zone 7 in the
Tana district (near Rodbergnes), which boundary
must be clearly marked on both sides of the
river, it is forbidden from July 25th inclusive to
April 3oth inclusive to fish or kill salmon or
sea trout or to use, to lay out or to allow
permanent tackle to remain in position for
catching such fish. Notwithstanding this provision,
sea trout (Komse) may be caught with
seine nets in August below Guldholmen.
In the part of the fishing area lying south of
the above-mentioned boundary, it is forbidden
from September Ist inclusive to April 30th
inclusive to fish or kill salmon or sea trout
or to use, or to lay out or to allow permanent
tackle to remain in position for catching such
fish. At other times during the year, no tackle
may be used, laid out or allowed to remain in
position in this part of the fishing area for
fishing salmon or sea trout, except that such
fish may be caught there from 6 p.m. on
Saturday until midnight on Sunday. All knotted
tackle - including connecting nets and fish
traps in barriers - shall during this period be
taken on land or suspended above the water.

The provision regarding the weekly closed
period shall not apply to fishing with rod or
hand line.

 9.
Text of Finnish Regulations.
It is forbidden from September Ist inclusive
to April 3oth inclusive to fish or kill salmon or
sea trout or to use, to lay out or to allow
permanent tackle to remain in position for
catching such fish.
At other times during the year, no tackle may
be used, laid out or allowed to remain in position
for fishing salmon or sea trout, so that it may
be possible to catch such fish from 6 p.m. on
Saturday until midnight on Sunday.
All knotted tackle - including connecting
nets and fish traps in barriers - shall during
this period be taken on land or suspended
above the water.
The provision regarding the weekly closed
period shall not apply to fishing with rod or
hand line.

CHAPTER III.
THE CATCHING OF OTHER FISH.
 10.
For the purpose of catching fresh-water trout, red char, grayling, gwyniad, vendace, pike,
perch and burbot, bar nets alone may be used in the river, while during the period from the breaking
up of the ice until August 31st inclusive, rods and hand lines may alone be used.
For the lakes it is permissible to catch such fish with bar nets, seine nets, fish traps, lines and
other tackle with hooks.
In fishing for grayling and gwyniad with bar nets it shall be permissible from August 1st inclusive
until the ice forms to use a breakwater, made of posts and bundles of branches, not exceeding
4 metres in length. The breakwater shall be taken up and put on land as soon as the fishing is
terminated. As regards the posts and rams the provision of  4 shall apply.

 12.
The mesh of tackle used for catching the kinds of fish mentioned in  10 shall not be less than
30 mm. or more than 45 mm. between the knots, counting from the middle of each knot when the
tackle is wet. It shall, however, be permitted to catch vendace in lakes with bar nets of a mesh
down to 20 nun.
Fish traps, including connecting nets, may not exceed 1.5 metres in height at any place.
CHAPTER IV.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
 12.
The use of other tackle than that mentioned in Chapters II and III, including fish-gigs and
the use of lime, explosives, poisonous substances or electric current, as a means of catching fish, is
forbidden. It is, however, permissible to use gaffs, fish-axes or spoon nets as auxiliary tackle
for lawful fishing.
 13.
Objects calculated to frighten fish may not be placed in or over the water or on the bed of the
river.
 14.
It is at all times forbidden to catch or kill salmon or sea trout less than 25 cm. in length or
fresh-water trout, red char, gwyniad or grayling less than 20 cm. in length, measured from the tip
of the snout to the end of the central part of the tail fin.
Should such fish have been caught, they must be immediately returned to the water. The same
applies to salmon caught in the annual close season and in the weekly close period if it has not
been caught with rod or hand line.

 15.
No part of barriers or bar nets may be fixed over the middle of the river-bed either in the main
stream or in subsidiary streams which generally contain water all the summer. If such tackle is
laid out from opposite banks either immediately opposite each other or within a distance of 12o
metres, along the river, no part of the tackle may be fixed nearer the middle of the bed than onetenth
of the width of the river or current at the midsummer water-level.

 16.
Text of Norwegian Regulations.
Within an area at the outlet of the Tana
river from Smalfjordnes to Stangenes, bag nets
on similar tackle may not be laid out to catch
salmon. The bar nets (hook nets) may be
retained to the same extent and in the same
numbers at the same places as hitherto.

Text of Norwegian Regulations.
 17.
Fishery inspectors shall be considered on the
same footing as police officials in respect of
any insulting language or action used against
them.
 18.
The provisions laid down in the present
fishery regulations shall not prevent the inspector
of fresh-water fishery, when applying
such provisions as he considers necessary in
order to avoid abuses, from permitting fishing
for scientific purposes or in order to catch fish
for breeding in incubators.
 19.
Breaches of the above provisions shall be
punishable by a fine. Fishing tackle which is
put to an unlawful use and fish which is caught
unlawfully, or the value of such tackle or such
fish, may be confiscated.

Text of Finnish Regulations.
 16.
The person duly instructed to supervise the
observance of the present regulations shall
enjoy the same rights and the same legal
protection as inspectors and police officials;
certificates issued by him shall have the same
value as evidence as that conferred on certificates
issued by inspectors in general, in virtue
of Chapter 17, Article 11, of the Code of Legal
Procedure.
 17.
The provisions laid down in the present
fishery regulations shall not apply to fishing
for scientific purposes or in order to catch fish
for breeding, which shall be authorised by the
Department of Agriculture under conditions
which shall prevent abuse.
 18.
Breaches of the provisions of the present
fishery regulations shall be punishable in
accordance with the general law.

 20. -  19.
Knotted tackle which is proved to have been procured before the issue of the present fishery
regulations but the mesh of which does not comply with the provisions may, so far as the size of
the mesh is concerned, be used for five years from the date when the provisions come into force.
During the same period, it shall also be permissible in the period from August 1st inclusive to September
3oth inclusive to use in the river nets which can be proved to have been procured before the
issue of the regulations for the purpose of catching grayling or gwyniad at places to which such
fish were driven before the end of 1937.
