AGREEMENT

in the form of an exchange of letters between the European Economic Community, on the one hand, and the Government of Denmark and the Home Government of the Faroe Islands, on the other hand, concerning salmon fishing in Faroese waters

LETTER I

Sir,

The Faroese authorities have noted that the European Economic Community has expressed concern regarding the level of catches of salmon in Faroese waters.

The Faroese authorities are of the opinion that the question of fixing a quota for the fishing of salmon in Faroese waters, which has been subject to bilateral agreements by exchange of letters between our Parties since 1982, ought to find a solution from the season 1985/86 onwards within the framework of the North Atlantic Salmon Convention (NASCO).

The Faroese authorities confirm that they will cooperate with the European Community and other interested Parties in NASCO with a view to agreeing at the next annual meeting of NASCO, as a contribution to attaining the objectives of the Convention, a regulatory measure fixing a quota for their catches in their area of fisheries jurisdiction for the season starting on 1 October 1985 and ending on 31 May 1986.

Furthermore, I have the honour to confirm that if our joint endeavours to agree such limitations within NASCO for the 1985/86 season should not succeed, bilateral consultations between the Faroe Islands and the Community will be held within a two-week period immediately following the 1985 annual meeting of NASCO.

The Faroese authorities have noted that, if these consultations do not result in a mutually satisfactory solution, the Community reserves the right to suspend the fishing rights granted to Faroese vessels in the waters of the Community for 1985. In that situation the Faroese authorities will take similar action.

I should be grateful if you would confirm that the European Economic Community is in agreement with the foregoing.

Please accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest consideration.

For the Home Government of the Faroe Islands

LETTER II

Sir,

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of today's date, which reads as follows:

'The Faroese authorities have noted that the European Economic Community has expressed concern regarding the level of catches of salmon in Faroese waters.

The Faroese authorities are of the opinion that the question of fixing a quota for the fishing of salmon in Faroese waters, which has been subject to bilateral agreements by exchange of letters between our Parties since 1982, ought to find a solution from the season 1985/86 onwards within the framework of the North Atlantic Salmon Convention (NASCO).

The Faroese authorities confirm that they will cooperate with the European Community and othe rinterested Parties in NASCO with a view to agreeing at the next annual meeting of NASCO, as a contribution to attaining the objectives of the Convention, a regulatory measure fixing a quota for their catches in their area of fisheries jurisdiction for the season starting on 1 October 1985 and ending on 31 May 1986.

Furthermore, I have the honour to confirm that if our joint endeavours to agree such limitations within NASCO for the 1985/86 season should not succeed, bilateral consultations between the Faroe Islands and the Community will be held within a two-week period immediately following the 1985 annual meeting of NASCO.

The Faroese authorities have noted that, if these consultations do not result in a mutually satisfactory solution, the Community reserves the right to suspend the fishing rights granted to Faroese vessels in the waters of the Community for 1985. In that situation the Faroes authorities will take similar action.

I should be grateful if you would confirm that the European Economic Community is in agreement with the foregoing.'

I have the honour to inform you that the Community has taken note of the contents of your letter.

Please accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest consideration.

On behalf of the Council of the European Communities

