Treaty between the Government of the Republic of Honduras and the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning the
delimitation of the maritime areas between the Cayman Islands and the Republic of
Honduras
4 December 2001
The Government of the Republic of Honduras and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
in respect of the Cayman Islands,
Wishing to delimit the maritime areas between the Cayman Islands and the Republic of Honduras,
Wishing also in this context to take account of the traditional interests of the Cayman Islands in certain fisheries in areas
appertaining under this Treaty to the Republic of Honduras, and of relevant circumstances of an historical character regarding
Honduran oil concessions in the Caribbean Sea,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
(1) The maritime boundary between the Cayman Islands and the Republic of Honduras shall be formed by geodesic lines
joining, in the order in which they are given, the following points identified by their geographical coordinates:
Point / Latitude N / Longitude W
A  / 19&#186;27'57"  / 83&#186;35'50"
B  / 17&#186;35'03"  / 82&#186;21'00"
  C  / 17&#186;35'03" /  80&#186;49'59"
(2) The geographical coordinates given in this article are expressed in the geodetic reference system WGS 84 (World
Geodetic System 1984).
(3) The boundary line has been drawn by way of illustration on the chart at Annex A to this Treaty, which forms an
integral part thereof, and is to be understood as an all-purpose maritme delimitation, that is to say, covering the water column,
seabed and subsoil.
Article 2
It has not been possible, for the time being, to complete the maritime delimitation beyond point C. It is, however,
agreed between the Parties that the delimitation from point C shall, at the appropriate time, be continued in an easterly direction
until it meets the tripoint between the limits of the maritime areas under the respective jurisdiction of the Parties and another
State's jurisdiction.
Article 3
Provisions concerning fishing by vessels of the Cayman Islands in the area of Misteriosa and Rosario Banks are set out
in Annex B to this Treaty, which forms an integral part thereof.
Article 4
(1) Each Party shall notify the other of the completion of the constitutional procedures required for the entry into force of
this Treaty. The Treaty shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the last notification.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing, this Treaty shall be provisionally applied from the date on which the Parties inform
each other that they have commenced the fulfilment of their internal legal requirements.
In witness whereof, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Treaty.
Done in duplicate at Tegucigalpa on 4 December 2001 in the Spanish and English languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government For the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
of the Republic of Honduras and Northern Ireland
Roberto Florez Bermudez David Allan Osborne
For Foreign Affairs Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary
Annex B
to the Treaty between the Government of the Republic of Honduras and the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
concerning the delimitation of the maritime areas between the Cayman Islands and
the Republic of Honduras
Provisions concerning fishing by vessels of the Cayman Islands in the area of Misteriosa and Rosario Banks
1. Commercial fishing for red snapper (family Lutjanidae) and grouper (family Serranidae) by vessels of the Cayman
Islands may continue in the area of Misteriosa and Rosario Banks located in the exclusive economic zone of the Republic of
Honduras and defined in paragraph 2 below, in accordance with existing patterns and levels. The Government of the Republic of
Honduras extends access, free of charge, to the said area for up to ten vessels of the Cayman Islands, duly notified in advance by
the competent authorities of the Cayman Islands, for the purpose of conducting such fishing.
2. The area of Misteriosa and Rosario Banks referred to in this annex is defined by geographical coordinates, expressed in
the geodetic reference system WGS 84, joined in sequence by geodesic lines as follows:
Point  / Latitude N  / Longitude W
1 / 18&#186;57'00"  / 84&#186;02'00"
2 /  18&#186;57'00"  / 83&#186;38'00"
3 /  18&#186;25'00"  / 83&#186;56'00"
4  / 18&#186;25'00"  / 84&#186;12'00"
The area has been drawn by way of illustration on the chart at Annex A to this Treaty, which forms an integral part thereof.
3. The following conditions shall apply:
(a) the length of each fishing vessel shall not exceed 100 feet;
(b) taken together, the fishing vessels are authorized to fish a maximum of twenty-five metric tonnes per annum;
(c) the taking of crustaceans (lobster, shrimp etc) and molluscs (conch, etc) is not permitted;
(d) the catch is authorized for local consumption in the Cayman Islands, not for export.
4. The Government of the Republic of Honduras shall have exclusive authority to enforce the provisions of this annex and
applicable national fishery regulations with respect to fishing by vessels of the Cayman Islands within the said area. Such
national regulations as may be applied shall not disturb existing patterns and levels of fishing, except to the extent that such
measures are essential for conservation purposes and sustainable exploitation of the species and are applied on a
non-discriminatory basis. Nevertheless, the competent authorities of the Cayman Islands shall take appropriate measures to
maintain a list of vessels which they have authorized to conduct fishing in accordance with this annex and to ensure that such
vessels comply with the provisions of this annex. The competent authorities of the Cayman Islands shall provide the competent
authorities of Honduras with annual statistical information regarding fishing activities carried out in accordance with this annex.
5. Vessels fishing in accordance with this annex shall cooperate with scientific investigations in the said area, at the
request of the competent authorities of Honduras.
6. Without prejudice to routine meetings between the competent fishing authorities, consultations shall be held at the
request of either Party when:
(a) there is reason to believe that vessels of the Cayman Islands are fishing in excess of or in a manner inconsistent with
existing patterns or levels of fishing;
(b) the United Kingdom, on behalf of the Cayman Islands, seeks a change in existing patterns or levels of fishing;
(c) the Republic of Honduras intends to introduce conservation measures or apply fishery regulations which may affect
existing patterns or levels of fishing;
(d) there is a need to discuss implementation of any provision of this annex.
7. If such consultations result in agreement to amend the terms of this annex, such amendment shall enter into force by a
subsequent exchange of diplomatic notes.
