 Royal Crest Miscellaneous Series No.9 (2020)     Economic Partnership Agreement  between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, of the one part, and the Republic of Kenya, a Member of the East African Community, of the other part      London, 8 December 2020      [The Agreement is not in force]         Presented to Parliament  by the Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Affairs  by Command of Her Majesty December 2020       CP 339  OGL_Logo© Crown copyright 2020  This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0  except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit   Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.  This publication is available at www.gov.uk/official-documents  Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at Treaty Section, Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, King Charles Street, London, SW1A 2AH  ISBN 978-1-5286-2337-7 CCS1220743916 12/20  Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum  Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s  Stationery Office ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, OF THE ONE PART, AND THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA, A MEMBER OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY, OF THE OTHER PART PARTIES TO THE AGREEMENT THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND (hereinafter referred to as the “United Kingdom” or the “UK”), of the one part, and THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA (hereinafter referred to as the “EAC Partner State(s)”), of the other part RECALLING their commitments within the framework of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO), done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994, hereinafter referred to as the “WTO Agreement”; HAVING REGARD TO the Agreement establishing the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States, signed in Georgetown on 6 June 1975 and amended in 2003 (the Georgetown Agreement) and to the revised Georgetown Agreement, endorsed by ACP Heads of State and Government in Nairobi, in December 2019, which established the Organisation of African Caribbean and Pacific States; HAVING REGARD TO The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community (EAC) signed in Arusha on 30 November 1999, and its Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union;  REITERATING their desire for a wider unity of Africa and the achievement of the objectives of The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community; CONSIDERING that the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK have agreed that their trade and economic cooperation shall aim at fostering the smooth and gradual integration of the ACP states into the world economy with due regard to their political choices, levels of development and development priorities, thereby promoting their sustainable development and contributing to poverty eradication in the EAC Partner State(s); REAFFIRMING also that the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) shall be consistent with the objectives and principles of the Joint Statement of the Parties on the Objectives and Essential and Fundamental Elements of this Agreement as set out at Annex III;  REAFFIRMING that the EPA shall serve as an instrument of development and shall promote sustained growth, increase the production and supply-side capacity of the EAC Partner State(s), foster structural transformation of the EAC Partner State(s)’ economies and their diversification and competitiveness and lead to the development of trade, the attraction of investment, technology and the creation of employment in the EAC Partner State(s); REITERATING the need to ensure that particular emphasis shall be placed on regional integration and the provision of special and differential treatment to all EAC Partner States, while maintaining special treatment for least developed EAC Partner States; RECOGNISING that substantial investment is required to uplift the standards of living of the EAC Partner State(s); RECOGNISING that UK development cooperation in support of this Agreement shall continue to be guided by the internationally agreed aid effectiveness agenda and assessment of a government’s commitment to the UK Partnership Principles, reducing poverty and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals; that UK development cooperation takes the form of financial and non-financial support; and that financial resources may be provided through a range of forms and means, including assistance provided through multilateral and regional organisations. HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: PART I GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 1 Scope of the Agreement The Parties hereby establish an EPA, that covers: (a)General Provisions;(b)Trade in Goods;(c)Fisheries;(d)Agriculture;(e)Economic and Development Cooperation;(f)Institutional Provisions;(g)Dispute Avoidance and Settlement;(h)General Exceptions;(i)General and Final Provisions; and(j)Annexes and Protocols to the above.ARTICLE 2 Objectives 1.The objectives of this Agreement are to:(a)contribute to economic growth and development through theestablishment of a strengthened and strategic trade and developmentpartnership consistent with the objective of sustainable development andin accordance with Article 75;(b)promote regional integration, economic cooperation and goodgovernance in the EAC;(c)promote the gradual integration of the EAC into the world economy, inconformity with its political choices and development priorities;(d)foster the structural transformation of EAC economies, and theirdiversification and competitiveness by enhancing their production,supply and trading capacity;(e)improve EAC capacity in trade policy and trade-related issues;(f)establish and implement an effective, predictable and transparentregional regulatory framework for trade and investment in the EACPartner State(s), thus supporting the conditions for increasinginvestment, and private sector initiative; and(g)strengthen the existing relations between the Parties on the basis ofsolidarity and mutual interest. To this end, consistent with their WTOrights and obligations, this Agreement shall enhance commercial andeconomic relations, support a new trading dynamic between the Partiesby means of the progressive, asymmetrical liberalisation of tradebetween them and reinforce, broaden and deepen cooperation in all areasrelevant to trade and investment.2.This Agreement also aims to:(a)establish an agreement consistent with Article XXIV of the GeneralAgreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994);(b)facilitate continuation of trade by the EAC Partner State(s) througheconomic and trade cooperation in accordance with the objectives set outin Annex III; and(c)establish the framework and scope of potential negotiation in relation toother issues including trade in services, trade-related issues and any otherareas of interest to both Parties.ARTICLE 3 Rendez-vous Clause The Parties undertake to conclude the negotiations in the subject matters listed below, within five (5) years upon entry into force of this Agreement: (a)trade in services;(b)trade related issues namely:(i)competition policy;(ii)investment and private sector development;(iii)trade, environment and sustainable development;(iv)intellectual property rights; and(v)transparency in public procurement;(c)any other areas that the Parties may agree upon.ARTICLE 4 Principles This Agreement is based on the following principles: (a)the essential and fundamental elements of this Agreement, as jointlystated by the Parties in Annex III;(b)strengthening integration in the EAC Region;(c)ensuring asymmetry, in favour of the EAC Partner State(s), in theliberalisation of trade and in the application of trade-related measuresand trade defence instruments;(d)allowing the EAC Partner State(s) to maintain regional preferences withother African countries and regions without an obligation to extend themto the UK; and(e)contributing to enhance the production, supply and trading capacities ofthe EAC Partner State(s).PART II  TRADE IN GOODS   ARTICLE 5  Scope and Objectives  1. The provisions of this Part shall apply to all goods originating in the UK and the EAC Partner State(s).  2. The objectives in the area of trade in goods are to:  (a) provide full duty-free and quota-free market access conditions for goods originating in the EAC Partner State(s) into the market of the UK on a secure, long-term and predictable basis in accordance with the modalities established in this Agreement;  (b) liberalise progressively and gradually the EAC Partner State(s)’ markets for goods originating from the UK in accordance with the modalities established in this Agreement; and  (c) preserve and improve market access conditions to ensure that the EAC Partner State(s) fully benefit from the EPA.   TITLE I  CUSTOMS DUTIES AND FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS   ARTICLE 6  Customs Duty  1. A customs duty shall include any duty or charge of any kind imposed on or in connection with the importation of goods and any form of surtax or surcharge in connection with such importation, but shall not include:  (a) charges equivalent to internal taxes levied on both imported and locally produced goods consistent with the provisions of Article 20;  (b) anti-dumping, countervailing or safeguard measures applied in accordance with the provisions of Title VI; and  (c) fees or other charges imposed in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.  2. The basic customs duty to which the successive reductions are to be applied shall be that specified in each Party's tariff schedule for each product.   ARTICLE 7  Classification of Goods  1. The classification of goods in trade covered by this Agreement shall be that set out in each Party's respective tariff nomenclature in conformity with the International Convention in the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (HS).  2. The Parties shall exchange all necessary information, within a period of three months after a tariff modification or a change in the HS, in respect of their applied customs duties and the corresponding nomenclatures with those products listed in Annexes I and II.   ARTICLE 8  Fees and Other Charges  Fees and other charges referred to in Article 6(c) shall be limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered and shall not represent an indirect protection for domestic products or a taxation of imports for fiscal purposes. Trade-related fees and charges shall not be imposed for consular services.   ARTICLE 9  Rules of Origin  For the purposes of this Part, the term “originating” means qualifying under the rules of origin set out in Protocol 1 to this Agreement.   ARTICLE 10  Customs Duties on Products Originating in the EAC Partner State(s)  Products originating in the EAC Partner State(s) shall be imported into the UK free of customs duties, under the conditions set out in Annex I.   ARTICLE 11 Customs Duties on Products Originating in the UK Products originating in the UK shall be imported into the EAC Partner State(s) under the conditions set out in the schedule of tariff liberalisation in Annex II. ARTICLE 12 Standstill 1.The Parties agree not to increase their applied customs duties for productssubject to liberalisation under this Agreement, with the exception of measuresadopted according to Articles 48, 49 and 50.2.In order to preserve the prospect for the wider African regional integrationprocesses, the Parties may decide, in the EPA Council, to modify the level of customsduties stipulated in Annexes II(a), II(b) and II(c), which may be applied to a productoriginating in the UK upon its importation into the EAC Partner State(s). The Partiesshall ensure that any such modification does not result in an incompatibility of thisAgreement with the requirements of Article XXIV of GATT 1994.ARTICLE 13 Movement of Goods 1.Customs duties shall be imposed once for goods originating in one Partyimported into the territory of the other Party.2.Any duty paid upon importation into an EAC Partner State shall be refundedfully for the goods that leave the EAC Partner State of first importation to anotherEAC Partner State. The duty shall be paid in the EAC Partner State of consumptionof the goods.3.The Parties agree on cooperation to facilitate the movement of goods andsimplify customs procedures.ARTICLE 14 Export Duties and Taxes 1.A Party shall not institute any new duties or taxes in connection with theexportation of goods to the other Party that are in excess of those imposed on likeproducts destined for internal sale.2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the EAC Partner State(s) can impose, after notifying the UK, a temporary duty or tax in connection with the exportation of goods under the following circumstances:  (a) to foster the development of domestic industry;  (b) to maintain currency stability, when the increase in the world price of an export commodity creates the risk of a currency overvaluation; or  (c) to protect revenue, food security and environment.  3. Such taxes should be enforced on a limited number of products for a limited period of time and shall be reviewed by the EPA Council for renewal after 48 months.  4. Any more favourable treatment consisting in or in relation to taxes applied by the EAC Partner State(s) to exports of any products destined for any major trading economy shall, from the entry into force of this Agreement, be accorded to the like product destined for the territory of the UK.  5. For the purposes of Articles 14 and 15, “major trading economy” means any developed country, or any country accounting for a share of world merchandise exports above 1 percent in the year before the entry into force of the free trade agreement referred to in Article 15, or any group of countries acting individually, collectively or through a free trade agreement accounting collectively for a share of world merchandise exports above 1.5 percent in the year before the entry into force of the free trade agreement referred to in Article 151. 1 This calculation shall be based on the WTO official data on leading exporters on world merchandise trade (excluding intra-EU trade).   ARTICLE 15  More Favourable Treatment Resulting from a Free Trade Agreement  1. With respect to the goods covered by this Part, the UK shall accord to the EAC Partner State(s) any more favourable treatment applicable as a result of the UK becoming party to a free trade agreement with a Third Party after the signature of this Agreement.  2. With respect to the goods covered by this Part, the EAC Partner State(s) shall accord to the UK any more favourable treatment applicable as a result of the EAC Partner State(s) becoming parties to a free trade agreement with any major trading economy after the signature of this Agreement. Provided that the UK can demonstrate that it has been given less favourable treatment than that offered by the EAC Partner State(s) to any other major trading economy, the Parties shall to the extent possible, consult and jointly decide on how best to implement the provisions of this paragraph on a case by case basis.  3. The provisions of this Part shall not be so construed as to oblige the Parties to extend reciprocally any preferential treatment applicable as a result of one of them being party to a free trade agreement with a Third Party on the date of signature of this Agreement.  4. The provisions of paragraph 2 shall not apply in respect of trade agreements between the EAC Partner State(s) with countries of the ACP Group, or other African countries and regions.  5. For the purposes of this Article, “free trade agreement” means an agreement substantially liberalising trade and substantially eliminating discriminatory measures and / or prohibiting new or more discriminatory measures among Parties at the entry into force of that agreement or within a reasonable time frame.   ARTICLE 16  Special Provisions on Administrative Cooperation  1. The Parties agree that administrative cooperation is essential for the implementation and control of the preferential treatment granted under this Part and underline their commitment to combat irregularities and fraud in customs and related matters.  2. Where a Party has made a finding, on the basis of objective information, of a failure to provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or fraud, the Party concerned may temporarily suspend the relevant preferential treatment of the product(s) concerned in accordance with this Article.  3. For the purpose of this Article, a failure to provide administrative cooperation shall mean, inter alia:  (a) a repeated failure to respect the obligations to verify the originating status of the product(s) concerned;  (b) a repeated refusal or undue delay in carrying out and/or communicating the results of subsequent verification of the proof of origin;  (c) a repeated refusal or undue delay in obtaining authorisation to conduct administrative cooperation missions to verify the authenticity of documents or accuracy of information relevant to the granting of the preferential treatment in question.  4. A finding of irregularities or fraud may be made, inter alia, where there is a rapid increase, without satisfactory explanation, in imports of goods exceeding the usual level of production and export capacity of the other Party that is linked to objective information concerning irregularities or fraud.  5.The application of a temporary suspension shall be subject to the followingconditions:(a)The Party which has made a finding, on the basis of objectiveinformation, of a failure to provide administrative cooperation and/or ofirregularities or fraud shall without undue delay notify the Committee ofSenior Officials of its finding together with the objective information andenter into consultations within the Committee of Senior Officials, on thebasis of all relevant information and objective findings, with a view toreaching a solution acceptable to both Parties.(b)Where the Parties have entered into consultations within the Committeeof Senior Officials as above and have failed to agree on an acceptablesolution within three (3) months following the notification, the Partyconcerned may temporarily suspend the relevant preferential treatmentof the product(s) concerned. A temporary suspension shall be notified tothe EPA Council without undue delay.(c)Temporary suspensions under this Article shall be limited to thatnecessary to protect the financial interests of the Party concerned. Theyshall not exceed a period of six (6) months, and may be renewed. Theyshall be subject to periodic consultations within the Committee of SeniorOfficials in particular with a view to their termination as soon as theconditions for their application no longer exist.6.At the same time as the notification to the Committee of Senior Officials underparagraph 5(a) of this Article, the Party concerned should publish a notice toimporters in its official journal. The notice to importers should indicate for theproduct concerned that there is a finding, on the basis of objective information, of afailure to provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or fraud.ARTICLE 17 Management of Administrative Errors In case of error by the competent authorities in the proper management of the preferential system of export, and in particular in the application of the provisions of Protocol 1 concerning the definition of the concept of “originating products” and methods of administrative cooperation, where this error leads to consequences in terms of import duties, the Party facing such consequences may request the Committee of Senior Officials to examine the possibilities of adopting all appropriate measures with a view to resolving the situation. ARTICLE 18  Customs Valuation  1. Article VII of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on the implementation of Article VII of GATT 1994 shall govern customs valuation rules applied to trade between the Parties.  2. The Parties shall cooperate with a view to reaching a common approach to issues relating to customs valuation.   TITLE II  NON-TARIFF MEASURES   ARTICLE 19  Prohibition of Quantitative Restrictions  1. All prohibitions or restrictions on the importation, exportation or sale for exports between the Parties, other than customs duties, taxes, fees and other charges provided for under Article 6, whether made effective through quotas, import or export licenses or other measures, shall be eliminated upon the entry into force of this Agreement. No new such measures shall be introduced in trade between the Parties. The provisions of this Article shall be without prejudice to the provisions of Title VI of this Part.  2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not extend to the following:  (a) Export prohibitions or restrictions temporarily applied to prevent or relieve critical shortages of foodstuffs or other products essential to the exporting contracting party;  (b) Import and export prohibitions or restrictions necessary to the application of standards or regulations for the classification, grading or marketing of commodities in international trade.     ARTICLE 20  National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation  1. Imported products originating in one Party shall not be subject, either directly or indirectly, to internal taxes or other internal charges of any kind in excess of those applied, directly or indirectly, to like domestic products of the other Party. Moreover, the Parties shall not otherwise apply internal taxes or other internal charges so as to afford protection to their respective production.  2. Imported products originating in one Party shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like domestic products of the other Party in respect of all laws, regulations and requirements affecting their internal sale, offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use. The provisions of this paragraph shall not prevent the application of differential internal transportation charges, which are based exclusively on the economic operation of the means of transport and not on the origin of the product.  3. Neither Party shall establish or maintain any internal quantitative regulation relating to the mixture, processing or use of products in specified amounts or proportions which requires, directly or indirectly, that any specified amount or proportion of any product which is the subject of the regulation must be supplied from domestic sources. Moreover, neither Party shall apply internal quantitative regulations so as to afford protection to their respective production.  4. The provisions of this Article shall not prevent the payment of subsidies exclusively to national producers, including payments to national producers derived from the proceeds of internal taxes or charges applied consistently with the provisions of this Article and subsidies effected through governmental purchases of national products.  5. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to laws, regulations, procedures or practices governing public procurement.   ARTICLE 21  Good Governance in the Tax Area  The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation on the principles of good governance in the area of taxation through the relevant authorities in line with their respective national laws and regulations.   TITLE III  CUSTOMS COOPERATION AND TRADE FACILITATION   ARTICLE 22  Scope and Objectives  1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of customs cooperation and trade facilitation matters in the evolving global trading environment and agree:  (a) to reinforce cooperation and ensure that the relevant legislation and procedures, as well as the administrative capacity of the relevant administrations, fulfil the objective of promoting trade facilitation.  (b) that the EAC Partner State(s) need transitional periods of time and capacity building to smoothly implement the provisions of this Title.  2. The objectives of this Title are to:  (a) facilitate trade between the Parties;  (b) promote harmonisation of customs legislation and procedures at regional level;  (c) provide support to the EAC Partner State(s) to strengthen trade facilitation;  (d) provide support to the EAC Partner State(s)’ customs administrations to implement this agreement and other international customs best practices; and  (e) enhance cooperation between the Parties' customs authorities and other related border agencies.   ARTICLE 23  Customs Cooperation and Mutual Administrative Assistance  1. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Title and effectively respond to the objectives laid down in Article 22, the Parties shall:  (a) exchange information on customs legislation and procedures;  (b) develop joint initiatives in mutually agreed areas;  (c) cooperate in the following areas, subject to the provisions of Article 75, including paragraph 4 of that Article:  (i) modernisation of customs systems and procedures, as well as reduction of customs clearance time;  (ii) simplification and harmonisation of customs procedures and trade formalities, including those related to import, export and transit;  (iii) enhancement of regional transit systems;  (iv) enhancement of transparency in accordance with Article 24(3);  (v) capacity building which may include financial or technical assistance to the EAC Partner State(s);  (vi) any other area of customs as may be agreed by the Parties;  (d) establish, as far as possible, common positions in international organisations in the field of customs and trade facilitation, such as the WTO, World Customs Organisation (WCO), United Nations (UN) and United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD); and  (e) promote coordination between all related agencies, both internally and across borders.  2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Parties shall provide each other mutual administrative assistance in customs matters in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2.   ARTICLE 24  Customs Legislation and Procedures  1. The Parties agree that their respective trade and customs legislation and procedures shall draw upon international instruments and standards applicable in the field of customs and trade including the substantive elements of the revised Kyoto Convention on the Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs Procedures, the substantive elements of the WCO Framework of Standards to secure and Facilitate Global Trade, the WCO data set and the HS Convention.  2. The Parties agree that their respective trade and customs legislation and procedures shall be based upon:  (a) the need to protect and facilitate legitimate trade through effective enforcement of, and compliance with the requirements set out in the customs legislation;  (b) the need to avoid unnecessary and discriminatory burdens on economic operators, to protect against fraud and corruption and to provide further facilitation for operators that meet high levels of compliance with customs legislation and procedures;  (c) the need to use a single administrative document or electronic equivalent, for the purposes of establishing customs declarations in the UK and in the EAC Partner State(s) respectively;  (d) modern customs techniques, including risk assessment, simplified procedures for entry and release of goods, post release controls, and audits;  (e) the progressive development of systems, including those based upon information technology, for export import and transit operations, to facilitate the exchange of information between economic operators, customs administrations and other agencies;  (f) the principle that penalties imposed for minor breaches of customs regulations or procedural requirements are proportionate and, do not give rise to undue delays in their application in customs clearance;  (g) a system of binding rulings on customs matters, notably on tariff classification and rules of origin, in accordance with the rules laid down in regional and/or national legislations;  (h) the need to apply fees and charges that are commensurate with the service provided in relation to any specific transaction, and not be calculated on an ad valorem basis. Fees and charges shall not be imposed on consular services in respect of trade in goods;  (i) the elimination of any requirement for the mandatory use of pre-shipment inspections as defined by the WTO Agreement on Pre-shipment Inspection, or their equivalent; and  (j) the elimination of all requirements for the mandatory use of customs brokers as well as transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate rules for their licensing.  3. In order to improve working methods and to ensure transparency and efficiency of customs operations, the Parties shall:  (a) take further steps towards the simplification and standardisation of documentation and trade formalities to enable the rapid release and clearance of goods;   (b) provide effective, prompt and non-discriminatory procedures enabling the right of appeal against customs and other agency administrative actions, rulings and decisions affecting imports, exports or goods in transit. Such procedures shall be easily accessible to all enterprises; and  (c) ensure that integrity is maintained, through the application of measures reflecting the principles of the relevant international conventions and instruments.   ARTICLE 25  Facilitation of Transit Movements  1. The Parties shall ensure freedom of transit through their territory via most convenient routes. Any restriction, control or requirement shall be non-discriminatory, proportionate and applied uniformly.  2. A Party may require that traffic in transit through its territory be entered at the proper customs house through designated routes. Should a Party require the use of such routes, it shall do it in full compliance with Article V(3) of GATT 1994.  3. Without prejudice to legitimate customs controls, a Party shall accord no less favourable treatment for goods in transit in the territory of the other Party than that accorded to domestic goods.  4. The Parties shall operate bonded transport regimes that allow the transit of goods without payment of customs duties or other charges having an equivalent effect, subject to the provision of an appropriate guarantee in accordance with regional and/or national customs legislations.  5. The Parties shall promote and implement regional transit arrangements.  6. The Parties shall promote co-ordination between all concerned agencies, both internally and across borders.  7. The legislation of the Parties shall draw upon international standards and instruments relevant to transit.     ARTICLE 26  Relations with the Business Community  The Parties agree to:  (a) ensure that all legislation, procedures, fees and charges are made publicly available, as far as possible through electronic or any other appropriate means, and whenever possible provide necessary clarifications;  (b) regularly consult in a timely manner with trade representatives on legislative proposals and procedures related to customs and trade issues;  (c) introduce new or amended legislations and procedures in a way that allows traders to become well prepared for complying with them;  (d) make publicly available relevant notices of an administrative nature, including agency requirements and entry procedures, hours of operation and operating procedures for customs offices at ports and border crossing points, and points of contact for information enquiries;  (e) foster co-operation between operators and relevant administrations via the use of non-arbitrary and publicly accessible procedures, such as Memoranda of Understanding, based upon those promulgated by the WCO; and  (f) ensure that their respective customs and related requirements and procedures continue to meet the needs of the trading community, follow best practices and remain as little trade-restrictive as possible.   ARTICLE 27  Transitional Provisions  In view of the need to enhance the EAC Partner State(s)’ capacity in the area of customs and trade facilitation and without prejudice to their WTO commitments, the Parties agree that the EAC Partner State(s) shall benefit from a transitional period of five (5) years after the entry into force of this Agreement to meet the obligations in Articles 23, 24 and 25.  This transitional period can be further extended by authorisation of the EPA Council.   ARTICLE 28  Harmonisation of Customs Standards at Regional Level  The Parties acknowledge and recognise the importance of consolidating the harmonisation of customs standards and trade facilitation measures at regional level, including the initiation of reforms in the field of customs and trade facilitation where necessary.   ARTICLE 29  Special Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation  1. The Parties hereby establish a Special Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation, composed of their representatives, which shall:  a) meet on a date and with an agenda agreed in advance by the Parties;  b) be chaired alternately by either Party; and  c) report to the EPA Council.  2. The functions of the Special Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation shall include:  (a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this Title and Protocol 1 on rules of origin;  (b) providing a forum to consult and discuss all issues concerning customs, including rules of origin, general customs procedures, customs valuation, tariff classification, transit and mutual administrative assistance in customs matters;  (c) enhancing cooperation on the development, application and enforcement of rules of origin and related customs procedures, general customs procedures and mutual administrative assistance in customs matters;  (d) enhancing cooperation on capacity building and technical assistance; and  (e) any other issues agreed by the Parties in respect of this Title.   TITLE IV  SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES   ARTICLE 30  Scope and Definitions  1. The provisions of this Title apply to measures covered by the World Trade Organization Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (the “WTO SPS Agreement”).  2. For the purpose of this Title, unless otherwise provided, the definitions of the WTO SPS Agreement, the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the World Animal Health Organisation and International Plant Protection Convention shall apply.   ARTICLE 31  Objectives  The objectives in the area of application of sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures are to:  (a) facilitate the Parties' inter-regional and intra-regional trade, whilst safeguarding human, animal and plant health or life in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement;  (b) address problems arising from SPS measures on agreed priority sectors and products giving due consideration to regional integration;  (c) establish procedures and modalities for facilitating cooperation in SPS matters;  (d) ensure transparency as regards SPS measures applicable to trade between and within the Parties;  (e) promote intra-regional harmonisation of measures with international standards, in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement, and the development of appropriate policies, legislative, regulatory and institutional frameworks within the EAC Partner State(s);  (f) enhance the effective participation of the EAC Partner State(s) in the Codex Alimentarius Commission, World Animal Health Organisation and International Plant Protection Convention;  (g) promote consultation and exchanges between the EAC Partner State(s) and UK institutions and laboratories;  (h) facilitate the development of capacity for setting and implementing regional and national standards in accordance with international requirements in order to facilitate regional integration;  (i) to establish and enhance the EAC Partner State(s)’ capacity to implement and monitor SPS measures pursuant to the provisions of Title VI of Part V on Economic and Development Cooperation; and  (j) promote technology transfer.    ARTICLE 32  Rights and Obligations  1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the international treaties and agreements relating to this Title to which they are party.  2. Each Party shall:  (a) have the sovereign right to implement SPS measures, provided that such measures are consistent with the provisions of the WTO SPS Agreement;  (b) consult the other Party prior to the introduction of any new SPS measures, through the notification mechanisms provided for in the WTO SPS Agreement and, if and when appropriate, through the Parties' contact points;  (c) support the other in gathering information needed to make informed decisions; and  (d) promote linkages, joint ventures, joint research and development between the EAC Partner State(s) and UK institutions and laboratories.   ARTICLE 33  Scientific Justification of Measures  Subject to the provisions of this Title, the Parties shall ensure that the introduction, alteration or modification of any SPS measure in their territories shall be based on scientific justifications and comply with the WTO SPS Agreement.   ARTICLE 34  Harmonisation  1. The Parties shall aim to achieve harmonisation of their respective rules and procedures for formulation of their SPS measures, including inspection, testing and certification procedures, in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement.  2. The Committee of Senior Officials shall develop modalities to assist and to monitor this process of harmonisation.   ARTICLE 35  Equivalence  The Parties shall apply the principles of equivalence according to the provisions of the WTO SPS Agreement. For this purpose, each Party shall give reasonable access, upon request, to the other for inspection, testing and other relevant procedures.   ARTICLE 36  Zoning and Compartmentalisation  The Parties shall recognise, on a case by case basis, designated areas, which are free from pests or diseases or areas of low pest or disease prevalence as potential sources of plant and animal products taking into account the provisions of Article 6 of the WTO SPS Agreement.   ARTICLE 37  Notification, Enquiry and Transparency  1. The Parties shall be transparent in their application of SPS measures in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement.  2. The Parties recognise the importance of effective mechanisms for consultation, notification and exchange of information with respect to SPS measures in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement.  3. The importing Party shall inform the exporting Party of any changes in its SPS import requirements that may affect trade falling under the scope of this Title. The Parties also undertake to establish mechanisms for the exchange of such information.   ARTICLE 38  Conformity Assessment  The Parties shall, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with SPS standards, agree on procedures for conformity assessment.   ARTICLE 39  Information Exchange and Transparency of Trade Conditions  Cooperation shall include:  (a) information sharing and consultation on changes to SPS measures which may affect products of export interest to either Party;  (b) exchange of information on other areas of potential relevance to their trade relations, including rapid alerts, scientific opinions and events upon specific request;  (c) advance notice to ensure that the EAC Partner State(s) are informed of new SPS measures that may affect EAC exports to the UK. This system shall build on existing mechanisms under WTO obligations, especially Article 7 of the WTO SPS Agreement; and  (d) promotion of transparency as regards the sampling, analysis and action following official controls on feed and food from either Party.   ARTICLE 40  Competent Authorities  1. The respective SPS authorities of the Parties shall be the Competent Authorities in the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK for the implementation of the measures referred to in this Title.  2. The Competent Authorities referred to in paragraph 1 shall have the roles conferred upon them under the WTO SPS Agreement.  3. The Parties shall notify each other of their respective Competent Authorities referred to in Paragraph 1 and any changes thereto.     TITLE V  STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT   ARTICLE 41  Scope and Definitions  1. The provisions of this Title shall apply to the preparation, adoption and application of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment, as defined in the WTO Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement (the “TBT Agreement”).  2. For the purpose of this Title the definitions of the TBT Agreement shall apply.   ARTICLE 42  Rights and Obligations  1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the TBT Agreement, while taking account of their rights and commitments under other international arrangements to which both the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK are parties, including those relating to the protection of environment and biodiversity in particular.  2. The Parties shall ensure that technical regulations are not prepared, adopted or applied with a view to or with an effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between them, in accordance with the provisions of the TBT Agreement.   ARTICLE 43  Mutual Recognition Agreements  The Parties may negotiate mutual recognition agreements in sectors of mutual economic interest.   ARTICLE 44  Transparency and Notification  1. The Parties reaffirm their obligations concerning the notification and sharing of information about technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures as provided for by the TBT Agreement.  2. The Parties shall exchange information on issues of potential relevance to their trade relations, including rapid alerts, scientific opinions and events through enquiry points.  3. The Parties may cooperate in the establishment and maintenance of enquiry points, and in the setting up and maintenance of common data bases.   ARTICLE 45  Harmonisation  The Parties shall endeavour to harmonise their standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.   ARTICLE 46  Conformity Assessment  1. The Parties reaffirm their commitments on conformity assessment in accordance with the TBT Agreement.  2. The Parties may consider, taking account of the extent of alignment of their technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment infrastructure, the negotiation of agreements on the mutual recognition of conformity assessment procedures.   ARTICLE 47  Technical Regulatory Bodies  1. The Regulatory Bodies of the EAC Partner State(s) shall be the competent authorities in the EAC Partner State(s) for the implementation of the measures referred to in this Title that have the responsibility and competence for ensuring or supervising the implementation of standardisation, metrology, accreditation and conformity assessment.  2.  The body responsible in the UK for the implementation of this Title is the Government of the UK.  3. The EAC Partner State(s) shall in accordance with this Agreement, notify the UK of its respective Technical Regulatory Bodies.   TITLE VI  TRADE DEFENCE MEASURES   ARTICLE 48  Anti-dumping and Countervailing Measures  1. Subject to the provisions of this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the UK or the EAC Partner State(s), whether individually or collectively, from adopting anti-dumping or countervailing measures in accordance with the relevant WTO agreements. For the purpose of this Article, origin shall be determined in accordance with the non-preferential rules of origin of the Parties.  2. Before imposing definitive anti-dumping or countervailing duties in respect of products imported from either Party, the Parties shall consider the possibility of constructive remedies as provided for in the relevant WTO agreements.  3. Where an anti-dumping or countervailing measure has been imposed by either Party, there shall be one single forum of judicial review, including at the stage of appeals.  4. Where anti-dumping or countervailing measures can be imposed on a regional basis and on a national basis, where applicable, the Parties shall ensure that such measures are not applied simultaneously in respect of the same product by regional authorities on the one hand, and national authorities on the other.  5. Either Party shall notify the exporting Party of the receipt of a properly documented complaint before initiating any investigation.  6. The provisions of this Article shall be applicable in all investigations initiated after this Agreement enters into force.  7. WTO rules on dispute settlement shall apply to any disputes related to anti-dumping or countervailing measures.   ARTICLE 49  Multilateral Safeguards  1. Subject to the provisions of this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK from adopting measures in accordance with Article XIX of the GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Safeguards, and Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture annexed to the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the WTO . For the purpose of this Article, origin shall be determined in accordance with the non-preferential rules of origin of the Parties.  2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the UK shall, in the light of the overall development objectives of this Agreement and the small size of the economies of the EAC Partner State(s), exclude imports from any EAC Partner State from any measures taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Safeguards and Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.  3. The provisions of paragraph 2 shall apply for a period of five (5) years beginning with the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Not later than one hundred and twenty (120) days before the end of this period, the EPA Council shall review the operation of those provisions in the light of the development needs of the EAC Partner State(s), with a view to determining whether to extend their application for a further period.  4. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall be subject to the WTO Agreement on the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes.   ARTICLE 50  Bilateral Safeguards  1. After having examined alternative solutions, a Party may apply safeguard measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article 10 and 11 under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in this Article.  2. Safeguard measures referred to in paragraph 1 may be taken where a product originating in one Party is being imported into the territory of the other Party in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause:  (a) serious injury to the domestic industry producing like or directly competitive products in the territory of the importing Party; or  (b) disturbances in a sector of the economy, particularly where these disturbances produce major social problems, or difficulties which could bring about serious deterioration in the economic situation of the importing Party; or  (c) disturbances in the markets of like or directly competitive agricultural products1 or in the mechanisms regulating those markets. 1 For the purpose of this Article, agricultural products are those covered by Annex I of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.  3. Safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall not exceed what is necessary to remedy or prevent the serious injury or disturbances, as defined in paragraphs 2 and 4(b). Those safeguard measures of the importing Party may only consist of one or more of the following:  (a) suspension of the further reduction of the rate of import duty for the product concerned, as provided for under this Agreement;  (b) increase in the customs duty on the product concerned up to a level which does not exceed the customs duty applied to other WTO Members; and  (c) introduction of tariff quotas on the product concerned.  4. (a) Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 to 3 where any product originating in the UK is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause one of the situations referred to under paragraph 2 to the EAC Partner State(s), the EAC Partner State(s) may take surveillance or safeguard measures limited to their territory in accordance with the procedures laid down in paragraphs 5 to 8.  (b) The EAC Partner State(s) may take safeguard measures, in accordance with the procedures laid down in paragraphs 5 to 8, where a product originating in the UK as a result of the reduction of duties is being imported into their territory in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause disturbances to an infant industry producing like or directly competitive products. Such provision is only applicable for a period of ten (10) years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. This period may be extended by the EPA Council for a period of a maximum of five (5) years.  5. (a) Safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall only be maintained for such a time as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury or disturbances as defined in paragraphs 2 and 4.  (b) Safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall not be applied for a period exceeding two (2) years. Where the circumstances warranting imposition of safeguard measures continue to exist, such measures may be extended for a further period of no more than two (2) years. Where the EAC Partner State(s) apply a safeguard measure, such measure may however be applied for a period not exceeding four years and, where the circumstances warranting imposition of safeguard measures continue to exist, extended for a further period of four (4) years.  (c) Safeguard measures referred to in this Article that exceed one (1) year shall contain clear elements progressively leading to their elimination at the end of the set period, at the latest.  (d) No safeguard measure referred to in this Article shall be applied to the import of a product that has previously been subject to such a measure, for a period of at least one year since the expiry of the measure.  6. For the implementation of the above paragraphs, the following provisions shall apply:  (a) Where a Party takes the view that one of the circumstances set out in paragraphs 2 and/or 4 exists, it shall immediately refer the matter to the Committee of Senior Officials for examination;  (b) The Committee of Senior Officials may make any recommendation needed to remedy the circumstances which have arisen. If no recommendation has been made by the Committee of Senior Officials aimed at remedying the circumstances, or no other satisfactory solution has been reached within thirty (30) days of the matter being referred to the Committee of Senior Officials the importing party may adopt the appropriate measures to remedy the circumstances in accordance with this Article;  (c) Before taking any measure provided for in this Article or, in the cases to which paragraph 7 of this Article applies, as soon as possible, the EAC Partner State(s) shall supply the Committee of Senior Officials with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation, with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties concerned;  (d) In the selection of safeguard measures pursuant to this Article, priority must be given to those which least disturb the operation of this Agreement;  (e) Any safeguard measure taken pursuant to this Article shall be notified in writing immediately to the Committee of Senior Officials and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within that body, particularly with a view to establishing a timetable for their abolition as soon as circumstances permit.  7. Where exceptional circumstances require immediate action, the importing Party concerned, may take the measures provided for in paragraph 3 or 4 on a provisional basis without complying with the requirements of paragraph 6. Such action may be taken for a maximum period of one hundred and eighty (180) days where measures are taken by the UK and two hundred (200) days where measures are taken by the EAC Partner State(s). The duration of any such provisional measure shall be counted as a part of the initial period and any extension referred to in paragraph 5. In the taking of such provisional measures, the interest of all Parties involved shall be taken into account including their level of development. The importing Party concerned shall inform the other party concerned and shall immediately refer the matter to the Committee of Senior Officials for examination.   8. If an importing party subjects imports of a product to an administrative procedure having as its purpose the rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows liable to give rise to the problems referred to in this Article, it shall inform the Committee of Senior Officials without delay.  9. The WTO Agreement shall not be invoked to preclude a Party from adopting safeguard measures in conformity with this Article.   PART III  FISHERIES   TITLE I  GENERAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 51  Scope and Principles  1. The cooperation in fisheries trade and development shall cover marine, inland fisheries and aquaculture.  2. The Parties recognise that fisheries constitute a key economic resource of the EAC Partner State(s), contribute significantly to the economies of the EAC Partner State(s) and have great potential for future regional economic development and poverty reduction. It is also an important source of food and foreign exchange.  3. The Parties further recognise that fisheries resources are also of considerable interest to both the UK and the EAC Partner State(s), and agree to cooperate for the sustainable development and management of the fisheries sector in their mutual interests taking into account economic, environmental and social impacts.  4. The Parties agree that the appropriate strategy to promote the economic growth of the fisheries sector and to enhance its contribution to the economy of the EAC Partner State(s), while taking into consideration its long term sustainability, is through increasing value-adding activities within the sector.   ARTICLE 52  Principles of Cooperation  1. The principles of cooperation in fisheries shall include:  (a) supporting the development and strengthening of regional integration;  (b) providing special and differential treatment;  (c) taking into account the best available scientific information for the resource assessment and management;  (d) ensuring functioning monitoring systems of the environmental, economic and social impacts in the EAC Partner State(s);  (e) ensuring conformity with existing national laws and relevant international instruments including the United Nations Convention on the Law Of the Sea (UNCLOS), regional and sub-regional agreements; and  (f) ensuring preservation and priority of particular needs of the artisanal/subsistence fishery.  2. These guiding principles should contribute to sustainable and responsible development of the living inland, marine resources, aquaculture and to optimising the benefits of this sector for present and future generations, through increased investment, capacity building and improved market access.  3. The Parties shall cooperate to ensure that financial and other support will be provided to improve the competitiveness and production capacity of the processing factories, the diversification of the fishing industry and development and improvement of port facilities in the EAC Partner State(s).  4. Detailed areas of cooperation are identified under Title IV of Part V of this Agreement.   TITLE II  MARINE FISHERIES   ARTICLE 53  Scope and Objectives  1. The provisions of this Title shall apply to the utilisation, conservation and management of marine fisheries resources to optimise the benefits from fisheries for the EAC Partner State(s) through investment, capacity building and improved market access.  2. The objectives of cooperation are to:  (a) promote sustainable development and management of fisheries;  (b) strengthen cooperation to ensure the sustainable exploitation and management of fisheries resources as a strong basis for regional integration, given the straddling and migratory species which are shared among coastal EAC Partner States and given that no individual EAC Partner State has the capacity to ensure sustainability of the resource;  (c) ensure a more equitable share of the benefits derived from the fisheries sector;  (d) ensure effective Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS) necessary for combating Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing;  (e) promote effective exploitation, conservation and management of the living marine resource in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and waters in which the EAC Partner State(s) have jurisdiction based on international instruments, including UNCLOS, for the social and economic benefit of the Parties;  (f) promote and develop regional and international trade based on best practices;  (g) create an enabling environment, including infrastructure and capacity building, for the EAC Partner State(s) to cope with the stringent market requirements for both industrial and small scale fisheries;  (h) support national and regional policies aimed at increasing productivity and competitiveness of the fisheries sector; and  (i) build links with other economic sectors.   ARTICLE 54  Fisheries Management and Conservation Issues  1. A precautionary approach shall be applied in determining levels of sustainable catch, fishing capacity and other management strategies to avoid or reverse undesirable outcomes such as over-capacity and over-fishing, as well as undesirable impacts on the ecosystems and artisanal fisheries.  2. Each EAC Partner State may take appropriate measures, including seasonal and gear restrictions in order to protect its territorial waters and ensure the sustainability of the artisanal and coastal fisheries.   3. The Parties shall promote the membership of all the concerned EAC Partner State(s) to the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) and other relevant fisheries organisations. The EAC Partner State(s) concerned, with the UK, shall coordinate action to ensure the management and conservation of all fish species, including tuna and tuna-like resources and facilitate relevant scientific research.  4. Where there is insufficient scientific evidence for the competent national management authority to determine limits and target levels of sustainable catch in an EAC Partner State’s EEZ, the Parties in consultation with the competent national authority and together with IOTC and, where relevant, other regional fisheries organisations, shall cooperate to support such scientific analysis.   5. The Parties agree to take appropriate measures where an increase in effort results in catch levels above the target sustainable level established by the competent national authority.  6. In order to conserve and manage straddling stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, the UK and the EAC Partner State(s) shall ensure compliance by vessels flying their flags with relevant national, regional and sub-regional fisheries management measures and related national laws and regulations.   ARTICLE 55  Vessel Management and Post-Harvest Arrangements  1. Vessel management and post-harvest arrangements emerging from the IOTC and any other relevant regional fisheries organisations will be observed. The EAC Partner State(s) and the UK shall set out minimum terms and conditions with respect to monitoring, control and surveillance of UK fishing vessels operating in the waters of the EAC Partner State(s), which should include the following:  (a) A Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) will be set up for the EAC Partner State(s), and all EAC Partner State(s) will use a compatible VMS. Those EAC Partner State(s) which do not have a VMS may be assisted by the UK to set up a compatible VMS.  (b) In addition to a compulsory compatible VMS system, all coastal EAC Partner State(s), in conjunction with the UK, will develop other mechanisms to ensure effective Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS) and the UK may support the EAC Partner State(s) to put such an agreed system in place and assist in implementation.   (c) The UK and the EAC Partner State(s) shall have the right of placing observers, whether in national or international waters, with the procedures concerning the deployment of observers being well stipulated. Observers are to be paid by the national governments but all costs on board are to be met by the ship-owner. The UK may support the costs of training observers.  (d) Common systems of reporting of fishing will be developed and used throughout the region, with minimum terms set for reporting.  (e) All vessels that land or tranship their catch within an EAC Partner State shall do so in ports or outer-port areas. No transhipment shall be allowed at sea, except on particular conditions foreseen by the relevant Regional Fisheries Management Organisation (RFMO). The Parties shall cooperate to develop and modernise landing or transhipment infrastructure in ports of the EAC Partner State(s), including development capacity of fish products.  (f) Discards reporting shall be compulsory. Priority should be given to avoiding discards through the use of selective fishing methods in line with principles of the IOTC and relevant regional fisheries organisations. As far as possible, by-catch shall be brought ashore.  2. The Parties agree to cooperate in developing and implementing national/regional training programmes for EAC nationals in order to facilitate their effective participation in the fishing industry. If the UK negotiates a bilateral fisheries agreement, employment of nationals of the EAC Partner State(s) shall be encouraged. The International Labour Organisation (ILO) Declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work shall apply as of right to seamen signed on UK vessels.  3. The Parties shall undertake coordinated efforts to improve the means for preventing, deterring, and eliminating IUU fishing, and to this end take appropriate measures. Fishing vessels involved in IUU fishing should be confiscated and the owners prosecuted by the competent authorities. They should not be allowed to fish again in waters of the EAC Partner State(s) concerned unless prior authorisation has been obtained from both the flag State and the concerned EAC Partner State(s) as well as, where relevant, the RFMO concerned.    TITLE III  INLAND FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT   ARTICLE 56  Scope and Objectives  1. The provisions of this Title shall apply to inland fisheries, coastal and aquaculture development in the EAC Partner State(s) with respect to capacity building, technology transfer, SPS standards, investment and investment finance, environmental protection as well as legal and regulatory frameworks.  2. The objectives of cooperation in inland fisheries and aquaculture development will be to promote sustainable exploitation of inland fisheries resources, and enhance aquaculture production, remove supply-side constraints, improve fish and fish products quality to meet international SPS measures, improve access to the market of the UK, address intra regional trade barriers, attract capital inflows and investment into the sector, build capacity and enhance access to financial support for the private investors for inland fisheries and aquaculture development.   PART IV  AGRICULTURE   ARTICLE 57  Scope and Definitions  1. The provisions of this Part shall apply to crops and livestock including productive insects.  2. For purposes of this Part and Title II of Part V, the following definitions shall apply:  (a) agriculture includes crops, livestock and productive insects;  (b) agricultural products are those covered by Annex I of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture;  (c) agricultural financing means providing financial resources in support of agricultural related activities along the whole value chain such as input supplies, agricultural services, production, storage, distribution, product transformation and marketing;  (d) agricultural inputs means all substances or materials, equipments and tools used in the production and handling of agricultural products;  (e) sustainable agriculture technology means a technology designed with special consideration to its environmental, social and economic impacts;  (f) food and nutrition security implies that all people at all times have both physical and economic access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food to meet their needs for a productive and healthy life;  (g) livelihood security is defined as adequate and sustainable access to income and resources to meet basic needs in an equitable manner (including adequate access to food, potable water, health facilities, educational opportunities, housing and time for community participation and social integration);  (h) natural disaster is the consequence of natural calamities, e.g. drought, earthquake, landslide, volcano eruptions, floods, pests and diseases;  (i) small scale farmers are producers with limited resources and own small land holding of less than two (2) hectares and whose scale of operations is too small to attract the provision of services needed to significantly increase productivity and leverage markets opportunity; and  (j) sustainable development in the context of this Part includes the management and protection of the natural resource base for economic and social development in such a manner as to aim at meeting human needs for present and future generations.   ARTICLE 58  Objectives  1. The Parties agree that the fundamental objective of this Part is sustainable agricultural development which includes, but is not limited to, food and livelihoods security, rural development and poverty reduction in the EAC Partner State(s).  2. The objectives of this Part are to:  (a) foster cooperation between the Parties with a view to creating wealth and improving the quality of life of those engaged in agricultural activities through increased production, productivity and market share;  (b) improve food and nutrition security in the EAC Partner State(s) by promoting value addition, increasing output, quality, safety, market integration, trade, availability and accessibility;  (c) contribute to provision of gainful employment throughout the value chain of a modernised agricultural sector;  (d) develop modern and competitive agro-based industries;  (e) promote sustainable use and management of natural and cultural resources by developing environmentally friendly and sustainable technologies that improve the agricultural productivity;  (f) contribute to competitiveness by promoting value addition throughout the supply chains to access markets;  (g) improve producers' revenue by developing the marketing of value added agricultural products in the marketplace;  (h) facilitate the adjustment of the agricultural sector and the rural economy, to cope with global economic changes;  (i) mobilise and increase the economic performance of small scale farmers through capacity building of farmers’ organisations;  (j) improve trade and market facilitation for agricultural commodities in order to increase foreign exchange earnings; and  (k) improve infrastructure within the EAC Partner State(s) for enhancing production, productivity, marketing and distribution of agricultural inputs and products, with particular attention to storage, grading, handling, packing and transport.   ARTICLE 59  General Principles  1. The Parties recognise the importance of agriculture in the EAC Partner State(s)’ economies, as the main source of livelihood for the majority of the EAC Partner State(s)’ population, as the primary factor to ensure food and nutrition security, potential sector for high growth and added value and a source of export earnings.   2. In view of the multi-functional role agriculture plays in the economy of the EAC Partner State(s), the Parties agree to use a comprehensive approach to agriculture as a basis for sustainable development.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in promoting the sustainable growth of the agriculture sector, taking into account its multiple facets and the diversity of the economic, social, environmental characteristics and development strategies of the EAC Partner State(s).  4. The Parties recognise that deeper integration of the agricultural sector across the EAC Partner State(s) will contribute to the expansion of inter-regional markets, and increase the scope for investment and private sector development.  5. The Parties recognise the importance of supporting agricultural production, promotion of value addition, agricultural trade and market development initiatives through appropriate instruments and provision of appropriate regulatory framework to respond to changing market conditions. In this respect, the Parties resolve to work together to attract necessary investment into the EAC Partner State(s).  6. The Parties agree that agricultural priorities considered in this Part shall be clearly linked to the regional overarching policy framework for food and nutrition security and poverty reduction to ensure consistency and guidance of the regional development agenda.   ARTICLE 60  Comprehensive Dialogue  1. The Parties shall establish an EAC-UK Comprehensive Dialogue on Agriculture and Rural Development Policy (the “Agriculture Dialogue”) on all matters covered in this Part. The Agriculture Dialogue shall monitor the progress in implementing this Part and shall provide a forum for exchange and cooperation on the Parties' respective domestic agricultural policies and, in particular, the role of agriculture in the EAC Partner State(s) in raising farm incomes, food security, sustainable use of resources, rural development and economic growth.  2. The Agriculture Dialogue shall take place within the Committee of Senior Officials established under Article 106.  3. The Parties shall establish the working procedures and modalities of the Agriculture Dialogue by mutual agreement.   ARTICLE 61  Regional Integration  The Parties recognise that the integration of the agricultural sector across the EAC Partner State(s), through the progressive removal of barriers and the provision of an appropriate regulatory and institutional framework, harmonisation and convergence of policies, will contribute to the deepening of the regional integration process and thus contribute to the expansion of regional markets, which will increase the scope for investment and private sector development.   ARTICLE 62  Enabling Policies  The Parties recognise the importance of adopting and implementing policies and institutional reforms to enable and facilitate the achievement of objectives of this Part.   ARTICLE 63  Sustainable Agricultural Development  The Parties shall cooperate in achieving sustainable agricultural development with special focus on supporting vulnerable rural population in the EAC Partner State(s) in light of the changing world production and trade patterns as well as consumer tastes and preference.   ARTICLE 64  Food and Nutrition Security  1. The Parties agree that the provisions of this Agreement shall enable the EAC Partner State(s) to implement effective measures to achieve food and nutrition security and sustainable agricultural development, and to develop commercial agricultural markets in the region to ensure food and nutrition security.  2. The Parties shall ensure that actions taken under this Part aim at enhancing food and nutrition security, and avoiding adoption of measures that could endanger achievement of food and nutrition security at the household, national and regional levels.   ARTICLE 65  Value Chain Management  The Parties agree to have a regional strategy for enhancing supply capacities in agriculture, identifying high value agricultural sub-sectors for which the region has competitive advantage and capitalise on investments that can facilitate the shift from comparative to competitive advantages.    ARTICLE 66  Early Warning Systems  The Parties recognise the need to establish, improve and enhance food security information systems, including national early warning systems, as well as vulnerability assessment and monitoring systems, and implement capacity building actions, in conjunction with and through existing international and regional mechanisms.   ARTICLE 67  Technology  The Parties recognise the importance of modern and sustainable agricultural technologies and agree to cooperate to develop and promote the use of modern agricultural technologies that include:  (a) sustainable irrigation and fertigation technologies;  (b) tissue culture and micro propagation;  (c) improved seed;  (d) artificial insemination;  (e) integrated pest management;  (f) product packaging;  (g) post harvest handling;  (h) accredited laboratories;  (i) biotechnologies; and  (j) risk assessment and management.     ARTICLE 68  Domestic Policy Measures  1. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of agricultural support related to trade in agricultural products. To this end, the UK shall report periodically within the Agriculture Dialogue to the EAC Partner State(s) on the legal basis, form and amount of such support. Such information is deemed to have been provided if it is made available by the Parties or on their behalf on a publicly accessible website.  2. The UK shall not grant export subsidies for all agricultural products to the EAC Partner State(s), as from the entry into force of this Agreement.   3. Furthermore, the Committee of Senior Officials shall examine issues that may arise in relation to the access of the Parties' agricultural products to each other’s markets. This Committee may make recommendations to the EPA Council in accordance with Article 106.   ARTICLE 69  Production and Marketing of Agricultural Commodities  1. The Parties recognise challenges faced by the EAC Partner State(s) because of their dependence on export of primary agricultural commodities, which are subject to high price volatility and declining terms of trade, for foreign exchange earnings.  2. The Parties agree to cooperate to:  (a) strengthen Public-Private-Partnership in investments for production, processing and marketing of agricultural commodities;  (b) cooperate in developing capacities to access niche markets and facilitate compliance with commodity standards to meet such markets requirements;  (c) support diversification of agricultural production and export products in the EAC Partner State(s); and  (d) improve producers' revenue by developing the marketing of value added agricultural products in the market place.     ARTICLE 70  Monitoring  The Parties agree that the EPA Council shall review and monitor the implementation of their obligations under this Agreement. The EPA Council shall provide effective surveillance of compliance with obligations through ensuring transparency and give them an opportunity to assess the contribution of these obligations to their long-term objective of establishing a fair and market- oriented agricultural trading system.   ARTICLE 71  Net Food Importing Countries  1. The Parties recognise the importance of addressing the concerns of the net food importing EAC Partner State(s). The objective of this Article therefore is to assist countries that are net food importers to develop programmes to ensure food security.  2. The Parties agree to support efforts to:  (a) address constraints for food production, storage and distribution in the EAC region;   (b) source food aid from within the EAC Partner State(s) and other African Regional Economic Communities as far as possible; and  (c) improve coordination of food aid.   3. Parties agree to support efforts to maintain an adequate level of food aid, taking into account the interests of food aid recipients and to ensure that the measures mentioned in paragraph 2 do not unintentionally impede the delivery of food aid provided to deal with emergency situations.  4. The Parties shall support efforts to ensure that food aid is provided in full conformity with the measures that aim at preventing commercial displacement, which include:  (a) ensuring that all food aid transactions are need driven and in full grant form; and  (b) not tying them directly or indirectly to commercial exports of agricultural products or of other goods and services.    ARTICLE 72  Importance of Certain Sectors  1. The Parties recognise that:  (a) provision of adequate access to food, clean and safe drinking water, health facilities, educational opportunities, housing, community participation and social integration is important for livelihood security of rural populations;  (b) agricultural infrastructure development including production, processing, marketing and distribution plays a crucial role in the EAC Partner State(s)’ social-economic rural development and regional integration;  (c) technical support services such as agricultural research, extension and advisory services training are important in increasing agricultural productivity;  (d) facilitating agricultural financing is an important measure for transforming the agricultural sector in the EAC Partner State(s). Financing is required for agricultural technology development, agricultural credit and insurance, infrastructure development and markets as well as farmers’ training; and  (e) sustainable rural development is important to improve standards of living of the rural population of the EAC Partner State(s).  2. The Parties agree to cooperate in livelihood security, agricultural infrastructure, technical support services, agricultural financing services and rural development as provided for in Title II of Part V.   ARTICLE 73  Exchange of Information and Consultation  1. The Parties agree to exchange experiences and information on best practices and consult on all issues in pursuit of the objectives of this Part.  2. The Parties agree to:  (a) exchange information on agricultural production, consumption and trade and on the respective market developments for agricultural products;  (b) exchange information on investment opportunities and incentives available in the agricultural sector, including small-scale activities;  (c) exchange information on agricultural policies, laws and regulations between the two Parties;  (d) discuss policy and institutional changes needed to underpin the transformation of the agricultural sector as well as the formulation and implementation of regional policies on agriculture and rural development in pursuit of regional integration; and  (e) exchange information on new and appropriate technologies as well as policies and measures related to the quality of agricultural products.   ARTICLE 74  Geographical Indications  1. The Parties recognise the importance of geographical indications for sustainable agriculture and rural development.  2. The Parties agree to cooperate in the identification, recognition and registration of products that could benefit from protection as geographical indications and any other action aimed at achieving protection for identified products.   PART V  ECONOMIC AND DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION   ARTICLE 75  General Provisions  1. The Parties reaffirm that development cooperation is a core element of their Partnership and an essential factor for the realisation of the objectives of this Agreement.  2. The Parties agree to consider the developmental needs of the EAC Partner State(s) and how they can increase production and supply capacity, foster structural transformation and competitiveness of their economies, enhance their economic diversification; add value, in order to promote sustainable development and support regional integration.   3. The Parties commit to cooperate in order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement and to support regional integration and development strategies. The Parties agree that cooperation shall be informed by this Economic and Development Cooperation Part, in addition to the regional and national development strategies of the EAC Partner State(s). The cooperation shall include financial and non-financial support to the EAC Partner State(s). Financial support may be provided through a range of forms and means, including assistance provided through multilateral and regional organisations.  4. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, the Parties agree that the cooperation provisions contained in this Part and in Parts III and IV of this Agreement reflect the ambition of the Parties and do not create any obligations on the UK to provide financial or non-financial support in specific areas identified.  5. The UK financing pertaining to development cooperation between the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK supporting the implementation of this Agreement shall be carried out within the framework for development cooperation as agreed in Annex III. This will be primarily guided by the principles of the internationally agreed aid effectiveness agenda and the UK Partnership Principles, and aims to reduce poverty and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. In this context, taking into account the new challenges deriving from enhanced regional integration and competition on the global markets, the Parties agree that one of the priorities shall be to support the implementation of this Agreement.   6. For the purposes of the implementation of this Agreement, the Parties commit to jointly and individually mobilising resources with the guidance provided by the specific provisions of Title X on resource mobilisation.  7. Consistent with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness adopted in 2005, the Parties agree to use and support as appropriate nationally and/or regionally owned delivery mechanisms, funds or facilities for channelling and coordinating resources for the implementation of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 76  Objectives  1. The economic and development cooperation shall aim at:  (a) enhancing the competitiveness of the EAC Partner State(s)’ economies;  (b) building up supply capacity and enabling the smooth implementation of this Agreement;  (c) transforming the structure of the EAC Partner State(s)’ economies by establishing a strong, competitive and diversified economic base through enhancing production, distribution, transport, marketing;  (d) developing trade capacity as well as capacity to attract investment;  (e) strengthening trade, investment policies and regulations; and  (f) deepening regional integration.    ARTICLE 77  Areas of Cooperation  Economic and development cooperation shall include the following areas:  (a) infrastructure;  (b) agriculture and livestock;  (c) private sector development;  (d) fisheries;  (e) water and environment;  (f) market access issues:  (i) SPS;  (ii) TBT;  (iii) customs and trade facilitation in the EAC Partner State(s);   (g) EPA adjustment measures; and  (h) mobilisation of resources.    TITLE I  INFRASTRUCTURE   ARTICLE 78  Scope and Objectives  1. Cooperation in the development of physical infrastructure shall include particular transport, energy, information communication and technology.  2. The objectives in this area are to:  (a) increase the competitiveness of the EAC Partner State(s);  (b) address supply side constraints at institutional, national, and regional levels; and  (c) enhance the development of Public Private Partnerships.   ARTICLE 79  Transport  1. Cooperation in transport shall include road, rail, air and water transport.  2. The objectives in this area are to:  (a) improve national and regional connectivity to deepen regional economic integration;  (b) develop, restructure, rehabilitate, upgrade and modernise the EAC Partner State(s)’ durable and efficient transport systems;  (c) improve the movement of people and flow of goods; and  (d) provide better access to markets through improved road, air, maritime, inland water and rail transports.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) management of transport systems;  (b) improvement, development and modernisation of infrastructure at all levels, including the development of inter-modal infrastructure networks;  (c) strengthening of the institutional, technical and administrative capacities of the EAC Partner State(s) in standards, quality assurance, metrology and conformity assessment services;  (d) technology development and transfer, innovation, information exchange and networks, and marketing;  (e) encouragement of partnerships, linkages and joint ventures between economic operators;  (f) improvement of safety and reliability of the transport sector, including meteorological forecasting, management of hazardous goods and emergency responses; and  (g) development of regional transport policies and regulatory frameworks.   ARTICLE 80  Energy  1. Cooperation in the energy sector shall include public and private sector participation in energy generation, transmission, distribution and cross-border energy trade.  2. The objectives in this area are to:  (a) develop, increase and expand the region’s energy generation capacity;  (b) increase the number of alternative sources of energy;  (c) develop, increase and expand networks;  (d) develop, increase and expand distribution and transmission;  (e) improve the access of the EAC Partner State(s) to modern, efficient, reliable, diversified, sustainable and renewable sources of clean energy at competitive prices;  (f) enhance the production, distribution and management capacity of energy at national and regional levels;  (g) promote power interconnectivity both within and outside the EAC Partner State(s) for maximum energy utilisation; and  (h) support the creation of a conducive environment for attracting investment in this sector.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) production, transmission and distribution capacity of existing energy sources, in particular hydropower, petroleum and biomass;  (b) diversification of the energy mix to include other potential sources of energy that are socially and environmentally acceptable and that reduce dependency on oil;  (c) development of energy infrastructure, including for rural areas;  (d) development of appropriate energy regulatory and policy reforms, including commercialisation and privatisation;  (e) regional and inter-regional interconnectivity and cooperation in the production and distribution of energy;  (f) capacity building in human resources, improvement in management, service standards, and institutional structures;  (g) technology development and transfer, Research and Development, innovation, information exchange, development of databases and networks; and  (h) partnerships, linkages and joint ventures.   ARTICLE 81  Information and Communications Technologies (ICT)  1. Cooperation in the ICT sector shall include: the development of ICT, competitiveness, innovation, as well as the smooth transition towards the information society.  2. The objectives in this area are to:  (a) develop the ICT sector; and  (b) enhance the contribution of ICT in facilitation of trade through e-services, e-commerce, e- government, e-health, secure transactions and other socio-economic sectors.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) ICT connectivity and cost effectiveness at the national, regional and global levels;  (b) dissemination of new ICT;  (c) development of the legal and regulatory frameworks on ICT;  (d) technology development, transfer and applications, R&D, innovation, information exchange and networks, and marketing;  (e) capacity building in human resources, improvement in service standards, and institutional structures;  (f) partnerships, linkages and joint ventures between economic operators; and  (g) promotion and support for the development of niche markets for ICT-enabled services.   TITLE II  AGRICULTURE   ARTICLE 82  Scope and Objectives  1. Cooperation in this Title shall apply to crops and livestock including productive insects.  2. The Parties agree that the main objective of this Title is the sustainable agricultural development, which includes but is not limited to food and livelihoods security, rural development and poverty reduction in the EAC Partner State(s).  3. The other objectives of this Title are stipulated in Article 58 of Part IV.   ARTICLE 83  Areas of Cooperation  1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of the agricultural sector to the economies of the EAC Partner State(s) and agree to cooperate in promoting its transformation to increase its competitiveness, ensure food and nutrition security, rural development and facilitate the adjustment of agriculture and rural economy to accommodate the effects of implementation of this Agreement with special attention to small scale farmers.  2. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) Regional Integration  Improvement of access to regional and international markets for agricultural products including the development of market systems and market development strategies;   (b) Enabling Policies  i. development of national and regional agricultural policies, legal and regulatory frameworks, building of the necessary capacity and support to institutional development; and  ii. building capacities in the EAC Partner State(s) to take full advantage of increased trading opportunities and to maximise the benefits of trade reforms.  (c) Sustainable Agricultural Development  i. undertaking joint activities on a regional basis including fertiliser production, seed production, livestock development and plant and animal disease control;  ii. promotion and strengthening Processing, Marketing, Distribution and Transportation (PMDT) and handling of agricultural products; and  iii. capacity building to comply with international standards relating to agricultural production, packaging and SPS measures.  (d) Agricultural Infrastructure  i. development of agricultural support infrastructure including sustainable irrigation systems, water harvesting, storage and management, marketing, and grading;  ii. development of research and training infrastructure, storage facilities, feeder and community access roads;  iii. development of agro-processing infrastructure;  iv. establishment of agro-meteorology centre in the EAC Partner State(s); and  v. development of modern market infrastructure for expansion of domestic and regional markets.  (e) Food and Nutrition Security  i. capacity building of rural and urban communities for the promotion of improved livelihoods, eradication of poverty, and sustainable development;  ii. diversification of agricultural production and development of products that address food and nutrition security needs of the EAC Partner State(s);  iii. designing and implementation of programmes that lead to increased production and productivity in the agricultural sector with special focus on small scale farmers;  iv. capacity development for national and regional food safety compliance; and  v. designing and implementation of social adjustment programmes in regions adversely affected by natural disasters.  (f) Value Chain Management  i. promotion of the use of sustainable agricultural technologies and supply of necessary farm inputs;  ii. enhancing production, productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector through promoting agro-based industries;  iii. enhancing value addition throughout the supply chain of agricultural products to meet the requirements of national, regional and international markets; and  iv. promoting the development of activities in the areas of processing, marketing, distribution and transport of agricultural products.  (g) Early Warning Systems  i. capacity building in terms of assessing and disseminating information on the likely impacts of impending disasters well in advance in order to take contingent measures and early responsiveness;  ii. development and management of national and regional information systems;  iii. development, strengthening and linking of early warning systems and contingency plans and strategies for disaster response management at national and regional levels; and  iv. supporting climate change adaptation and mitigation options  in the EAC Partner State(s).  (h) Production and Marketing of Agricultural Commodities  i. developing capacities to access niche markets and facilitating compliance with commodity standards to meet such markets requirements;  ii. diversification of agricultural production and export products in the EAC Partner State(s);  iii. development of modern market infrastructure for expansion of domestic and regional markets; and  iv. developing product packaging and labelling programmes which enable the EAC Partner State(s)’ producers to secure premium prices for commodity exports.  (i) Rural Development  i. capacity building of farmer groups along the entire agricultural value chain;  ii. improving transport, communication and market facilities for agricultural inputs and outputs marketing;  iii. addressing socio-cultural barriers such as language differences, literacy levels, gender biases, community health that influence the nature of farming systems;  iv. improving farmers’ access to credit services and natural and cultural resource management; and  v. developing relevant policy measures to support availability of adequate agricultural inputs to small scale farmers on a timely basis.  (j) Net Food Importing Countries  Addressing constraints in food production, storage and distribution in the EAC Partner State(s).  (k) Livelihood Security  i. capacity building for developing social services for populations in rural and peri-urban areas;  ii. improving total household income from agricultural production through diversification, add value, off farm employment and adoption of new sustainable agricultural technologies among others in the EAC Partner State(s);  iii. increasing productivity of the agricultural sector within the EAC Partner State(s); and  iv. increasing the use of sustainable agricultural technologies.  (l) Technical Support Services  i. strengthening of innovation and transfer of technology, knowledge, R&D;  ii. developing and increasing use of mechanisation of the EAC Partner State(s)’ agricultural sector;  iii. establishing agricultural input plants and distribution system within the EAC Partner State(s);  iv. promoting and strengthening investment in agricultural research, extension services, training and research-extension –farmers linkage;  v. establishing and strengthening regional centres of excellence including an agro-meteorology centre, biotechnology, analytical and diagnostic laboratories for crop, livestock and soils; and  vi. improving access to services in plant and animal production including livestock breeding services, veterinary services and plant protection services.  (m) Agricultural Financing Services  i. strengthening rural financial services for small-scale producers, processors and traders;  ii. developing regionally owned mechanisms or a fund for agricultural and rural development;  iii. developing agricultural micro-financing institutions and insurance schemes;  iv. facilitating access to credit from banks and other financial institutions for agro-processors, traders and farmers; and  v. supporting the EAC Partner State(s)’ financial institutions serving the agriculture sector and facilitating access by the private sector to capital markets to raise both short and long-term capital.  (n) Geographical Indications  i. developing policies and legal frameworks on geographical indications;  ii. establishing regulations on geographical indications;  iii. developing a code of practice to define products in relation to their origin;  iv. facilitating local organisations and institutions to coordinate local stakeholders on geographical indications and product conformity;  v. building capacity on identification, registration, marketing, traceability and conformity on geographical indications products; and  vi. developing any other area of cooperation under this heading that may arise in the future.   TITLE III  PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT   ARTICLE 84  Scope and Objectives  1. Cooperation on private sector development shall include investment promotion and enterprise development.  2. The objectives of this Title are to:  (a) create a conducive environment for promotion of investment and private enterprises including development of new industries, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and technology transfer;  (b) enhance supply capacities, competitiveness and value addition;  (c) improve access to investment finance such as from relevant UK financing institutions;  (d) build capacity and provide institutional support for private sector development institutions such as investment promotion agencies, apex bodies, chambers of commerce, associations, contact points and trade facilitation institutions;  (e) develop and/or strengthen a policy, legal and regulatory framework that promotes and protects investment;  (f) improve support and delivery mechanisms to the Private Sector such as from the relevant UK institutions for promotion of investment in the EAC Partner State(s); and  (g) create and strengthen partnerships, joint ventures, subcontracting, outsourcing and linkages.  ARTICLE 85  Investment Promotion  The Parties agree to cooperate to promote investments within the EAC Partner State(s) in the following areas:  (a) supporting reforms in the policies, legal and regulatory frameworks;  (b) supporting enhancement of institutional capacities, in particular, capacity building for investment promotion agencies of the EAC Partner State(s) and institutions involved in promoting and facilitating foreign and local investment;  (c) supporting the establishment of appropriate administrative structures, including one-stop shops, for the entry and setting up of investments;  (d) supporting the creation and continuity of a predictable and secure investment climate;  (e) supporting efforts of the EAC Partner State(s) to design revenue generating instruments to mobilise investment resources;  (f) establishing and supporting risk insurance schemes as a risk-mitigating mechanism in order to boost investor confidence in the EAC Partner State(s);  (g) supporting the establishment of mechanisms for exchange of information between the EAC Partner State(s) investment agencies and their UK counterparts;  (h) encouraging UK private sector investments in the EAC Partner State(s);  (i) supporting the establishment of financial frameworks and instruments adapted to investment needs of SMEs; and  (j) facilitating partnerships through joint ventures and capital financing.   ARTICLE 86  Enterprise Development  The Parties agree to cooperate on enterprise development within the EAC Partner State(s) through supporting:  (a) promotion of EAC-UK private sector business dialogue, cooperation and partnerships;  (b) efforts for Micro, Small and Medium size Enterprises (MSME) promotion and integration into the mainstream business activities;  (c) promotion of efficient production and marketing of the EAC Partner State(s)’ firms;  (d) implementation of the EAC Partner State(s)’ Private Sector Development Strategies (PSDS);  (e) promotion of a favourable environment for the development and growth of MSMEs;  (f) private sector organisations’ capacities to comply with international standards;  (g) protection of innovations from piracy; and  (h) capacities of the EAC Partner State(s) for exploration, exploitation and marketing of natural resources.   TITLE IV  FISHERIES   ARTICLE 87  Scope of Cooperation  Cooperation in fisheries shall cover marine and inland fisheries and aquaculture.   ARTICLE 88  Areas of Cooperation in Marine Fisheries  1. Cooperation in marine fisheries shall include:  (a) fisheries management and conservation issues;  (b) vessel management and post-harvest arrangements;  (c) financial and trade measures; and  (d) development of fisheries and fisheries products and marine aquaculture.  2. The UK may contribute to the mobilisation of the resources for the implementation of the identified areas of cooperation at national and regional levels, which will also include support for regional capacity building.  3. Subject to the provisions of Part III of this Agreement, the Parties agree to cooperate, in the following areas:  (a) development and improvement of infrastructure for storage, marketing and distribution of fish and fish products;  (b) capacity building at the national and regional levels to meet SPS/TBT/Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points technical requirements, development of monitoring control and surveillance systems of the EAC Partner State(s)’ EEZ, and introduction and management of certification schemes for specific marine fisheries;  (c) investment and technology transfer in fishing operations, fish processing, port services, development and improvement of port facilities, diversification of the fishery to include non-tuna species which are under-exploited or not exploited;  (d) joint ventures and linkages especially with MSME and artisanal fisheries within the fisheries supply chain;  (e) value addition on fish; and  (f) R&D on stock assessment and sustainability levels.  4. The Parties undertake to cooperate in promoting the setting-up of joint ventures in fishing operations, fish processing, port services, enhance production capacity, improve competitiveness of fishing and related industries and services, downstream processing, development and improvement of port facilities, diversification of the fishery to include non-tuna species which are under-exploited or not exploited.     ARTICLE 89  Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Development  Cooperation on inland fisheries and aquaculture development shall include the following areas:  (a) Capacity building and export market development through:  (i) building capacity in industrial and artisanal production, processing and product diversification that strengthen the competitiveness of the region’s inland fisheries and aquaculture. This could, for example, be achieved by the creation of Research and Development (R&D) centres including the development of aquaculture for commercial fishing farms;  (ii) building capacity for managing export market chains, including the introduction and management of certification schemes for specific product lines; and implementation of market promotion, value addition and reduction in post-harvest losses in fisheries products; and  (iii) increasing capacity in the region through, for example, improving fisheries competent authorities, traders and fishermen's associations in order to participate in fisheries trade with the UK and training programmes in product development and branding.  (b) Infrastructure through:  (i) development and improvement of infrastructure for inland fisheries and aquaculture; and  (ii) facilitation of access to funding for infrastructure, including all type of equipment.  (c) Technology through:  (i) development of technical capabilities, including value-adding technology promotion, for example through fisheries technology transfer from the UK to the EAC Partner State(s); and  (ii) enhancement of fisheries management capacity in the region, for example through research and data collection systems and contribution towards appropriate technologies on harvesting and post-harvest management.   (d) Legal and regulatory framework through:  (i) development of inland fisheries and aquaculture regulations and monitoring control and surveillance systems;  (ii) development of appropriate legal and regulatory instruments on Intellectual Property Rights and building capacity for their implementation in international trade; and  (iii) protection of eco-labelling and intellectual property.  (e) Investment and finance through:  (i) promotion of joint ventures and other forms of mixed investments between stakeholders in the Parties, for example for the setting up of modalities for identifying investors for joint venture operations in inland fisheries and aquaculture; and  (ii) providing access to credit facilities for the development of small to medium scale enterprises as well as industrial scale inland fisheries.  (f) Environmental and stocks conservation in fisheries through:  (i) measures to ensure that fish trade supports environmental conservation, and safeguards against stock depletion and the maintenance of biodiversity and cautious introduction of exotic species for aquaculture; for example, through the cautious introduction of exotic species to be introduced only in managed/closed spaces in consultation with all concerned neighbouring countries.  (g) Socioeconomic and poverty alleviation measures through:  (i) promotion of small and medium scale fishers, processors, and fish traders by building the capacity of the EAC Partner State(s) to participate in trade with the UK; and  (ii) participation of marginal groups in the fishing industry, for example the promotion of gender equity in fisheries, and particularly developing capacity of women traders involved and intending to engage in fisheries. Other disadvantaged groups with the potential to engage in fisheries for sustainable social economic development will also be involved in such processes.     TITLE V  WATER AND ENVIRONMENT   ARTICLE 90  Scope and Objectives  1. Cooperation in this Title shall include natural resources, in particular water, environment and biodiversity.  2. The objectives of cooperation in this Title are to:  (a) enhance the linkages between trade and environment;  (b) support the implementation of international environmental agreements, conventions and treaties;  (c) ensure the balance between environmental management and poverty reduction;  (d) protect the environment and enhance biodiversity conservation and genetic preservation;  (e) promote equitable and sustainable utilisation of natural resources;  (f) facilitate and encourage sustainable utilisation of shared resources; and  (g) promote public and private sector involvement in natural resource management.   ARTICLE 91  Water Resources  1. Cooperation in the area of water resources shall include irrigation, hydropower generation, water production and supply and protection of water catchment areas.  2. The objectives of cooperation in this area are to:  (a) develop sustainable use and management of water resources in the EAC Partner State(s) so as to improve the livelihood of the population of the EAC Partner State(s);  (b) promote regional cooperation for the sustainable utilisation of transboundary water resources; and  (c) develop water supply infrastructure for productive purposes.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) development of water supply infrastructure in the region;  (b) development of the relevant legal and regulatory frameworks;  (c) integrated water resource management;  (d) capacity building in human resources, improvement in service standards, water management, and institutional structures;  (e) creation of partnerships, linkages, and joint ventures between economic operators;  (f) promotion of technology development, transfer and applications, R&D, innovation, information exchange and networks;  (g) development of water pollution control, purification and conservation, wastewater treatment and sanitation; and  (h) promotion of sustainable irrigation schemes.   ARTICLE 92  Environment  1. Cooperation in the area of environment shall include protection and sustainable management of the environment, as well as implementation of trade-related environmental policies.  2. The objectives of cooperation in this area are to:  (a) protect, restore and conserve the environment and biodiversity (flora, fauna and microbial genetic resources including their ecosystems);  (b) develop industries of the EAC Partner State(s) that use environmentally friendly technologies; and  (c) promote technology development, transfer and application, research and development, innovation and information exchange.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) implementation of international environmental agreements, conventions and treaties;  (b) strengthening and promoting equitable and sustainable utilisation, conservation and management of environment and biodiversity, including forestry and wildlife resources;  (c) reinforcement of institutional and legal frameworks and the capacity to develop, implement, administer and enforce environmental laws, regulations, standards and policies;  (d) creation of partnerships, linkages, and joint ventures between economic operators;  (e) prevention and mitigation against natural environmental disasters, and the loss of biodiversity;  (f) promotion of technology development and adaptation, transfer and applications, R&D, and innovation;  (g) protection and management of coastal and marine resources, domestic and wild indigenous biological and genetic resources;  (h) development of alternative environmentally friendly activities and livelihoods;  (i) production and facilitating trade of goods and services for which eco-labelling is important;  (j) information exchange and networking on products and their requirements in terms of production process, transport, marketing and labelling;  (k) development of infrastructure facilities on environmentally friendly products;  (l) integration of local communities in the management of biodiversity, forestry, and wildlife resources;  (m) development of waste management and disposal of industrial and toxic wastes; and  (n) promotion of stakeholder participation in international environmental dialogue.     TITLE VI  SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES   ARTICLE 93  Scope and Objectives  1. Cooperation in this Title shall include support and building capacity in harmonisation, zoning and compartmentalisation, conformity assessment, information exchange and transparency of trade conditions.  2. The objectives of cooperation in this Title are to:  (a) facilitate the Parties’ inter-regional and intra-regional trade, whilst safeguarding human, animal and plant health or life in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement;  (b) address problems arising from SPS measures on agreed priority sectors and products giving due consideration to regional integration;  (c) stipulate procedures and modalities for facilitating cooperation in SPS matters;  (d) ensure transparency as regards SPS measures applicable to trade between and within the Parties;  (e) promote intra-regional harmonisation of measures with international standards, in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement, and the development of appropriate policies, legislative, regulatory and institutional frameworks within the EAC Partner State(s);  (f) enhance the effective participation of the EAC Partner State(s) in the Codex Alimentarius Commission, World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC);  (g) promote consultation and exchanges between EAC and UK institutions and laboratories;  (h) facilitate the development of capacity for setting and implementing regional and national standards in accordance with international requirements in order to facilitate regional integration;  (i) establish and enhance the EAC Partner State(s)’ capacity to implement and monitor SPS measures pursuant to this Article; and  (j) promote technology transfer.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) Support the EAC Partner State(s) to comply with SPS measures, including the development of appropriate regulatory frameworks, policies, matters concerning the work of the relevant international standards-setting bodies, training, information events, capacity building, and technical assistance;  (b) support the harmonisation of SPS measures within the EAC Partner State(s) and the setting up of national SPS coordinating committees and to promote the capacity of the public and private sector for sanitary control. Priority areas include development and implementation of a quality programme, training, information events, the building, upgrading, modernisation and accreditation of laboratories;  (c) support on matters concerning the work of the relevant international standards-setting bodies. This cooperation may include training, information events, capacity building and technical assistance;  (d) support in the area of fisheries with the aim of developing harmonised regional rules, legislation and standards of fish products to promote trade between the Parties and within the EAC region;  (e) support with the aim of promoting cooperation between the EAC Partner State(s)’ SPS institutions and equivalent UK SPS institutions;  (f) support the implementation of the SPS Agreement, particularly, in strengthening the EAC Partner State(s) competent authorities, notification and enquiry points; and  (g) support information sharing and exchange.   ARTICLE 94  Harmonisation  1. The Parties shall aim to achieve harmonisation of their respective rules and procedures for formulation of their SPS measures, including inspection, testing and certification procedures, in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement.  2. The EAC Partner State(s) will develop, with the support of the UK, a programme and timeframe for harmonising their SPS standards.  3. The Committee of Senior Officials shall develop modalities to assist and to monitor the process of harmonisation within the regions, as appropriate.   ARTICLE 95  Zoning and Compartmentalisation  The Parties shall recognise on a case by case basis designated areas which are free from pests or diseases or areas of low pest or disease prevalence as potential sources of plant and animal products, taking into account the provisions of Article 6 of the WTO SPS Agreement.   ARTICLE 96  Special and Differential Treatment and Technical Assistance  1. The UK agrees to provide technical assistance and special and differential treatment in accordance with Articles 9 and 10 of the WTO SPS Agreement.  2. The Parties shall cooperate to address the special needs of the EAC Partner State(s) arising from the implementation of provisions of this Title.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in relation to the following areas as priorities for technical assistance:  (a) the building of technical capacity in the public and private sectors of the EAC Partner State(s) to enable sanitary and phytosanitary controls, including training and information events for inspection, certification, supervision and control;  (b) the enhancement of technical capacity for the implementation and monitoring of SPS measures, including promoting greater use of international standards;  (c) the development of capacities for risk analysis, harmonisation, compliance, testing, certification, residue monitoring, traceability and accreditation including through the upgrading or setting up of laboratories and other equipment to help the EAC Partner State(s) comply with international standards;  (d) the support for the participation of the EAC Partner State(s) in the work of relevant international standards setting bodies; and  (e) the development of the EAC Partner State(s)’ capacity for effective participation in the notification processes.   TITLE VII  TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE   ARTICLE 97  Scope and Objectives  1. Cooperation in this Title shall include the preparation, adoption and application of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures, as defined in the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (WTO TBT Agreement).  2. The objectives of cooperation in this Title are to:  (a) progressively eliminate technical barriers to trade, in order to facilitate trade between the Parties and within the EAC Partner State(s);  (b) enhance regional integration among the EAC Partner State(s) by harmonising standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures applied in the EAC Partner State(s), in accordance with the WTO TBT Agreement;  (c) promote greater use of international technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures, including sector specific measures;  (d) develop functional links, joint ventures and joint research and development work between the EAC Partner State(s) and UK standardisation, conformity assessment and regulatory institutions;  (e) enhance the market access for products originating in the EAC Partner State(s) through improvements in the safety, quality and competitiveness of their products;  (f) promote greater use of international best practices for technical regulations, international standards and conformity assessment procedures;  (g) ensure that the preparation, adoption and application of standards and technical regulations are transparent and do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of the WTO TBT Agreement;  (h) support the development of appropriate regulatory framework, policies and reform within the EAC Partner State(s) to meet internationally accepted practices; and  (i) assist the EAC Partner State(s) to implement the WTO TBT Agreement and to comply with the TBT requirements of their trading partners in the context of the WTO TBT Agreement.  3. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) support the promotion of greater use of international standards, technical regulations and conformity assessments, including sector specific measures in the Parties’ territories;  (b) support the EAC Partner State(s)’ capacity building in the fields of standardisation, metrology, accreditation and conformity assessment procedures, including support in the upgrading and setting up of laboratories and relevant institutions as well as procurement of relevant equipment;  (c) support quality management and assurance in selected sectors of importance to the EAC Partner State(s);  (d) support the EAC Partner State(s)’ standards and other technical regulatory bodies full participation in international standard setting bodies, and reinforcing the role of international standards as a basis for technical regulations;  (e) support the efforts by the EAC Partner State(s)’ conformity assessment bodies to obtain international accreditation;  (f) development of functional links between the Parties’ standardisation, conformity assessment and certification institutions;  (g) support the development of common understanding on good regulatory practices, including:  (i) transparency in the preparation, adoption and application of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;  (ii) necessity and proportionality of regulatory measures and related conformity assessment procedures, which may include the use of suppliers’ declarations of conformity;  (iii) use of international standards as a basis for setting up technical regulations, except where such international standards would be an ineffective or inappropriate means for the fulfilment of the legitimate objectives pursued;  (iv) enforcement of technical regulations and market surveillance activities; and  (v) establishment of mechanisms and methods for reviewing technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;  (h) identification, prioritisation and support in the development of the necessary technical infrastructure and transfer of technology, in terms of metrology, standardisation, testing, certification and accreditation, to support technical regulations;  (i) enhancement of regulatory, technical and scientific cooperation by, inter alia, exchange of information, experiences and data, with a view to improving the quality and level of their technical regulations and making efficient use of regulatory resources;  (j) development of compatibility and convergence of the respective technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;  (k) promotion and encouragement of bilateral cooperation between the Parties’ respective organisations responsible for metrology, standardisation, testing, certification and accreditation; and  (l) promotion of cooperation between the Parties and between the EAC Partner State(s) in relation to the work of relevant international institutions and organisations, and fora dealing with TBT issues.   TITLE VIII  CUSTOMS AND TRADE FACILITATION   ARTICLE 98  Scope and Objectives  1. The Parties acknowledge and recognise the importance of cooperation in customs and trade facilitation matters in the evolving global trading environment.  2. The Parties agree to reinforce cooperation with a view to ensuring that the relevant legislation and procedures, as well as the administrative capacity of the relevant administrations, fulfil the objective of promoting trade facilitation.  3. The Parties acknowledge the need for proper administrative capacity to meet these objectives. They agree that the EAC Partner State(s) will need transitional periods of time and capacity building to smoothly implement the provisions of this Title.  4. The objectives of cooperation in this Title are to:  (a) facilitate trade between the Parties;  (b) promote harmonisation of customs legislation and procedures at regional level;  (c) provide support to the EAC Partner State(s) to strengthen trade facilitation;  (d) provide support to the EAC Partner State(s)’ customs administrations to implement this Agreement and other international customs best practices; and  (e) enhance cooperation between the Parties’ customs authorities and other related border agencies.  5. The Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas:  (a) exchange of information on customs legislation and procedures;  (b) development of joint initiatives in mutually agreed areas;  (c) support of the:  (i) modernisation of customs systems and procedures and reduction of customs clearance time;  (ii) simplification and harmonisation of customs procedures and trade formalities, including those related to import, export, and transit;  (iii) enhancement of regional transit systems;  (iv) enhancement of transparency in accordance with Article 134;  (v) capacity building including financial and technical assistance to the EAC Partner State(s) in this area; and  (vi) any other area of customs as agreed on by the Parties.  (d) establishment, as far as possible, of common positions in international organisations in the field of customs and trade facilitation, such as the WTO, WCO, UN and UNCTAD; and  (e) promotion of coordination between all related agencies, both internally and across borders.  6. The Parties shall provide each other mutual administrative assistance in customs matters in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 1 on rules of origin and may cooperate in the following areas:  (a) introduction of procedures and practices which reflect international instruments and standards applicable in the field of customs and trade facilitation, including WTO rules and WCO instruments and standards;  (b) implementation of activities aimed at consolidating the harmonisation of customs standards and trade facilitation measures;  (c) the application of modern customs techniques, including risk assessment, binding rulings, simplified procedures, post-release controls and audit methods;  (d) the automation of customs and other trade procedures, including electronic exchange of customs and trade information;  (e) the training of customs officials and other relevant public and private sector officials on customs and trade facilitation; and  (f) any other areas that may be identified by the Parties.   TITLE IX  EPA ADJUSTMENT MEASURES  ARTICLE 99  Scope and Objectives  1. The Parties recognise that the elimination and/or substantial reduction of tariffs as set out in this Agreement will be a challenge for the EAC Partner State(s).   2. The Parties also recognise that the implementation of this Agreement may result in potential challenges, inter alia, social, economic and environmental to the economies of the EAC Partner State(s). The Parties agree that these challenges may be addressed through economic and development cooperation actions.  3. Cooperation in this Title aims at addressing actual and potential adjustment challenges resulting from the implementation of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 100  Areas of Cooperation  1. With regard to revenue losses linked to the reduction of tariffs, the UK may:  (a) engage in an enhanced dialogue on fiscal adaptation measures and reforms;  (b) establish cooperation modalities to support fiscal reform.  2. To ensure that the economies of the EAC Partner State(s) take full advantage of this Agreement, the UK agrees to work with the EAC Partner State(s) to undertake appropriate cooperation activities aiming at:  (a) improving competitiveness of productive sectors within the EAC Partner State(s);  (b) improving productive and professional capacities of the workforce of the EAC Partner State(s) including training of workers displaced with closure of firms or equipping them with new skills for new activities etc.;  (c) supporting measures towards sustainable environment;  (d) building capacity to enhance macro-economic discipline;  (e) mitigating the possible impacts affecting food and nutrition security, rural development, livelihood security and export earnings in the EAC Partner State(s); and  (f) addressing other possible areas of cooperation related to the implementation challenges of this Agreement.   TITLE X  RESOURCE MOBILISATION   ARTICLE 101  Principles and Objectives  1. Recognising the UK’s commitment to support the implementation of this Agreement and the EAC Partner State(s) own efforts to financing their development needs, the Parties agree to work both jointly and independently to mobilise financial resources to support the implementation of this Agreement, regional integration and the EAC Partner State(s)’ development strategies.  2. The objective of joint resource mobilisation is to complement, support and promote in the spirit of interdependence, the efforts of the EAC Partner State(s) in pursuing alternative sources of funding to support regional integration and the development strategies contained in this Agreement.     ARTICLE 102  Obligations  1. The EAC Partner State(s) may:  (a) commit resources from their financing mechanisms on a timely and predictable basis to support regional integration and the EPA-related development strategies and projects;  (b) develop their development strategies with due regard for the right of the EAC Partner State(s) to determine the direction and the sequence of their development strategies and priorities; and  (c) establish an EPA fund to channel EPA-related resources.  2. The EAC Partner State(s) shall formulate rules and regulations for the management of the Fund to ensure transparency, accountability and value for money in the utilisation of these resources. Without prejudice to other partners’ contributions to the EAC EPA Fund, the UK may consider channelling resources and this will be made provisional on a successful assessment of the Fund by the UK.  3. The UK may commit resources taking particularly into account the supply side constraints of the EAC Partner State(s) linked to the implementation of this Agreement, through:  (a) the UK Budget; or  (b) any other instrument enabling technical or financial support that will be used to implement the UK’s Official Development Assistance (ODA), including assistance provided through multilateral and regional organisations.  4. The Parties shall jointly commit to work towards mobilising the following resources:  (a) funds of other donors (multilateral and bilateral donors);  (b) grants, concessional loans, public-private partnerships, and specialised facilities;  (c) any other ODA resources available from development partners.   PART VI  INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 103  Scope and Objective  1. The provisions of this Part apply to the EPA Council, the Committee of Senior Officials, the Consultative Committee and any institutions and Committees as may be established under this Agreement.  2. The objective of this Part is to establish institutions which will facilitate the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 104  EPA Council  1. An EPA Council is hereby established upon entry into force of this Agreement.  2. The EPA Council shall be composed of the representatives of the Parties at ministerial level.  3. The EPA Council shall establish its own rules of procedure within six (6) months of entry into force of this Agreement.  4. The EPA Council shall be co-chaired by a representative of each Party, in accordance with the provisions laid down in its rules of procedure.  5. The EPA Council shall meet at regular intervals, not exceeding a period of two (2) years, and extraordinarily whenever circumstances so require with the agreement of the Parties.  6. The EPA Council shall be responsible for:  (a) the operation and implementation of this Agreement and the monitoring of the fulfilment of its objectives;  (b) the examination of any major issue arising within the framework of this Agreement, as well as any other question of common interest affecting trade between the Parties, without prejudice to the rights conferred in Part VII; and  (c) the examination of proposals and recommendations from the Parties for the review and amendment of this Agreement.  ARTICLE 105  Powers of the EPA Council  1. The EPA Council shall have powers to take decisions and may adopt recommendations from the Committee of Senior Officials in writing by mutual agreement.  2. The decisions taken shall be binding on the Parties that shall take all the measures necessary to implement them in accordance with their respective internal rules.  3. The EPA Council shall establish and adopt within six (6) months after the entry into force of this Agreement the Rules of Procedure required for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel.  4. For matters in which an EAC Partner State acts individually the adoption of such decisions by the EPA Council shall require the agreement of the EAC Partner State concerned.   ARTICLE 106  Committee of Senior Officials  1. A Committee of Senior Officials is hereby established upon entry into force of this Agreement.  2. It shall be composed of Permanent Secretaries or Principal Secretaries, as the case may be, from the EAC Partner State(s) and representatives from the UK at Senior Official level.  3. Subject to any directions which may be given by the EPA Council, the Committee of Senior Officials shall meet at least once in each year and may hold extraordinary meetings whenever circumstances so require at any time agreed by the Parties. The Committee of Senior Officials shall also meet preceding the meetings of the EPA Council.  4. The Committee shall be co-chaired by a representative of each of the Parties.  5. The Committee of Senior Officials shall be responsible for:   (a) assisting the EPA Council in the performance of its duties;  (b) receiving and considering reports of the specialised committees, working sessions, task forces or any bodies established by the Committee under Article 107(1) and co-ordinating their activities as well as making recommendations for consideration by the EPA Council;  (c) submitting reports and recommendations on the implementation of this Agreement to the EPA Council either on its own initiative or upon the request of the EPA Council, or upon request of a Party;  (d) in the area of trade:  (i) supervising and being responsible for the implementation and proper application of the provisions of this Agreement and discussing and recommending areas of cooperation in this regard;  (ii) undertaking action to avoid disputes and resolving disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of the Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Title I of Part VII;  (iii) assisting the EPA Council in the performance of its functions, including the submission of recommendations for decisions to be taken by the EPA Council;  (iv) monitoring the development of regional integration and of economic and trade relations between the Parties;  (v) monitoring and assessing the impact of the implementation of this Agreement on the sustainable development of the Parties;  (vi) discussing and undertaking actions that may facilitate trade, investment and business opportunities between the Parties; and  (vii) discussing any matters pertaining to this Agreement and any issue liable to affect the attainment of its objectives;   (e) in the area of development:  (i) assisting the EPA Council in the performance of its functions regarding development cooperation related matters falling under this Agreement;  (ii) monitoring the implementation of the cooperation provisions laid down in this Agreement and to coordinate such action with third party donors;  (iii) making recommendations on trade-related cooperation between the Parties;  (iv) keeping under periodic review the areas of cooperation set out in this Agreement, and making recommendations on the inclusion of new priorities, as appropriate; and  (v) reviewing and discussing cooperation issues pertaining to regional integration and implementation of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 107  Powers of the Committee of Senior Officials  1. In the performance of its functions, the Committee of Senior Officials shall:  (a) establish as appropriate, give directives to and oversee any specialised committees, working sessions, task forces or bodies to deal with matters falling within its competence, and determine their composition, duties and their rules of procedure unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement;  (b) take decisions or adopt recommendations in the cases provided for in this Agreement or where such implementing power has been delegated to it by the EPA Council, in such cases, the Committee shall take decisions or make recommendations in accordance with the conditions laid down in Article 105; and  (c) consider any issues under this Agreement and take appropriate action in the exercise of its functions.  2. The Committee shall hold specific working sessions to perform the functions provided for in paragraph 1(a).  3. The Committee shall determine its own rules of procedure within three (3) months of the entry into force of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 108  EPA Consultative Committee  1. An EPA Consultative Committee is hereby established with the task of assisting the Committee of Senior Officials to promote dialogue and cooperation between representatives of the private sector, organisations of civil society, including the academic community, and social and economic partners. Such dialogue and cooperation shall include all matters covered under this Agreement as they arise in the context of the implementation of this Agreement.  2. Participation in the EPA Consultative Committee shall be decided by the EPA Council, upon recommendations from the Committee of Senior Officials, with a view to ensuring a broad representation of all interested parties.  3. The EPA Consultative Committee shall carry out its activities on the basis of consultation by the Committee of Senior Officials or on its own initiative and make recommendations to the Committee of Senior Officials. Representatives of the Parties shall attend the meetings of the EPA Consultative Committee.  4. The EPA Consultative Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure within three (3) months after its establishment in agreement with the Committee of Senior Officials.   PART VII  DISPUTE AVOIDANCE AND SETTLEMENT   ARTICLE 109  Scope and Objective  1. This Part applies to any dispute concerning the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Agreement, unless otherwise provided.  2. The objective of this Part is to avoid and settle any dispute between the Parties concerning the interpretation and application of this Agreement in good faith and to arrive at, where possible, a mutually agreed solution.   TITLE I  DISPUTE AVOIDANCE   ARTICLE 110  Consultations  1. The Parties shall enter into consultations and endeavour to resolve any dispute concerning the interpretation and application of this Agreement in good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually agreed solution.  2. A Party shall seek consultations by means of a written request to the other Party, copied to the Committee of Senior Officials, identifying the measure at issue and the provisions of the Agreement that it considers the measure not to be in conformity with.   3. Consultations shall take place, unless the Parties agree otherwise, in the territory of the Party complained against and shall be held within twenty (20) days of the date of the receipt of the request. The consultations shall be deemed concluded within sixty (60) days of the date of the receipt of the request of the Party complained against, unless the Parties agree to continue consultations. All information disclosed during the consultations shall remain confidential.  4. Consultations on matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable or seasonal goods shall be held as soon as is practically possible and in any event within fifteen (15) days of the date of the receipt of the request, and shall be deemed concluded within thirty (30) days of the date of the receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree to continue consultations.  5. If the Party to which the request is made does not respond to the request for consultations within ten (10) days of the date of its receipt, or if consultations are not held within the timeframes laid down in paragraph 3 or in paragraph 4 above respectively, or if consultations have been concluded and no agreement has been reached on a mutually agreed solution, either Party may request settlement of the dispute by arbitration in accordance with Article 112.  6. The Parties may agree to amend the time limits referred to in paragraphs 3 to 5 above given the difficulties or complexities of the case experienced by either Party.   ARTICLE 111  Mediation  1. If consultations fail to produce a mutually agreed solution, the Parties may, by agreement, seek recourse to a mediator. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the terms of reference for the mediation shall be the matter referred to in the request for consultations.  2. Either Party may proceed to arbitration under Article 112 without recourse to mediation.  3. Unless the Parties agree on a mediator within fifteen (15) days of the date of the agreement to request mediation, the Chairperson of the Committee of Senior Officials, or his or her delegate, shall select by lot a mediator from the pool of individuals who are on the list referred to in Article 125 and are not nationals of either Party. The selection shall be made within twenty-five (25) days of the date of the submission of agreement to request mediation and in the presence of a representative of each Party. The mediator will convene a meeting with the Parties no later than thirty (30) days after being selected. The mediator shall receive the submissions of each Party no later than fifteen (15) days before the meeting and notify an opinion no later than forty-five (45) days after having been selected.  4. The mediator’s opinion may include a recommendation on how to resolve the dispute consistent with the provisions of this Agreement. The mediator’s opinion is non-binding.  5. The Parties may agree to amend the time limits referred to in paragraph 3. The mediator may also decide to amend these time limits upon request of any of the Parties or on his own initiative, given the difficulties experienced by the Party concerned or the complexities of the case.  6. The proceedings involving mediation, in particular all information disclosed and positions taken by the Parties during these proceedings, shall remain confidential.   TITLE II  DISPUTE SETTLEMENT   ARTICLE 112  Initiation of the Arbitration Procedure  1. Where the Parties have failed to resolve the dispute by recourse to consultations as provided for in Article 110, the complaining Party may give notice to initiate the procedure for the establishment of an arbitration panel, which shall be established in accordance with Article 113.  2. The notice for establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in writing to the Party complained against and to the Committee of Senior Officials. The complaining Party shall identify in its notice the specific measures at issue, and it shall clearly explain how such measures constitute a breach of the provisions of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 113  Establishment of the Arbitration Panel  1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.  2. Within ten (10) days of the date of the submission of the notice for the establishment of an arbitration panel to the Committee of Senior Officials, the Parties shall consult in order to reach an agreement on the composition of the arbitration panel.   3. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on its composition within the timeframe laid down in paragraph 2, each Party will select an arbitrator from the list of arbitrators established under Article 125 within five (5) days. If any of the Parties fails to appoint its arbitrator, upon request of the other Party, this arbitrator shall be selected by lot by the Chairperson of the Committee of Senior Officials, or the Chairperson's delegate from the sub-list of that Party established under Article 125.  4. Unless the Parties reach an agreement concerning the Chairperson of the arbitration panel within the timeframe established in paragraph 2, the two arbitrators shall in turn appoint a third arbitrator as the Chairperson of the panel from the list established under Article 125 within five (5) days of their appointment and shall notify the Committee of Senior Officials of the appointment. In the event of failure to appoint the Chairperson of the panel, either Party may ask the Chairperson of the Committee of Senior Officials or the Chairperson's delegate to select by lot the Chairperson of the arbitration panel from the sub-list of Chairpersons contained in the list established under Article 125 within five (5) days.  5. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the three arbitrators are selected and have accepted their appointment according to the rules of procedure.   ARTICLE 114  Interim Panel Report  1. The arbitration panel shall notify the Parties of an interim report containing both the descriptive section and its findings and conclusions, as a general rule not later than ninety (90) days from its date of establishment. Where it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the Chairperson of the arbitration panel must notify the Parties and the Committee of Senior Officials in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the panel plans to issue its interim report. Under no circumstances should the interim report be issued later than one hundred and twenty (120) days after the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel. Any Party may submit written comments to the arbitration panel on precise aspects of its interim report within fifteen (15) days of the notification of the report.  2. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable or seasonal goods, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its interim report in thirty (30) days, and in any case no later than forty-five (45) days after its establishment. A Party may submit a written request for the arbitration panel to review precise aspects of the interim report, within seven (7) days of the notification of the interim report.  3. After considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim report, the arbitration panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate. The final arbitration panel ruling shall include a discussion of the arguments made at the interim review stage and shall answer clearly to the questions and observations of the Parties.  ARTICLE 115  Arbitration Panel Ruling  1. The arbitration panel shall:  (a) notify its ruling to the Parties and to the Committee of Senior Officials within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of its establishment;  (b) notwithstanding subparagraph (a) above, where this deadline cannot be met, the Chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the Committee of Senior Officials in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the panel plans to issue its ruling. Under no circumstances shall the ruling be notified later than one hundred and fifty (150) days from the date of its establishment.  2. In cases of urgency including those involving perishable and seasonal goods, the arbitration panel:  (a) shall notify its ruling within sixty (60) days from the date of its establishment; and  (b) may give a preliminary ruling, as soon as is practically possible and in any event within seven (7) days of its establishment on whether it deems the case to be urgent.  3. The arbitration panel ruling shall include recommendations as to how the Party complained against could bring itself into compliance.  4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 6 to 9 on the Reasonable Period of Time (RPT), the Party complained against shall take any measure necessary to comply immediately and in good faith with the arbitration panel ruling.  5. If immediate compliance is not possible, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on the period of time to comply with the ruling. In such a case, the Party complained against shall, no later than twenty-one (21) days after the notification of the arbitration panel ruling to the Parties, notify the complaining Party and the Committee of Senior Officials of the time it will require for compliance.  6. If there is disagreement between the Parties on the RPT to comply with the arbitration panel ruling, the complaining Party shall, within fourteen (14) days of the notification made under paragraph 1, request in writing the arbitration panel to determine the length of the RPT. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the other Party and to the Committee of Senior Officials. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Parties and to the Committee of Senior Officials within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the submission of the request.  7. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene, the procedures set out in Article 113 shall apply. The time limit for notifying the ruling shall be thirty-five (35) days from the date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 6.  8. In determining the length of the RPT, the arbitration panel shall take into consideration the length of time that it will normally take the Party complained against to adopt comparable legislative or administrative measures to those identified by such Party as being necessary to ensure compliance, and in particular, the panel shall take into account the difficulties the EAC Partner State(s) may encounter due to lack of requisite capacity.  9. The RPT may be extended by agreement of the Parties.   ARTICLE 116  Review of Any Measure Taken to Comply with the Arbitration Panel Ruling  1. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the Committee of Senior Officials before the end of the reasonable period of time of any measure that it has taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling.  2. Where at the end of the RPT the Party complained against has not complied with paragraph 1 above, the complaining Party may take, upon notification to the other Party and the Committee of Senior Officials, appropriate measures in accordance with Article 117(2).  3. Where there is a disagreement between the Parties as to whether the Party complained against has brought itself into compliance with the provisions of this Agreement, either Party may request in writing the arbitration panel to rule on the matter. Such request shall identify the specific measure at issue and it shall explain clearly how such measure is incompatible or compatible with the provisions of the Agreement and the arbitration panel ruling.  4. The arbitration panel shall endeavour to notify its ruling within forty-five (45) days of the date of the submission of the request above. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable and seasonal goods, the arbitration panel shall notify its ruling within thirty (30) days of the date of the submission of the request.  5. In the event that the original arbitration panel or some of its members being unable to reconvene within fifteen (15) days, the procedures set out in Article 113 shall apply. In such cases, the time limit for notifying the ruling shall be eighty (80) days from the date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 3 above.    ARTICLE 117  Temporary Remedies in case of Non-Compliance  1. If the Party complained against fails to notify any measure taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling before the expiry of the RPT or if the arbitration panel rules that the measure notified under Article 116(1) is not compatible with the obligations of the Party complained against under the provisions of this Agreement, the complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification to the other Party, to adopt appropriate measures.  2. In adopting such measures, the complaining Party shall endeavour to select measures that least affects the attainment of the objectives of this Agreement and shall take into consideration their impact on the economy of the Party complained against. In addition, where the UK has obtained the right to adopt such measures, it shall select measures which are specifically aimed at bringing into compliance the EAC Partner State whose measures were found to be in breach of this Agreement.  3. At any time after the expiry of the RPT, the complaining Party may request the Party complained against to provide an offer for temporary compensation and the Party complained against shall present such an offer.  4. Compensation or retaliatory measures shall be temporary and shall be applied only until any measure found to violate the provisions of this Agreement have been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with those provisions or until the Parties have agreed to settle the dispute.   ARTICLE 118  Review of Any Measure Taken to Comply After the Adoption of Appropriate Measures  1. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party and the Committee of Senior Officials of any measure it has taken to comply with the ruling of the arbitration panel and of its request for an end to application of appropriate measures by the complaining Party.  2. Where the Parties do not reach an agreement on the compatibility of the notified measure with the provisions of this Agreement within thirty (30) days of the date of the submission of the notification, the complaining Party shall request in writing the arbitration panel to rule on the matter. Such request shall be notified to the other Party and to the Committee of Senior Officials. The arbitration panel ruling shall be notified to the Parties and to the Committee of Senior Officials within forty-five (45) days of the date of the submission of the request.   3. If the arbitration panel rules that any measure taken to comply is not in conformity with the provisions of this Agreement, it shall determine whether the complaining Party can continue to apply appropriate measures. If the arbitration panel rules that any measure taken to comply is in conformity with the provisions of this Agreement, the appropriate measures shall be terminated immediately following the date of the ruling.  4. In the event that the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene, the procedures laid down in Article 113 shall apply. The period for notifying the ruling shall be sixty (60) days from the date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 2 above.   TITLE III  COMMON PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 119  Mutually Agreed Solution  The Parties may reach an agreed solution to a dispute under this Part at any time and shall notify the Committee of Senior Officials of any such solution. If the solution requires approval pursuant to the relevant domestic procedures of either Party, the notification shall refer to this requirement, and the procedure shall be suspended. If such approval is not required, or upon notification of the completion of any such domestic procedure, the procedure shall be terminated.   ARTICLE 120  Rules of Procedure  Dispute settlement procedures shall be governed by Rules of Procedure to be adopted by the EPA Council within six (6) months after the entry into force of this Agreement.    ARTICLE 121  Information and Technical Advice  At the request of either Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel may obtain information from any source, including the Parties involved in the dispute, it deems appropriate for the arbitration panel proceeding. The arbitration panel shall also have the right to seek the relevant opinion of experts as it deems appropriate. Interested natural or legal persons of the Parties and other third parties are authorised to submit amicus curiae briefs to the arbitration panel in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. Any information obtained in this manner must be disclosed to the Parties which may submit comments.   ARTICLE 122  Language of the Submissions  1. The written and oral submissions of the Parties shall be made in any official language of the Parties.  2. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on a common working language for any specific proceedings under this Part. If the Parties are unable to agree on a common working language, each Party shall arrange for and bear the costs of the translation of its written submissions and interpretations at the hearings into the language chosen by the Party complained against, unless such language is an official language of that Party.1 1 For the purpose of this Article, the official languages are those listed in Article 145.   ARTICLE 123  Rules of Interpretation  1. Arbitration panels shall interpret the provisions of this Agreement in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including those codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.  2. The interpretations and rulings of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations provided in the provisions of this Agreement.    ARTICLE 124  Arbitration Panel Rulings Procedure  1. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by consensus. Where a decision cannot be adopted by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by majority vote.  2. Any ruling of the arbitration panel shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions of this Agreement and the reasoning behind any findings, recommendations and conclusions that it makes. The Committee of Senior Officials shall make the arbitration panel rulings publicly available.  3. The arbitration panel ruling shall be final and binding on Parties.   ARTICLE 125  List of Arbitrators  1. The Committee of Senior Officials shall, not later than six (6) months after the entry into force of this Agreement, establish a list of at least fifteen (15) individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators. The list shall be composed of three sub-lists: one sub-list for each Party to serve as arbitrators; and one sub-list of individuals that are not nationals of either Party and who shall act as Chairperson to the arbitration panel. Each sub-list shall include at least five (5) individuals. The Committee of Senior Officials shall ensure that the list is always maintained at this level in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.  2. Should any of the sub-lists not be established or not contain sufficient names of individuals at the time a notice is made pursuant to Article 113(2), the arbitrators shall be drawn by lot from the individuals who have been formally proposed for the respective sub-list by one or both of the Parties. If only one Party has proposed names, the three arbitrators shall be drawn by lot from among these names.  3. In case there is no list of arbitrators established under paragraph 1 above or names of arbitrators proposed under paragraph 2, the Party initiating the process of arbitration shall request the Secretary General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration to act as the appointing authority.  4. Arbitrators shall have specialised knowledge of and experience in law and international trade. They shall be independent, serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government, or be affiliated with the government of any of the Parties, and shall comply with the Code of Conduct annexed to the Rules of Procedures to be adopted by the EPA Council within six (6) months after the entry into force of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 126  Relations with WTO Dispute Settlement  1. Arbitration panels set up under this Agreement shall not adjudicate disputes on either Party’s rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement.  2. Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to any action in the WTO Agreement, including dispute settlement action. However, where a Party has, with regard to a particular measure, initiated a dispute settlement proceeding, either under this Title or under the WTO Agreement, it may not institute a dispute settlement proceeding regarding the same measure in the other forum until the first proceeding has ended. In addition, a Party shall not seek redress for the breach of an obligation which is identical under the Agreement and under the WTO Agreement in the two fora. In such case, once a dispute settlement proceeding has been initiated, the Party shall not bring a claim seeking redress for the breach of the identical obligation under the other agreement to the other forum, unless the forum selected fails for procedural or jurisdictional reasons to make findings on the claim seeking redress of that obligation.  3. A Party may, with regard to a particular measure, institute a dispute settlement proceeding, either under this Part or under the WTO Agreement:  (a) dispute settlement proceedings under this Part are deemed to be initiated by a Party's request for the establishment of an arbitration panel under Article 112 and are deemed to be ended when the arbitration panel notifies its ruling to the Parties and to the Committee of Senior Officials under Article 115 or where a mutually agreed solution has been reached under Article 119;   (b) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are deemed to be initiated by a Party’s request for the establishment of a panel under Article 6 of the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes of the WTO (DSU) and are deemed to be ended when the Dispute Settlement Body adopts the Panel's report, and the Appellate Body's report as the case may be, under Articles 16 and 17(14) of the DSU.  4. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party from implementing the suspension of obligations authorised by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO. The WTO Agreement shall not preclude a Party from suspending obligations under this Agreement.    ARTICLE 127  Time Limits  1. Any time limits laid down in this Part, including the limits for the arbitration panels to notify their rulings, shall be counted in calendar days from the day following the act or fact to which they refer.  2. Any time limit referred to in this Part may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.   PART VIII  GENERAL EXCEPTIONS   ARTICLE 128  General Exception Clause  1. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by the UK or the EAC Partner State(s) of measures:  (a) necessary to protect public security and morals or to maintain public order;  (b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;  (c) relating to the importation or exportation of gold or silver;  (d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to customs enforcement, the enforcement of monopolies operated under paragraph 4 of Article II and Article XVII of GATT 1994, the protection of patents, trade marks and copyrights, and the prevention of deceptive practices;  (e) relating to the products of prison labour;  (f) imposed for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value;  (g) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption;  (h) undertaken in pursuance of obligations under any intergovernmental commodity agreement which conforms to criteria submitted to the GATT 1994 Contracting Parties and not disapproved by them or which is itself so submitted and not so disapproved1; 1 The exception provided for in this sub-paragraph extends to any commodity agreement which conforms to the principles approved by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 30 (IV) of 28 March l947.  (i) involving restrictions on exports of domestic materials necessary to ensure essential quantities of such materials to a domestic processing industry during periods when the domestic price of such materials is held below the world price as part of a governmental stabilisation plan. However, such measures shall not operate to increase the exports of or the protection afforded to such domestic industry, and shall not depart from the provisions of this Agreement relating to non-discrimination; or  (j) essential to the acquisition or distribution of products in general or local short supply, provided that any such measures shall be consistent with the principle that the UK or the EAC Partner State(s) are entitled to an equitable share of the international supply of such products, and that any such measures, which are inconsistent with the other provisions of this Agreement, shall be eliminated as soon as the conditions giving rise to them have ceased to exist.   ARTICLE 129  Security Exceptions  1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:  (a) to require the UK or the EAC Partner State(s) to furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; or  (b) to prevent the UK or the EAC Partner State(s) from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:  (i) relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived;  (ii) the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment;  (iii) relating to government procurement indispensable for national security or for national defence purposes;  (iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or  (c) to prevent the UK or the EAC Partner State(s) from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security.  2. The Committee of Senior Officials shall be informed to the fullest extent possible of measures taken under paragraphs 1(b) and (c) above and of their termination.   ARTICLE 130  Taxation  1. Nothing in this Agreement, or in any arrangement adopted under this Agreement, shall be construed to prevent a Party from distinguishing, in the application of the relevant provisions of its fiscal legislation, between taxpayers who are not in the same situation, in particular with regard to their place of residence or with regard to the place where their capital is invested.  2. Nothing in this Agreement, or in any arrangement adopted under this Agreement, shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement of any measure aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion of taxes pursuant to the tax provisions of agreements to avoid double taxation or other tax arrangements or domestic fiscal legislation.  3. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.    PART IX  GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 131  Balance of Payments Difficulties  1. Where a Party is in serious balance of payments and external financial difficulties, or under threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures with regard to trade in goods.  2. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the application of the restrictive measures referred to in paragraph 1.  3. Any restrictive measure adopted or maintained under this Article shall be non- discriminatory and of limited duration and shall not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments and external financial situation. They shall be in accordance with the conditions established in the WTO Agreement and consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), as applicable.  4. A Party maintaining or having adopted restrictive measures, or any changes thereto, shall promptly notify them to the other Party and to the EPA Council and present as soon as possible, a time schedule for their removal.  5. Consultations shall be held promptly within the EPA Council and such consultations shall assess the balance of payments situation of the concerned Party and the restrictions adopted or maintained under this Article, taking into account, inter alia, such factors as:  (a) the nature and extent of the balance of payments and the external financial difficulties;  (b) the external economic and trading environment;  (c) alternative corrective measures which may be available.  6. The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictive measures with paragraphs 3 and 4. All findings of statistical and other facts presented by the IMF relating to foreign exchange, monetary reserves and balance of payments shall be accepted and conclusions shall be based on the assessment by the IMF of the balance of payments and the external financial situation of the concerned Party adopting or maintaining the measure.    ARTICLE 132  Definition of the Parties and Fulfilment of Obligations  1. The Contracting Parties of this Agreement are the Republic of Kenya and any other Contracting Parties to The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community that accede to this Agreement in accordance with Article 143, herein referred to as the ‘EAC Partner State(s)’, on the one part, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, of the other part.    2. For the purposes of this Agreement, the term ‘Party’ shall refer to the EAC Partner State(s) or the UK as the case may be. The term ‘Parties’ shall refer to the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK.    3. For the purposes of this Agreement, the term ‘EAC Partner State’ shall refer to a State that is a Contracting Party to both this Agreement and to The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community.   4. The EAC Partner State(s) may mandate one of their representatives to act on their behalf on all matters under this Agreement for which they have agreed to act collectively.    5. The Parties shall adopt any general or specific measures required from them to fulfil their obligations under this Agreement and shall ensure that they comply with the objectives laid down in this Agreement.    ARTICLE 133  Contact Points  1. In order to facilitate communication relating to the effective implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall designate a contact point for the exchange of information upon entry into force of this Agreement. The designation of a contact point for the exchange of information is without prejudice to the specific designation of competent authorities under specific provisions of this Agreement.  2. On the request of the contact points for exchange of information, each Party shall indicate the office or official responsible for any matter pertaining to the implementation of this Agreement and provide the required support to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.  3. Each Party, as the case may be, shall, on the request of the other Party, and to the extent legally possible, provide information and reply promptly to any question from the other Party relating to an actual or proposed measure that might affect trade between the Parties.    ARTICLE 134  Transparency and Confidentiality  1. Each Party shall ensure that any laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application as well as any international commitments relating to any trade matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or made publicly available and brought to the attention of the other Party.  2. Without prejudice to specific transparency provisions in this Agreement, the information referred to under this Article shall be considered to have been provided when the information has been made available to the Governments of the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK or to the WTO or on the official, publicly and fee-free accessible website of the Parties.  3. Nothing in this Agreement shall require any Party to provide confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private, except to the extent that it may be necessary to be disclosed in the context of a dispute settlement proceeding under Part VII of this Agreement. Where such disclosure is considered necessary by a panel established under Article 113 of Part VII the panel shall ensure that confidentiality is fully protected.   ARTICLE 135  Relations with Annex III  Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed so as to prevent the adoption by either Party of any appropriate measures consistent with and pursuant to Annex III.   ARTICLE 136  Relations with the WTO Agreement  The Parties agree that nothing in this Agreement requires them to act in a manner inconsistent with their WTO obligations.   ARTICLE 137  Notifications  Notifications required under this Agreement shall be made in writing and sent to the Governments of the EAC Partner State(s) or the UK, as the case may be.   ARTICLE 138  Entry into Force  1. This Agreement shall be signed and ratified, or approved in accordance with the applicable constitutional or internal rules and procedures of the respective Parties.  2. This Agreement shall enter into force the first day of the second month, or on such date as the Parties may otherwise agree, following notification from both of the Parties of the completion of the internal legal procedures referred to in paragraph 1.  3. Notifications under paragraph 2 shall be sent, in the case of the EAC Partner State(s) to the Government of Kenya and in the case of the UK to the Government of the UK1, who shall be joint depositaries of this Agreement. Each depositary shall notify the other depositary upon receipt of the notification indicating the completion of the Parties’ internal legal procedures for the purpose of entry into force. 1 Treaty Section, FCDO Legal Directorate, Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, WH.2.143, King Charles Street, London SW1A 2AH, United Kingdom  4. The joint depositary arrangements above shall be reviewed as part of the review provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 143 (Accession of Contracting Parties to The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community).   5. Pending entry into force of this Agreement, the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK may provisionally apply the provisions of this Agreement.   6. Provisional application of this Agreement shall be notified to the depositaries. Such provisional application shall take effect ten (10) days, or on such date as the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK may otherwise agree, following the date on which the last notification is made to the depositaries of the completion of the internal legal procedures necessary for that purpose.  7. Where a provision of this Agreement is applied in accordance with paragraph 5, any reference in such provision to the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall be understood to refer to the date from which the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK agree to apply that provision in accordance with paragraph 6.  8. Notwithstanding paragraph 5, the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK may unilaterally take steps to apply this Agreement, before provisional application, to the extent feasible.     ARTICLE 139  Denunciation  1. A Party to this Agreement may give written notice to the other of its intention to denounce this Agreement.  2. Denunciation shall take effect one year after notification to the other Party.   ARTICLE 140  Territorial Application  1. This Agreement shall apply, on the one hand, to the territories of the EAC Partner State(s), as defined in Article 132(1), and, on the other hand, to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the following territories for whose international relations the UK is responsible to the extent that and under the conditions which the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union applied to those territories before those treaties ceased to apply to the UK:  (a) Gibraltar; and  (b) the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.  2. References to ‘territory’ in this Agreement shall be understood in this sense.   ARTICLE 141  Review Clause  1. This Agreement shall be reviewed after every five (5) years from the date of its entry into force.  2. As regards the implementation of this Agreement, a Party may make suggestions oriented towards adjusting trade-related cooperation, taking into account the experience acquired during the implementation of this Agreement.     ARTICLE 142  Amendment Clause  1. The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. A Party may submit proposals for the amendment of this Agreement to the EPA Council for consideration. The other Party may comment on the proposals for amendment within ninety (90) days from the date of receipt of the proposal.  2. Should the EPA Council adopt amendments to this Agreement, such amendments shall be submitted to the Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval in accordance with their respective constitutional or internal legal requirements.  3. An amendment shall enter into force after the Parties exchange written notifications certifying that they have completed their respective applicable legal requirements and procedures, on such date as the Parties may agree.   ARTICLE 143  Accession of Contracting Parties to the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community  1. This Agreement shall be open to accession by any State that is a Contracting Party to The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community. A request for accession shall be submitted to the EPA Council.   2. The Parties shall review the effects of the accession of the eligible State on this Agreement. The EPA Council may decide on any transitional or amending measures that might be necessary.  3. Following the EPA Council’s approval of the eligible State’s application for accession, the eligible State may deposit an instrument of accession with the relevant depositary.   4. This Agreement shall enter into force in relation to the acceding State on the date its instrument of accession is deposited or on such other date as that State and the Parties to this Agreement agree.      ARTICLE 144  Amendments to Agreement Made on Accession  1. Upon accession of a State under Article 143:   (a) the title of the Agreement shall be updated to include the State that has acceded to the Agreement and the words ‘A MEMBER OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY’ shall be updated to ‘MEMBERS OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY’;   (b) the EAC Partner State(s) listed under ‘PARTIES TO THE AGREEMENT’ shall be updated to include the State that has acceded to the Agreement; and  (c) all references to ‘EAC Partner State(s)’ in this Agreement, including its Annexes and Protocols, shall be updated to ‘EAC Partner States’.  2. Upon accession of all the Contracting Parties to The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, under Article 143:   (a) the title of the Agreement shall be replaced with the following:   ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY PARTNER STATES, OF THE ONE PART, AND THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, OF THE OTHER PART  (b) the EAC Partner State(s) listed under ‘PARTIES TO THE AGREEMENT’ shall be updated to include all the Contracting Parties to The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community.   ARTICLE 145  Authentic Texts  This Agreement is drawn up in English.     ARTICLE 146  Annexes  The Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement shall form an integral part of this Agreement.  Annex I  Customs duties on products originating in the EAC Partner State(s)   Annex II  Customs duties on products originating in the UK   Annex III  Joint Statement of the Parties on the objectives and essential and fundamental elements of this agreement   Protocol 1  Concerning the definition of the concept of “originating products” and methods of administrative cooperation  Protocol 2  On mutual administrative assistance in customs matters     DONE in Duplicate at London this eighth day of December 2020.    For the Government of the United    For the Government of the Kingdom of Great Britain and     Republic of Kenya:  Northern Ireland:           RANIL JAYWARDENA     BETTY MAINA   ANNEX I   CUSTOMS DUTIES ON PRODUCTS ORIGINATING IN THE EAC PARTNER STATE(S)  1. Without prejudice to paragraphs 2 and 3, customs duties of the UK (hereinafter “UK customs duties”) shall be entirely eliminated on all products of Chapters 1 to 97 of the Harmonized System, except those of Chapter 93 thereof, originating in an EAC Partner State on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. For products of Chapter 93, the UK shall continue to impose the applied Most Favoured Nation duty rate (hereinafter “MFN duty rate”).  2. The importation of products of tariff heading 1701 originating in any EAC Partner State that is recognised by the United Nations as a least developed country shall remain subject to the provisions of Article 50.   3. (a) For the purpose of the application of the provisions of Article 50, disturbances in the markets of products of tariff heading 1701 may be deemed to arise in situations where the UK market price of white sugar falls during two consecutive months below 80 per cent of the UK market price for white sugar prevailing during the previous marketing year.  (b) Subparagraph 3(a) shall not apply for a period of five (5) years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.  (c) The Parties agree to review subparagraph 3(a), with a view to reaching agreement within five (5) years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, on a percentage of the UK market price for white sugar prevailing during the previous marketing year which, if the UK market price of white sugar falls below this percentage during two consecutive months, may be deemed a disturbance in the market of products of tariff heading 1701.   ANNEX II  CUSTOMS DUTIES ON PRODUCTS  ORIGINATING IN THE UK  1. Customs duties applicable to products originating in the UK imported into the territory of the EAC Partner State(s) for goods listed in Annex II(a), shall be eliminated upon the entry into force of this Agreement.  2. Customs duties applicable to products originating in the UK imported into the territory of the EAC Partner State(s) for goods listed in Annex II(b) shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the following schedule:  – seven years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 80 per cent of the basic duty;  – eight years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 70 per cent of the basic duty;  – nine years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 60 per cent of the basic duty;   – ten years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 50 per cent of the basic duty;  – eleven years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 40 per cent of the basic duty;  – twelve years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 30 per cent of the basic duty;  – thirteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 20 per cent of the basic duty;  – fourteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 10 per cent of the basic duty;  – fifteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement the remaining duties shall be abolished.  3. Customs duties applicable to products originating in the UK imported into the territory of the EAC Partner State(s) for goods listed in Annex II(c) shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the following schedule:  – twelve years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 95 per cent of the basic duty;  – thirteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 90 per cent of the basic duty;  – fourteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 85 per cent of the basic duty;  – fifteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 80 per cent of the basic duty;  – sixteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 70 per cent of the basic duty;  – seventeen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 65 per cent of the basic duty;  – eighteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 60 per cent of the basic duty;  – nineteen years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 55 per cent of the basic duty;  – twenty years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 50 per cent of the basic duty;  – twenty-one years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 40 per cent of the basic duty;  – twenty-two years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 30 per cent of the basic duty;  – twenty-three years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 20 per cent of the basic duty;  – twenty-four years after the entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be reduced to 10 per cent of the basic duty;  – twenty-five years after the entry into force of this Agreement the remaining duties shall be abolished.  4. Customs duties applicable to products originating in the UK imported into the territory of the EAC Partner State(s) for goods listed in Annex II(d) shall be excluded from any of the regimes of tariff phase-down contained in this Annex. ANNEX II(A)  NUMBER OF TARIFF LINES 1934  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  01012100  010121  -- Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  01013010  010130  --- Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  01022100  010221  -- Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  01023100  010231  -- Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  01029010  010290  -- Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  01031000  010310  - Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  01041010  010410  --- Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  01042010  010420  --- Pure-bred breeding animals  0%  T0  05111000  051110  - Bovine semen  0%  T0  05119110  051191  --- Fish eggs and roes  0%  T0  05119120  051191  --- Fish waste  0%  T0  05119910  051199  --- Animal semen other than of bovine  0%  T0  06011000  060110  - Bulbs, tubers, tuberous roots, corms, crowns and rhizomes, dormant  0%  T0  06012000  060120  - Bulbs, tubers, tuberous roots, corms, crowns and rhizomes, in growth or in flower; chicory plants and roots   0%   T0  06021000  060210  - Unrooted cuttings and slips  0%  T0  06022000  060220  - Trees, shrubs and bushes, grafted or not, of kinds which bear edible fruit or nuts  0%  T0  06023000  060230  - Rhododendrons and azaleas, grafted or not  0%  T0  06024000  060240  - Roses, grafted or not  0%  T0  06029000  060290  - Other  0%  T0  10011100  100111  -- Seed  0%  T0  10011900  100119  -- Other  0%  T0  10019100  100191  -- Seed  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  10021000  100210  -Seed 0%  T0  10029000  100290  -Other 0%  T0  10031000  100310  -Seed 0%  T0  10041000  100410  -Seed 0%  T0  10049000  100490  -Other 0%  T0  12091000  120910  -Sugar beet seeds 0%  T0  12092100  120921  -- Lucerne (alfalfa) seeds  0%  T0  12092200  120922  -- Clover (Trifolium spp.) seeds  0%  T0  12092300  120923  -- Fescue seeds  0%  T0  12092400  120924  -- Kentucky blue grass (Poa pratensis L.) seeds  0%  T0  12092500  120925  -- Ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum Lam., Lolium perenne L.) seeds  0%  T0  12092900  120929  -- Other  0%  T0  12093000  120930  -Seeds of herbaceous plants cultivated principally for their flowers 0%  T0  12099100  120991  -- Vegetable seeds  0%  T0  12099900  120999  -- Other  0%  T0  12101000  121010  -Hop cones, neither ground nor powdered nor in the form of pellets 0%  T0  12102000  121020  -Hop cones, ground, powdered or in the form of pellets; lupulin 0%  T0  12119010  121190  -- For Pharmaceutical purposes e.g. Cinchona Back  0%  T0  13012000  130120  -Gum Arabic 0%  T0  13019000  130190  -Other 0%  T0  13021100  130211  -- Opium  0%  T0  13021200  130212  -- Of liquorice  0%  T0  13021300  130213  -- Of hops  0%  T0  13021900  130219  -- Other  0%  T0  13022000  130220  -Pectic substances, pectinates and pectates 0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  13023100  130231  -- Agar-agar  0%  T0  13023200  130232  -- Mucilages and thickeners, whether or not modified, derived from locust beans, locust bean seeds or guar seeds   0%   T0  13023900  130239  -- Other  0%  T0  15029000  150290  - Other  0%  T0  15050000  150500  Wool grease and fatty substances derived therefrom (including lanolin)  0%  T0  15071000  150710  - Crude oil, whether or not degummed  0%  T0  15081000  150810  - Crude oil  0%  T0  15091000  150910  - Virgin  0%  T0  15111000  151110  - Crude oil  0%  T0  15131100  151311  -- Crude oil  0%  T0  15132100  151321  -- Crude oil  0%  T0  15141100  151411  -- Crude oil  0%  T0  15149100  151491  -- Crude oil  0%  T0  15151100  151511  -- Crude oil  0%  T0  15200000  152000  Glycerol, crude; glycerol waters and glycerol lyes  0%  T0  15220000  152200  Degras; residues resulting from the treatment of fatty substances or animal or vegetable waxes  0%  T0  18031000  180310  - Not defatted  0%  T0  18032000  180320  - Wholly or partly defatted  0%  T0  18040000  180400  Cocoa butter, fat and oil  0%  T0  18050000  180500  Cocoa powder, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  0%  T0  19053210  190532  --- Communion wafers  0%  T0  19059010  190590  --- Empty cachets of a kind suitable for pharmaceutical use  0%  T0  25020000  250200  Unroasted iron pyrites  0%  T0  25030000  250300  Sulphur of all kinds, other than sublimed sulphur, precipitated sulphur and colloidal sulphur  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  25041000  250410  - In powder or in flakes  0%  T0  25049000  250490  - Other  0%  T0  25051000  250510  - Silica sands and quartz sands  0%  T0  25059000  250590  - Other  0%  T0  25061000  250610  - Quartz  0%  T0  25062000  250620  - Quartzite  0%  T0  25081000  250810  - Bentonite  0%  T0  25083000  250830  - Fireclay  0%  T0  25084000  250840  - Other clays  0%  T0  25085000  250850  - Andalusite, kyanite and sillimanite  0%  T0  25086000  250860  - Mullite  0%  T0  25087000  250870  - Chamotte or dinas earths  0%  T0  25090000  250900  Chalk  0%  T0  25101000  251010  - Unground  0%  T0  25102000  251020  - Ground  0%  T0  25111000  251110  - Natural barium sulphate (barytes)  0%  T0  25112000  251120  - Natural barium carbonate (witherite)  0%  T0  25120000  251200  Siliceous fossil meals (for example, kieselguhr, tripolite and diatomite) and similar siliceous earths, whether or not calcined, of an apparent specific gravity of 1 or less   0%   T0  25131000  251310  - Pumice stone  0%  T0  25132000  251320  - Emery, natural corundum, natural garnet and other natural abrasives  0%  T0  25140000  251400  Slate, whether or not roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape   0%   T0  25151100  251511  -- Crude or roughly trimmed  0%  T0  25151200  251512  -- Merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  25152000  251520  - Ecaussine and other calcareous monumental or building stone; alabaster  0%  T0  25161100  251611  -- Crude or roughly trimmed  0%  T0  25161200  251612  -- Merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape  0%  T0  25162000  251620  - Sandstone  0%  T0  25169000  251690  - Other monumental or building stone  0%  T0  25201000  252010  - Gypsum; anhydrite  0%  T0  25202000  252020  - Plasters  0%  T0  26011100  260111  -- Non-agglomerated  0%  T0  26011200  260112  -- Agglomerated  0%  T0  26012000  260120  - Roasted iron pyrites  0%  T0  26020000  260200  Manganese ores and concentrates, including ferruginous manganese ores and concentrates with a manganese content of 20 % or more, calculated on the dry weight   0%   T0  26030000  260300  Copper ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26040000  260400  Nickel ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26050000  260500  Cobalt ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26060000  260600  Aluminium ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26070000  260700  Lead ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26080000  260800  Zinc ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26090000  260900  Tin ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26100000  261000  Chromium ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26110000  261100  Tungsten ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26121000  261210  - Uranium ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26122000  261220  - Thorium ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26131000  261310  - Roasted  0%  T0  26139000  261390  - Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  26140000  261400  Titanium ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26151000  261510  - Zirconium ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26159000  261590  - Other  0%  T0  26161000  261610  - Silver ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26169000  261690  - Other  0%  T0  26171000  261710  - Antimony ores and concentrates  0%  T0  26179000  261790  - Other  0%  T0  26180000  261800  Granulated slag (slag sand) from the manufacture of iron or steel  0%  T0  26190000  261900  Slag, dross (other than granulated slag), scalings and other waste from the manufacture of iron or steel  0%  T0  26201100  262011  -- Hard zinc spelter  0%  T0  26201900  262019  -- Other  0%  T0  26202100  262021  -- Leaded gasoline sludges and leaded anti-knock compound sludges  0%  T0  26202900  262029  -- Other  0%  T0  26203000  262030  - Containing mainly copper  0%  T0  26204000  262040  - Containing mainly aluminium  0%  T0  26206000  262060  - Containing arsenic, mercury, thallium or their mixtures, of a kind used for the extraction of arsenic or those metals or for the manufacture of their chemical compounds   0%   T0  26209100  262091  -- Containing antimony, beryllium, cadmium, chromium or their mixtures  0%  T0  26209900  262099  -- Other  0%  T0  26211000  262110  - Ash and residues from the incineration of municipal waste  0%  T0  26219000  262190  - Other  0%  T0  27090000  270900  Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals, crude  0%  T0  27101210  271012  --- Motor Spirit (gasoline) regular  0%  T0  27101220  271012  --- Motor Spirit (gasoline) premium  0%  T0  27101230  271012  --- Aviation Spirit  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  27101240  271012  --- Spirit type Jet Fuel  0%  T0  27101250  271012  --- Special boiling point spirit and white spirit  0%  T0  27101290  271012  --- Other light oils and preparations  0%  T0  27101910  271019  --- Partly refined (including topped crudes)  0%  T0  27101921  271019  ---- Kerosene type Jet Fuel  0%  T0  27101922  271019  ---- Illuminating Kerosene (IK)  0%  T0  27101929  271019  ---- Other medium oils and preparations  0%  T0  27101931  271019  ---- Gas oil (automotive, light, amber for high speed engines)  0%  T0  27101932  271019  ---- Diesel oil (industrial heavy, black, for low speed marine and stationery engines)  0%  T0  27101939  271019  ---- Other gas oils  0%  T0  27101941  271019  ---- Residual fuel oils(marine, furnace and similar fuel oils) of a Kinematic viscosity of 125 centistrokes  0%  T0  27101942  271019  ---- Residual fuel oils (marine, furnace and similar fuel oils) of a Kinematic viscosity of 180 centistrokes  0%  T0  27101943  271019  ---- Residual fuel oils (marine, furnace and similar fuel oils) of a Kinematic viscosity of 280 centistrokes  0%  T0  27101949  271019  ---- Other residual fuels  0%  T0  27101955  271019  ---- Transformer oils  0%  T0  27101957  271019  ---- White oil Technical grade  0%  T0   27102000   271020  - Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals (other than crude) and preparations not elsewhere specified or included, containing by weight 70 % or more of petroleum oils or of oils obtained from bituminous minerals, these oils being the basic constituents of the preparations, containing biodiesel, other than waste oils     0%     T0  27122000  271220  - Paraffin wax containing by weight less than 0,75 % of oil  0%  T0  27129000  271290  - Other  0%  T0  27131200  271312  -- Calcined  0%  T0  28011000  280110  - Chlorine  0%  T0  28012000  280120  - Iodine  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  28013000  280130  - Fluorine; bromine  0%  T0  28020000  280200  Sulphur, sublimed or precipitated; colloidal sulphur  0%  T0  28030000  280300  Carbon (carbon blacks and other forms of carbon not elsewhere specified or included)  0%  T0  28041000  280410  - Hydrogen  0%  T0  28042100  280421  -- Argon  0%  T0  28042900  280429  -- Other  0%  T0  28043000  280430  - Nitrogen  0%  T0  28045000  280450  - Boron; tellurium  0%  T0  28046100  280461  -- Containing by weight not less than 99,99 % of silicon  0%  T0  28046900  280469  -- Other  0%  T0  28047000  280470  - Phosphorus  0%  T0  28048000  280480  - Arsenic  0%  T0  28049000  280490  - Selenium  0%  T0  28051100  280511  -- Sodium  0%  T0  28051200  280512  -- Calcium  0%  T0  28051900  280519  -- Other  0%  T0  28053000  280530  - Rare-earth metals, scandium and yttrium, whether or not intermixed or interalloyed  0%  T0  28054000  280540  - Mercury  0%  T0  28061000  280610  - Hydrogen chloride (hydrochloric acid)  0%  T0  28062000  280620  - Chlorosulphuric acid  0%  T0  28080000  280800  Nitric acid; sulphonitric acids  0%  T0  28091000  280910  - Diphosphorus pentaoxide  0%  T0  28092000  280920  - Phosphoric acid and polyphosphoric acids  0%  T0  28100000  281000  Oxides of boron; boric acids  0%  T0  28112200  281122  -- Silicon dioxide  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  28112900  281129  -- Other  0%  T0  28121000  281210  - Chlorides and chloride oxides  0%  T0  28129000  281290  - Other  0%  T0  28131000  281310  - Carbon disulphide  0%  T0  28139000  281390  - Other  0%  T0  28141000  281410  - Anhydrous ammonia  0%  T0  28142000  281420  - Ammonia in aqueous solution  0%  T0  28151100  281511  -- Solid  0%  T0  28151200  281512  -- In aqueous solution (soda lye or liquid soda)  0%  T0  28152000  281520  - Potassium hydroxide (caustic potash)  0%  T0  28153000  281530  - Peroxides of sodium or potassium  0%  T0  28161000  281610  - Hydroxide and peroxide of magnesium  0%  T0  28164000  281640  - Oxides, hydroxides and peroxides, of strontium or barium  0%  T0  28170010  281700  --- Zinc oxide  0%  T0  28170020  281700  --- zinc peroxide.  0%  T0  28181000  281810  - Artificial corundum, whether or not chemically defined  0%  T0  28182000  281820  - Aluminium oxide, other than artificial corundum  0%  T0  28183000  281830  - Aluminium hydroxide  0%  T0  28191000  281910  - Chromium trioxide  0%  T0  28199000  281990  - Other  0%  T0  28201000  282010  - Manganese dioxide  0%  T0  28209000  282090  - Other  0%  T0  28211000  282110  - Iron oxides and hydroxides  0%  T0  28212000  282120  - Earth colours  0%  T0  28220000  282200  Cobalt oxides and hydroxides; commercial cobalt oxides  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  28230000  282300  Titanium oxides  0%  T0  28241000  282410  - Lead monoxide (litharge, massicot)  0%  T0  28249000  282490  - Other  0%  T0  28251000  282510  - Hydrazine and hydroxylamine and their inorganic salts  0%  T0  28252000  282520  - Lithium oxide and hydroxide  0%  T0  28253000  282530  - Vanadium oxides and hydroxides  0%  T0  28254000  282540  - Nickel oxides and hydroxides  0%  T0  28255000  282550  - Copper oxides and hydroxides  0%  T0  28256000  282560  - Germanium oxides and zirconium dioxide  0%  T0  28257000  282570  - Molybdenum oxides and hydroxides  0%  T0  28258000  282580  - Antimony oxides  0%  T0  28259000  282590  - Other  0%  T0  28261200  282612  -- Of aluminium  0%  T0  28261900  282619  -- Other  0%  T0  28263000  282630  - Sodium hexafluoroaluminate (synthetic cryolite)  0%  T0  28269000  282690  - Other  0%  T0  28271000  282710  - Ammonium chloride  0%  T0  28272000  282720  - Calcium chloride  0%  T0  28273100  282731  -- Of magnesium  0%  T0  28273200  282732  -- Of aluminium  0%  T0  28273500  282735  -- Of nickel  0%  T0  28273900  282739  -- Other  0%  T0  28274100  282741  -- Of copper  0%  T0  28274900  282749  -- Other  0%  T0  28275100  282751  -- Bromides of sodium or of potassium  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  28275900  282759  -- Other  0%  T0  28276000  282760  - Iodides and iodide oxides  0%  T0  28281000  282810  - Commercial calcium hypochlorite and other calcium hypochlorites  0%  T0  28289000  282890  - Other  0%  T0  28291100  282911  -- Of sodium  0%  T0  28291900  282919  -- Other  0%  T0  28299000  282990  - Other  0%  T0  28301000  283010  - Sodium sulphides  0%  T0  28309000  283090  - Other  0%  T0  28311000  283110  - Of sodium  0%  T0  28319000  283190  - Other  0%  T0  28321000  283210  - Sodium sulphites  0%  T0  28322000  283220  - Other sulphites  0%  T0  28323000  283230  - Thiosulphates  0%  T0  28331100  283311  -- Disodium sulphate  0%  T0  28331900  283319  -- Other  0%  T0  28332100  283321  -- Of magnesium  0%  T0  28332200  283322  -- Of aluminium  0%  T0  28332400  283324  -- Of nickel  0%  T0  28332500  283325  -- Of copper  0%  T0  28332700  283327  -- Of barium  0%  T0  28332900  283329  -- Other  0%  T0  28333000  283330  - Alums  0%  T0  28334000  283340  - Peroxosulphates (persulphates)  0%  T0  28341000  283410  - Nitrites  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  28342100  283421  -- Of potassium  0%  T0  28342900  283429  -- Other  0%  T0  28351000  283510  - Phosphinates (hypophosphites) and phosphonates (phosphites)  0%  T0  28352200  283522  -- Of mono- or disodium  0%  T0  28352400  283524  -- Of potassium  0%  T0  28352500  283525  -- Calcium hydrogenorthophosphate   0%  T0  28352600  283526  -- Other phosphates of calcium  0%  T0  28352900  283529  -- Other  0%  T0  28353100  283531  -- Sodium triphosphate (sodium tripolyphosphate)  0%  T0  28353900  283539  -- Other  0%  T0  28362000  283620  - Disodium carbonate  0%  T0  28363000  283630  - Sodium hydrogencarbonate (sodium bicarbonate)  0%  T0  28364000  283640  - Potassium carbonates  0%  T0  28365000  283650  - Calcium carbonate  0%  T0  28366000  283660  - Barium carbonate  0%  T0  28369100  283691  -- Lithium carbonates  0%  T0  28369200  283692  -- Strontium carbonate  0%  T0  28369900  283699  -- Other  0%  T0  28371100  283711  -- Of sodium  0%  T0  28371900  283719  -- Other  0%  T0  28372000  283720  - Complex cyanides  0%  T0  28391100  283911  -- Sodium metasilicates  0%  T0  28391900  283919  -- Other  0%  T0  28399000  283990  - Other  0%  T0  28401100  284011  -- Anhydrous  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  28401900  284019  -- Other  0%  T0  28402000  284020  - Other borates  0%  T0  28403000  284030  - Peroxoborates (perborates)  0%  T0  28413000  284130  - Sodium dichromate  0%  T0  28415000  284150  - Other chromates and dichromates; peroxochromates  0%  T0  28416100  284161  -- Potassium permanganate  0%  T0  28416900  284169  -- Other  0%  T0  28417000  284170  - Molybdates  0%  T0  28418000  284180  - Tungstates (wolframates)  0%  T0  28419000  284190  - Other  0%  T0  28421000  284210  - Double or complex silicates, including aluminosilicates whether or not chemically defined  0%  T0  28429000  284290  - Other  0%  T0  28431000  284310  - Colloidal precious metals  0%  T0  28432100  284321  -- Silver nitrate  0%  T0  28432900  284329  -- Other  0%  T0  28433000  284330  - Gold compounds  0%  T0  28439000  284390  - Other compounds; amalgams  0%  T0  28441000  284410  - Natural uranium and its compounds; alloys, dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing natural uranium or natural uranium compounds   0%   T0   28442000   284420  - Uranium enriched in U 235 and its compounds; plutonium and its compounds; alloys, dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing uranium enriched in U 235, plutonium or compounds of these products    0%    T0   28443000   284430  - Uranium depleted in U 235 and its compounds; thorium and its compounds; alloys, dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing uranium depleted in U 235, thorium or compounds of these products    0%    T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of   28444000   284440  - Radioactive elements and isotopes and compounds other than those of subheading 284410, 284420 or 284430; alloys, dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing these elements, isotopes or compounds; radioactive residues    0%    T0  28445000  284450  - Spent (irradiated) fuel elements (cartridges) of nuclear reactors (Euratom)  0%  T0  28451000  284510  - Heavy water (deuterium oxide) (Euratom)  0%  T0  28459000  284590  - Other  0%  T0  28461000  284610  - Cerium compounds  0%  T0  28469000  284690  - Other  0%  T0  28470000  284700  Hydrogen peroxide, whether or not solidified with urea  0%  T0  28480000  284800  Phosphides, whether or not chemically defined, excluding ferrophosphorus  0%  T0  28491000  284910  - Of calcium  0%  T0  28492000  284920  - Of silicon  0%  T0  28499000  284990  - Other  0%  T0  28500000  285000  Hydrides, nitrides, azides, silicides and borides, whether or not chemically defined, other than compounds which are also carbides of heading 2849   0%   T0  28521000  285210  - Chemically defined  0%  T0  28529000  285290  - Other  0%  T0   28530000   285300  Other inorganic compounds (including distilled or conductivity water and water of similar purity); liquid air (whether or not rare gases have been removed); compressed air; amalgams, other than amalgams of precious metals    0%    T0  29011000  290110  - Saturated  0%  T0  29012100  290121  -- Ethylene  0%  T0  29012200  290122  -- Propene (propylene)  0%  T0  29012300  290123  -- Butene (butylene) and isomers thereof  0%  T0  29012400  290124  -- Buta-1,3-diene and isoprene  0%  T0     HS      Year of  29012900  290129  -- Other  0%  T0  29021100  290211  -- Cyclohexane  0%  T0  29021900  290219  -- Other  0%  T0  29022000  290220  - Benzene  0%  T0  29023000  290230  - Toluene  0%  T0  29024100  290241  -- o-Xylene  0%  T0  29024200  290242  -- m-Xylene  0%  T0  29024300  290243  -- p-Xylene  0%  T0  29024400  290244  -- Mixed xylene isomers  0%  T0  29025000  290250  - Styrene  0%  T0  29026000  290260  - Ethylbenzene  0%  T0  29027000  290270  - Cumene  0%  T0  29029000  290290  - Other  0%  T0  29031100  290311  -- Chloromethane (methyl chloride) and chloroethane (ethyl chloride)  0%  T0  29031200  290312  -- Dichloromethane (methylene chloride)  0%  T0  29031300  290313  -- Chloroform (trichloromethane)  0%  T0  29031400  290314  -- Carbon tetrachloride  0%  T0  29031500  290315  -- Ethylene dichloride (ISO) (1,2-dichloroethane)  0%  T0  29031910  290319  - - - 1,1,1-Trichloroethane (methyl chloroform)  0%  T0  29031990  290319  - - - Other  0%  T0  29032100  290321  -- Vinyl chloride (chloroethylene)  0%  T0  29032200  290322  -- Trichloroethylene  0%  T0  29032300  290323  -- Tetrachloroethylene (perchloroethylene)  0%  T0  29032900  290329  -- Other  0%  T0  29033100  290331  -- Ethylene dibromide (ISO) (1,2-dibromoethane)  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29033910  290339  - - - Bromomethane (methyl bromide)  0%  T0  29033990  290339  - - - Other  0%  T0  29037100  290371  -- Chlorodifluoromethane  0%  T0  29037200  290372  -- Dichlorotrifluoroethanes  0%  T0  29037300  290373  -- Dichlorofluoroethanes  0%  T0  29037400  290374  -- Chlorodifluoroethanes  0%  T0  29037500  290375  -- Dichloropentafluoropropanes  0%  T0  29037600  290376  -- Bromochlorodifluoromethane, bromotrifluoromethane and dibromotetrafluoroethanes  0%  T0  29037700  290377  -- Other, perhalogenated only with fluorine and chlorine  0%  T0  29037800  290378  -- Other perhalogenated derivatives  0%  T0  29037900  290379  -- Other  0%  T0  29038100  290381  -- 1,2,3,4,5,6-Hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH (ISO)), including lindane (ISO, INN)  0%  T0  29038200  290382  -- Aldrin (ISO), chlordane (ISO) and heptachlor (ISO)  0%  T0  29038900  290389  -- Other  0%  T0  29039100  290391  -- Chlorobenzene, o-dichlorobenzene and p-dichlorobenzene  0%  T0  29039200  290392  -- Hexachlorobenzene (ISO) and DDT (ISO) (clofenotane (INN), 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p- chlorophenyl)ethane)   0%   T0  29039900  290399  -- Other  0%  T0  29041000  290410  - Derivatives containing only sulpho groups, their salts and ethyl esters  0%  T0  29042000  290420  - Derivatives containing only nitro or only nitroso groups  0%  T0  29049000  290490  - Other  0%  T0  29051100  290511  -- Methanol (methyl alcohol)  0%  T0  29051200  290512  -- Propan-1-ol (propyl alcohol) and propan-2-ol (isopropyl alcohol)  0%  T0  29051300  290513  -- Butan-1-ol (n-butyl alcohol)  0%  T0  29051400  290514  -- Other butanols  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29051600  290516  -- Octanol (octyl alcohol) and isomers thereof  0%  T0  29051700  290517  -- Dodecan-1-ol (lauryl alcohol), hexadecan-1-ol (cetyl alcohol) and octadecan-1-ol (stearyl alcohol)  0%  T0  29051900  290519  -- Other  0%  T0  29052200  290522  -- Acyclic terpene alcohols  0%  T0  29052900  290529  -- Other  0%  T0  29053100  290531  -- Ethylene glycol (ethanediol)  0%  T0  29053200  290532  -- Propylene glycol (propane-1,2-diol)  0%  T0  29053900  290539  -- Other  0%  T0  29054100  290541  -- 2-Ethyl-2-(hydroxymethyl)propane-1,3-diol (trimethylolpropane)  0%  T0  29054200  290542  -- Pentaerythritol  0%  T0  29054300  290543  -- Mannitol  0%  T0  29054400  290544  -- D-glucitol (sorbitol)  0%  T0  29054500  290545  -- Glycerol  0%  T0  29054900  290549  -- Other  0%  T0  29055100  290551  -- Ethchlorvynol (INN)  0%  T0  29055900  290559  -- Other  0%  T0  29061100  290611  -- Menthol  0%  T0  29061200  290612  -- Cyclohexanol, methylcyclohexanols and dimethylcyclohexanols  0%  T0  29061300  290613  -- Sterols and inositols  0%  T0  29061900  290619  -- Other  0%  T0  29062100  290621  -- Benzyl alcohol  0%  T0  29062900  290629  -- Other  0%  T0  29071100  290711  -- Phenol (hydroxybenzene) and its salts  0%  T0  29071200  290712  -- Cresols and their salts  0%  T0  29071300  290713  -- Octylphenol, nonylphenol and their isomers; salts thereof  0%  T0   HS  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29071500  290715  -- Naphthols and their salts  0%  T0  29071900  290719  -- Other  0%  T0  29072100  290721  -- Resorcinol and its salts  0%  T0  29072200  290722  -- Hydroquinone (quinol) and its salts  0%  T0  29072300  290723  -- -Isopropylidenediphenol (bisphenol A, diphenylolpropane) and its salts  0%  T0  29072900  290729  -- Other  0%  T0  29081100  290811  -- Pentachlorophenol (ISO)  0%  T0  29081900  290819  -- Other  0%  T0  29089100  290891  -- Dinoseb (ISO) and its salts  0%  T0  29089200  290892  -- 4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol (DNOC (ISO)) and its salts  0%  T0  29089900  290899  -- Other  0%  T0  29091100  290911  -- Diethyl ether  0%  T0  29091900  290919  -- Other  0%  T0  29092000  290920  - Cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic ethers and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   0%   T0  29093000  290930  - Aromatic ethers and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  0%  T0  29094100  290941  --    -Oxydiethanol (diethylene glycol, digol)  0%  T0  29094300  290943  -- Monobutyl ethers of ethylene glycol or of diethylene glycol  0%  T0  29094400  290944  -- Other monoalkylethers of ethylene glycol or of diethylene glycol  0%  T0  29094900  290949  -- Other  0%  T0  29095000  290950  - Ether-phenols, ether-alcohol-phenols and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   0%   T0  29096000  290960  - Alcohol peroxides, ether peroxides, ketone peroxides and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   0%   T0  29101000  291010  - Oxirane (ethylene oxide)  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29102000  291020  - Methyloxirane (propylene oxide)  0%  T0  29103000  291030  - 1-Chloro-2,3-epoxypropane (epichlorohydrin)  0%  T0  29104000  291040  - Dieldrin (ISO, INN)  0%  T0  29109000  291090  - Other  0%  T0  29110000  291100  Acetals and hemiacetals, whether or not with other oxygen function, and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   0%   T0  29121100  291211  -- Methanal (formaldehyde)  0%  T0  29121200  291212  -- Ethanal (acetaldehyde)  0%  T0  29121900  291219  -- Other  0%  T0  29122100  291221  -- Benzaldehyde  0%  T0  29122900  291229  -- Other  0%  T0  29124100  291241  -- Vanillin (4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde)  0%  T0  29124200  291242  -- Ethylvanillin (3-ethoxy-4-hydroxybenzaldehyde)  0%  T0  29124900  291249  -- Other  0%  T0  29125000  291250  - Cyclic polymers of aldehydes  0%  T0  29126000  291260  - Paraformaldehyde  0%  T0  29130000  291300  Halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of products of heading 2912  0%  T0  29141100  291411  -- Acetone  0%  T0  29141200  291412  -- Butanone (methyl ethyl ketone)  0%  T0  29141300  291413  -- 4-Methylpentan-2-one (methyl isobutyl ketone)  0%  T0  29141900  291419  -- Other  0%  T0  29142200  291422  -- Cyclohexanone and methylcyclohexanones  0%  T0  29142300  291423  -- Ionones and methylionones  0%  T0  29142900  291429  -- Other  0%  T0  29143100  291431  -- Phenylacetone (phenylpropan-2-one)  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29143900  291439  -- Other  0%  T0  29144000  291440  - Ketone-alcohols and ketone-aldehydes  0%  T0  29145000  291450  - Ketone-phenols and ketones with other oxygen function  0%  T0  29146100  291461  -- Anthraquinone  0%  T0  29146900  291469  -- Other  0%  T0  29147000  291470  - Halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  0%  T0  29151100  291511  -- Formic acid  0%  T0  29151200  291512  -- Salts of formic acid  0%  T0  29151300  291513  -- Esters of formic acid  0%  T0  29152100  291521  -- Acetic acid  0%  T0  29152400  291524  -- Acetic anhydride  0%  T0  29152900  291529  -- Other  0%  T0  29153100  291531  -- Ethyl acetate  0%  T0  29153200  291532  -- Vinyl acetate  0%  T0  29153300  291533  -- n-Butyl acetate  0%  T0  29153600  291536  -- Dinoseb (ISO) acetate  0%  T0  29153900  291539  -- Other  0%  T0  29154000  291540  - Mono-, di- or trichloroacetic acids, their salts and esters  0%  T0  29155000  291550  - Propionic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0  29156000  291560  - Butanoic acids, pentanoic acids, their salts and esters  0%  T0  29157000  291570  - Palmitic acid, stearic acid, their salts and esters  0%  T0  29159000  291590  - Other  0%  T0  29161100  291611  -- Acrylic acid and its salts  0%  T0  29161200  291612  -- Esters of acrylic acid  0%  T0  29161300  291613  -- Methacrylic acid and its salts  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29161400  291614  -- Esters of methacrylic acid  0%  T0  29161500  291615  -- Oleic, linoleic or linolenic acids, their salts and esters  0%  T0  29161600  291616  -- Binapacryl (ISO)  0%  T0  29161900  291619  -- Other  0%  T0  29162000  291620  - Cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic monocarboxylic acids, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and their derivatives   0%   T0  29163100  291631  -- Benzoic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0  29163200  291632  -- Benzoyl peroxide and benzoyl chloride  0%  T0  29163400  291634  -- Phenylacetic acid and its salts  0%  T0  29163900  291639  -- Other  0%  T0  29171100  291711  -- Oxalic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0  29171200  291712  -- Adipic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0  29171300  291713  -- Azelaic acid, sebacic acid, their salts and esters  0%  T0  29171400  291714  -- Maleic anhydride  0%  T0  29171900  291719  -- Other  0%  T0  29172000  291720  - Cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic polycarboxylic acids, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and their derivatives   0%   T0  29173200  291732  -- Dioctyl orthophthalates  0%  T0  29173300  291733  -- Dinonyl or didecyl orthophthalates  0%  T0  29173400  291734  -- Other esters of orthophthalic acid  0%  T0  29173500  291735  -- Phthalic anhydride  0%  T0  29173600  291736  -- Terephthalic acid and its salts  0%  T0  29173700  291737  -- Dimethyl terephthalate  0%  T0  29173900  291739  -- Other  0%  T0  29181100  291811  -- Lactic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29181200  291812  -- Tartaric acid  0%  T0  29181300  291813  -- Salts and esters of tartaric acid  0%  T0  29181400  291814  -- Citric acid  0%  T0  29181500  291815  -- Salts and esters of citric acid  0%  T0  29181600  291816  -- Gluconic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0  29181800  291818  -- Chlorobenzilate (ISO)  0%  T0  29181900  291819  -- Other  0%  T0  29182100  291821  -- Salicylic acid and its salts  0%  T0  29182200  291822  -- o-Acetylsalicylic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0  29182300  291823  -- Other esters of salicylic acid and their salts  0%  T0  29182900  291829  -- Other  0%  T0  29183000  291830  - Carboxylic acids with aldehyde or ketone function but without other oxygen function, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and their derivatives   0%   T0  29189100  291891  -- 2,4,5-T (ISO) (2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid), its salts and esters  0%  T0  29189900  291899  -- Other  0%  T0  29191000  291910  - Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate  0%  T0  29199000  291990  - Other  0%  T0  29201100  292011  -- Parathion (ISO) and parathion-methyl (ISO) (methyl-parathion)  0%  T0  29201900  292019  -- Other  0%  T0  29209000  292090  - Other  0%  T0  29211100  292111  -- Methylamine, di- or trimethylamine and their salts  0%  T0  29211900  292119  -- Other  0%  T0  29212100  292121  -- Ethylenediamine and its salts  0%  T0  29212200  292122  -- Hexamethylenediamine and its salts  0%  T0  29212900  292129  -- Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29213000  292130  - Cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic mono- or polyamines, and their derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29214100  292141  -- Aniline and its salts  0%  T0  29214200  292142  -- Aniline derivatives and their salts  0%  T0  29214300  292143  -- Toluidines and their derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29214400  292144  -- Diphenylamine and its derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29214500  292145  -- 1--naphthylamine), 2--naphthylamine) and their derivatives; salts thereof   0%   T0  29214600  292146  -- Amfetamine (INN), benzfetamine (INN), dexamfetamine (INN), etilamfetamine (INN), fencamfamin (INN), lefetamine (INN), levamfetamine (INN), mefenorex (INN) and phentermine (INN); salts thereof   0%   T0  29214900  292149  -- Other  0%  T0  29215100  292151  -- o-, m-, p-Phenylenediamine, diaminotoluenes, and their derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29215900  292159  -- Other  0%  T0  29221100  292211  -- Monoethanolamine and its salts  0%  T0  29221200  292212  -- Diethanolamine and its salts  0%  T0  29221300  292213  -- Triethanolamine and its salts  0%  T0  29221400  292214  -- Dextropropoxyphene (INN) and its salts  0%  T0  29221900  292219  -- Other  0%  T0  29222100  292221  -- Aminohydroxynaphthalenesulphonic acids and their salts  0%  T0  29222900  292229  -- Other  0%  T0  29223100  292231  -- Amfepramone (INN), methadone (INN) and normethadone (INN); salts thereof  0%  T0  29223900  292239  -- Other  0%  T0  29224100  292241  -- Lysine and its esters; salts thereof  0%  T0  29224200  292242  -- Glutamic acid and its salts  0%  T0  29224300  292243  -- Anthranilic acid and its salts  0%  T0  29224400  292244  -- Tilidine (INN) and its salts  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29224900  292249  -- Other  0%  T0  29225000  292250  - Amino-alcohol-phenols, amino-acid-phenols and other amino-compounds with oxygen function  0%  T0  29231000  292310  - Choline and its salts  0%  T0  29232000  292320  - Lecithins and other phosphoaminolipids  0%  T0  29239000  292390  - Other  0%  T0  29241100  292411  -- Meprobamate (INN)  0%  T0  29241200  292412  -- Fluoroacetamide (ISO), monocrotophos (ISO) and phosphamidon (ISO)  0%  T0  29241900  292419  -- Other  0%  T0  29242100  292421  -- Ureines and their derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29242300  292423  -- 2-Acetamidobenzoic acid (N-acetylanthranilic acid) and its salts  0%  T0  29242400  292424  -- Ethinamate (INN)  0%  T0  29242900  292429  -- Other  0%  T0  29251100  292511  -- Saccharin and its salts  0%  T0  29251200  292512  -- Glutethimide (INN)  0%  T0  29251900  292519  -- Other  0%  T0  29252100  292521  -- Chlordimeform (ISO)  0%  T0  29252900  292529  -- Other  0%  T0  29261000  292610  - Acrylonitrile  0%  T0  29262000  292620  - 1-Cyanoguanidine (dicyandiamide)  0%  T0  29263000  292630  - Fenproporex (INN) and its salts; methadone (INN) intermediate (4-cyano-2-dimethylamino-4,4- diphenylbutane)   0%   T0  29269000  292690  - Other  0%  T0  29270000  292700  Diazo-, azo- or azoxy-compounds  0%  T0  29280000  292800  Organic derivatives of hydrazine or of hydroxylamine  0%  T0  29291000  292910  - Isocyanates  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29299000  292990  - Other  0%  T0  29302000  293020  - Thiocarbamates and dithiocarbamates  0%  T0  29303000  293030  - Thiuram mono-, di- or tetrasulphides  0%  T0  29304000  293040  - Methionine  0%  T0  29305000  293050  - Captafol (ISO) and methamidophos (ISO)  0%  T0  29309000  293090  - Other  0%  T0  29311000  293110  - Tetramethyl lead and tetraethyl lead  0%  T0  29312000  293120  - Tributyltin compounds  0%  T0  29319000  293190  - Other  0%  T0  29321100  293211  -- Tetrahydrofuran  0%  T0  29321200  293212  -- 2-Furaldehyde (furfuraldehyde)  0%  T0  29321300  293213  -- Furfuryl alcohol and tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol  0%  T0  29321900  293219  -- Other  0%  T0  29322000  293220  - Lactones  0%  T0  29329100  293291  -- Isosafrole  0%  T0  29329200  293292  -- 1-(1,3-Benzodioxol-5-yl)propan-2-one  0%  T0  29329300  293293  -- Piperonal  0%  T0  29329400  293294  -- Safrole  0%  T0  29329500  293295  -- Tetrahydrocannabinols (all isomers)  0%  T0  29329900  293299  -- Other  0%  T0  29331100  293311  -- Phenazone (antipyrin) and its derivatives  0%  T0  29331900  293319  -- Other  0%  T0  29332100  293321  -- Hydantoin and its derivatives  0%  T0  29332900  293329  -- Other  0%  T0  29333100  293331  -- Pyridine and its salts  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29333200  293332  -- Piperidine and its salts  0%  T0   29333300   293333  -- Alfentanil (INN), anileridine (INN), bezitramide (INN), bromazepam (INN), difenoxin (INN), diphenoxylate (INN), dipipanone (INN), fentanyl (INN), ketobemidone (INN), methylphenidate (INN), pentazocine (INN), pethidine (INN), pethidine (INN) intermediate A, phencyclidine (INN) (PCP), phenoperidine (INN), pipradrol (INN), piritramide (INN), propiram (INN) and trimeperidine (INN); salts thereof     0%     T0  29333900  293339  -- Other  0%  T0  29334100  293341  -- Levorphanol (INN) and its salts  0%  T0  29334900  293349  -- Other  0%  T0  29335200  293352  -- Malonylurea (barbituric acid) and its salts  0%  T0   29335300   293353  -- Allobarbital (INN), amobarbital (INN), barbital (INN), butalbital (INN), butobarbital, cyclobarbital (INN), methylphenobarbital (INN), pentobarbital (INN), phenobarbital (INN), secbutabarbital (INN), secobarbital (INN) and vinylbital (INN); salts thereof    0%    T0  29335400  293354  -- Other derivatives of malonylurea (barbituric acid); salts thereof  0%  T0  29335500  293355  -- Loprazolam (INN), mecloqualone (INN), methaqualone (INN) and zipeprol (INN); salts thereof  0%  T0  29335900  293359  -- Other  0%  T0  29336100  293361  -- Melamine  0%  T0  29336900  293369  -- Other  0%  T0  29337100  293371  -- 6-Hexanelactam (epsilon-caprolactam)  0%  T0  29337200  293372  -- Clobazam (INN) and methyprylon (INN)  0%  T0  29337900  293379  -- Other lactams  0%  T0    29339100    293391  -- Alprazolam (INN), camazepam (INN), chlordiazepoxide (INN), clonazepam (INN), clorazepate, delorazepam (INN), diazepam (INN), estazolam (INN), ethyl loflazepate (INN), fludiazepam (INN), flunitrazepam (INN), flurazepam (INN), halazepam (INN), lorazepam (INN), lormetazepam (INN), mazindol (INN), medazepam (INN), midazolam (INN), nimetazepam (INN), nitrazepam (INN), nordazepam (INN), oxazepam (INN), pinazepam (INN), prazepam (INN), pyrovalerone (INN), temazepam (INN), tetrazepam      0%      T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of      (INN) and triazolam (INN); salts thereof      29339900  293399  -- Other  0%  T0  29341000  293410  - Compounds containing an unfused thiazole ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure  0%  T0  29342000  293420  - Compounds containing in the structure a benzothiazole ring-system (whether or not hydrogenated), not further fused   0%   T0  29343000  293430  - Compounds containing in the structure a phenothiazine ring-system (whether or not hydrogenated), not further fused   0%   T0   29349100   293491  -- Aminorex (INN), brotizolam (INN), clotiazepam (INN), cloxazolam (INN), dextromoramide (INN), haloxazolam (INN), ketazolam (INN), mesocarb (INN), oxazolam (INN), pemoline (INN), phendimetrazine (INN), phenmetrazine (INN) and sufentanil (INN); salts thereof    0%    T0  29349900  293499  -- Other  0%  T0  29350000  293500  Sulphonamides  0%  T0  29362100  293621  -- Vitamins A and their derivatives  0%  T0  29362200  293622  -- Vitamin B1 and its derivatives  0%  T0  29362300  293623  -- Vitamin B2 and its derivatives  0%  T0  29362400  293624  -- D- or DL-Pantothenic acid (vitamin B3 or vitamin B5) and its derivatives  0%  T0  29362500  293625  -- Vitamin B6 and its derivatives  0%  T0  29362600  293626  -- Vitamin B12 and its derivatives  0%  T0  29362700  293627  -- Vitamin C and its derivatives  0%  T0  29362800  293628  -- Vitamin E and its derivatives  0%  T0  29362900  293629  -- Other vitamins and their derivatives  0%  T0  29369000  293690  - Other, including natural concentrates  0%  T0  29371100  293711  -- Somatotropin, its derivatives and structural analogues  0%  T0  29371200  293712  -- Insulin and its salts  0%  T0  29371900  293719  -- Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29372100  293721  -- Cortisone, hydrocortisone, prednisone (dehydrocortisone) and prednisolone (dehydrohydrocortisone)  0%  T0  29372200  293722  -- Halogenated derivatives of corticosteroidal hormones  0%  T0  29372300  293723  -- Oestrogens and progestogens  0%  T0  29372900  293729  -- Other  0%  T0  29375000  293750  - Prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes, their derivatives and structural analogues  0%  T0  29379000  293790  - Other  0%  T0  29381000  293810  - Rutoside (rutin) and its derivatives  0%  T0  29389000  293890  - Other  0%  T0   29391100   293911  -- Concentrates of poppy straw; buprenorphine (INN), codeine, dihydrocodeine (INN), ethylmorphine, etorphine (INN), heroin, hydrocodone (INN), hydromorphone (INN), morphine, nicomorphine (INN), oxycodone (INN), oxymorphone (INN), pholcodine (INN), thebacon (INN) and thebaine; salts thereof    0%    T0  29391900  293919  -- Other  0%  T0  29392000  293920  - Alkaloids of cinchona and their derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29393000  293930  - Caffeine and its salts  0%  T0  29394100  293941  -- Ephedrine and its salts  0%  T0  29394200  293942  -- Pseudoephedrine (INN) and its salts  0%  T0  29394300  293943  -- Cathine (INN) and its salts  0%  T0  29394400  293944  -- Norephedrine and its salts  0%  T0  29394900  293949  -- Other  0%  T0  29395100  293951  -- Fenetylline (INN) and its salts  0%  T0  29395900  293959  -- Other  0%  T0  29396100  293961  -- Ergometrine (INN) and its salts  0%  T0  29396200  293962  -- Ergotamine (INN) and its salts  0%  T0  29396300  293963  -- Lysergic acid and its salts  0%  T0  29396900  293969  -- Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  29399100  293991  -- Cocaine, ecgonine, levometamfetamine, metamfetamine (INN), metamfetamine racemate; salts, esters and other derivatives thereof   0%   T0  29399900  293999  -- Other  0%  T0  29400000  294000  Sugars, chemically pure, other than sucrose, lactose, maltose, glucose and fructose; sugar ethers, sugar acetals and sugar esters, and their salts, other than products of heading 2937, 2938 or 2939   0%   T0  29411000  294110  - Penicillins and their derivatives with a penicillanic acid structure; salts thereof  0%  T0  29412000  294120  - Streptomycins and their derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29413000  294130  - Tetracyclines and their derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29414000  294140  - Chloramphenicol and its derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29415000  294150  - Erythromycin and its derivatives; salts thereof  0%  T0  29419000  294190  - Other  0%  T0  29420000  294200  Other organic compounds  0%  T0  30012000  300120  - Extracts of glands or other organs or of their secretions  0%  T0  30019000  300190  - Other  0%  T0  30021000  300210  - Antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products, whether or not modified or obtained by means of biotechnological processes   0%   T0  30022000  300220  - Vaccines for human medicine  0%  T0  30023000  300230  - Vaccines for veterinary medicine  0%  T0  30029000  300290  - Other  0%  T0  30031000  300310  - Containing penicillins or derivatives thereof, with a penicillanic acid structure, or streptomycins or their derivatives   0%   T0  30032000  300320  - Containing other antibiotics  0%  T0  30033100  300331  -- Containing insulin  0%  T0  30033900  300339  -- Other  0%  T0  30034000  300340  - Containing alkaloids or derivatives thereof but not containing hormones or other products of  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of      heading 2937 or antibiotics      30039000  300390  - Other  0%  T0  30043100  300431  -- Containing insulin  0%  T0  30051000  300510  - Adhesive dressings and other articles having an adhesive layer  0%  T0  30059010  300590  --- White absorbent cotton Wadding  0%  T0  30059090  300590  --- Other  0%  T0   30061000   300610  - Sterile surgical catgut, similar sterile suture materials (including sterile absorbable surgical or dental yarns) and sterile tissue adhesives for surgical wound closure; sterile laminaria and sterile laminaria tents; sterile absorbable surgical or dental haemostatics; sterile surgical or dental adhesion barriers, whether or not absorbable     0%     T0  30062000  300620  - Blood-grouping reagents  0%  T0  30063000  300630  - Opacifying preparations for X-ray examinations; diagnostic reagents designed to be administered to the patient   0%   T0  30064000  300640  - Dental cements and other dental fillings; bone reconstruction cements  0%  T0  30066000  300660  - Chemical contraceptive preparations based on hormones, on other products of heading 2937 or on spermicides   0%   T0   30067000   300670  - Gel preparations designed to be used in human or veterinary medicine as a lubricant for parts of the body for surgical operations or physical examinations or as a coupling agent between the body and medical instruments    0%    T0  31010000  310100  Animal or vegetable fertilisers, whether or not mixed together or chemically treated; fertilisers produced by the mixing or chemical treatment of animal or vegetable products   0%   T0  31021000  310210  - Urea, whether or not in aqueous solution  0%  T0  31022100  310221  -- Ammonium sulphate  0%  T0  31022900  310229  -- Other  0%  T0  31023000  310230  - Ammonium nitrate, whether or not in aqueous solution  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  31024000  310240  - Mixtures of ammonium nitrate with calcium carbonate or other inorganic non-fertilising substances  0%  T0  31025000  310250  - Sodium nitrate  0%  T0  31026000  310260  - Double salts and mixtures of calcium nitrate and ammonium nitrate  0%  T0  31028000  310280  - Mixtures of urea and ammonium nitrate in aqueous or ammoniacal solution  0%  T0  31029000  310290  - Other, including mixtures not specified in the foregoing subheadings  0%  T0  31031000  310310  - Superphosphates  0%  T0  31039000  310390  - Other  0%  T0  31042000  310420  - Potassium chloride  0%  T0  31043000  310430  - Potassium sulphate  0%  T0  31049000  310490  - Other  0%  T0  31051000  310510  - Goods of this chapter in tablets or similar forms or in packages of a gross weight not exceeding 10 kg  0%  T0  31052000  310520  - Mineral or chemical fertilisers containing the three fertilising elements nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium   0%   T0  31053000  310530  - Diammonium hydrogenorthophosphate (diammonium phosphate)  0%  T0  31054000  310540  - Ammonium dihydrogenorthophosphate (monoammonium phosphate) and mixtures thereof with diammonium hydrogenorthophosphate (diammonium phosphate)   0%   T0  31055100  310551  -- Containing nitrates and phosphates  0%  T0  31055900  310559  -- Other  0%  T0  31056000  310560  - Mineral or chemical fertilisers containing the two fertilising elements phosphorus and potassium  0%  T0  31059000  310590  - Other  0%  T0  32011000  320110  - Quebracho extract  0%  T0  32012000  320120  - Wattle extract  0%  T0  32019000  320190  - Other  0%  T0  32021000  320210  - Synthetic organic tanning substances  0%  T0  32029000  320290  - Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of   32030000   320300  Colouring matter of vegetable or animal origin (including dyeing extracts but excluding animal black), whether or not chemically defined; preparations as specified in note 3 to this chapter based on colouring matter of vegetable or animal origin    0%    T0  32041100  320411  -- Disperse dyes and preparations based thereon  0%  T0  32041200  320412  -- Acid dyes, whether or not premetallised, and preparations based thereon; mordant dyes and preparations based thereon   0%   T0  32041300  320413  -- Basic dyes and preparations based thereon  0%  T0  32041400  320414  -- Direct dyes and preparations based thereon  0%  T0  32041500  320415  -- Vat dyes (including those usable in that state as pigments) and preparations based thereon  0%  T0  32041600  320416  -- Reactive dyes and preparations based thereon  0%  T0  32041700  320417  -- Pigments and preparations based thereon  0%  T0  32041900  320419  -- Other, including mixtures of colouring matter of two or more of the subheadings 320411 to 320419  0%  T0  32042000  320420  - Synthetic organic products of a kind used as fluorescent brightening agents  0%  T0  32049000  320490  - Other  0%  T0  32050000  320500  Colour lakes; preparations as specified in note 3 to this chapter based on colour lakes  0%  T0  32061100  320611  -- Containing 80 % or more by weight of titanium dioxide calculated on the dry matter  0%  T0  32061900  320619  -- Other  0%  T0  32062000  320620  - Pigments and preparations based on chromium compounds  0%  T0  32064100  320641  -- Ultramarine and preparations based thereon  0%  T0  32064200  320642  -- Lithopone and other pigments and preparations based on zinc sulphide  0%  T0  32064900  320649  -- Other  0%  T0  32065000  320650  - Inorganic products of a kind used as luminophores  0%  T0  32071000  320710  - Prepared pigments, prepared opacifiers, prepared colours and similar preparations  0%  T0  32072000  320720  - Vitrifiable enamels and glazes, engobes (slips) and similar preparations  0%  T0  32073000  320730  - Liquid lustres and similar preparations  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  32074000  320740  - Glass frit and other glass, in the form of powder, granules or flakes  0%  T0  32159010  321590  --- Ink for ball point pens  0%  T0  33011200  330112  -- Of orange  0%  T0  33011300  330113  -- Of lemon  0%  T0  33011900  330119  -- Other  0%  T0  33012400  330124  -- Of peppermint (Mentha piperita)  0%  T0  33012500  330125  -- Of other mints  0%  T0  33012900  330129  -- Other  0%  T0  33013000  330130  - Resinoids  0%  T0  33019000  330190  - Other  0%  T0  33021000  330210  - Of a kind used in the food or drink industries  0%  T0  33029000  330290  - Other  0%  T0  34031100  340311  -- Preparations for the treatment of textile materials, leather, furskins or other materials  0%  T0  34031900  340319  -- Other  0%  T0  34039100  340391  -- Preparations for the treatment of textile materials, leather, furskins or other materials  0%  T0  34039900  340399  -- Other  0%  T0  34042000  340420  - Of poly(oxyethylene) (polyethylene glycol)  0%  T0  34049000  340490  - Other  0%  T0  35071000  350710  - Rennet and concentrates thereof  0%  T0  35079000  350790  - Other  0%  T0  37011000  370110  - For X-ray  0%  T0  37021000  370210  - For X-ray  0%  T0  38011000  380110  - Artificial graphite  0%  T0  38012000  380120  - Colloidal or semi-colloidal graphite  0%  T0  38013000  380130  - Carbonaceous pastes for electrodes and similar pastes for furnace linings  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  38019000  380190  - Other  0%  T0  38021000  380210  - Activated carbon  0%  T0  38029000  380290  - Other  0%  T0  38030000  380300  Tall oil, whether or not refined  0%  T0  38040000  380400  Residual lyes from the manufacture of wood pulp, whether or not concentrated, desugared or chemically treated, including lignin sulphonates, but excluding tall oil of heading 3803   0%   T0  38051000  380510  - Gum, wood or sulphate turpentine oils  0%  T0  38059000  380590  - Other  0%  T0  38061000  380610  - Rosin and resin acids  0%  T0  38062000  380620  - Salts of rosin, of resin acids or of derivatives of rosin or resin acids, other than salts of rosin adducts  0%  T0  38063000  380630  - Ester gums  0%  T0  38069000  380690  - Other  0%  T0  38070000  380700  Wood tar; wood tar oils; wood creosote; wood naphtha; vegetable pitch; brewers' pitch and similar preparations based on rosin, resin acids or on vegetable pitch   0%   T0  38085000  380850  - Goods specified in subheading note 1 to this chapter  0%  T0  38089191  380891  - - - - Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane  0%  T0  38089199  380891  - - - - Other  0%  T0  38089210  380892  --- Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane  0%  T0  38089290  380892  --- Other  0%  T0  38089310  380893  --- Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane  0%  T0  38089390  380893  --- Other  0%  T0  38089410  380894  --- Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane  0%  T0  38089490  380894  --- Other  0%  T0  38089910  380899  --- Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane  0%  T0  38089990  380899  --- Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  38091000  380910  - With a basis of amylaceous substances  0%  T0  38099100  380991  -- Of a kind used in the textile or like industries  0%  T0  38099200  380992  -- Of a kind used in the paper or like industries  0%  T0  38099300  380993  -- Of a kind used in the leather or like industries  0%  T0  38121000  381210  - Prepared rubber accelerators  0%  T0  38122000  381220  - Compound plasticisers for rubber or plastics  0%  T0  38123000  381230  - Anti-oxidising preparations and other compound stabilisers for rubber or plastics  0%  T0  38130010  381300  ---Containing bromochlorodifluoromethane, bromotrifluoromethane or Dibromotetrafluoroethanes   0%   T0  38130020  381300  --- Containing methane, ethane or propane hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs)  0%  T0  38130030  381300  --- Containing methane, ethane or propane hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)  0%  T0  38130040  381300  --- Containing bromochloromethane  0%  T0  38130090  381300  --- Other  0%  T0  38140010  381400  ---Containing methane, ethane or propane chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), whether not containing hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)   0%   T0  38140020  381400  --- Containing methane, ethane or propane hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), but not containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)   0%   T0  38140030  381400  --- Containing carbon tetrachloride, bromochloromethane or 1,1,1-trichloroethane  0%  T0  38140090  381400  --- Other  0%  T0  38160000  381600  Refractory cements, mortars, concretes and similar compositions, other than products of heading 3801  0%  T0  38170000  381700  Mixed alkylbenzenes and mixed alkylnaphthalenes, other than those of heading 2707 or 2902  0%  T0  38210000  382100  Prepared culture media for the development or maintenance of micro-organisms (including viruses and the like) or of plant, human or animal cells   0%   T0  38220000  382200  Diagnostic or laboratory reagents on a backing, prepared diagnostic or laboratory reagents whether or not on a backing, other than those of heading 3002 or 3006; certified reference materials   0%   T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  38231100  382311  -- Stearic acid  0%  T0  38231200  382312  -- Oleic acid  0%  T0  38231300  382313  -- Tall oil fatty acids  0%  T0  38231900  382319  -- Other  0%  T0  38237000  382370  - Industrial fatty alcohols  0%  T0  38241000  382410  - Prepared binders for foundry moulds or cores  0%  T0  38243000  382430  - Non-agglomerated metal carbides mixed together or with metallic binders  0%  T0  38244000  382440  - Prepared additives for cements, mortars or concretes  0%  T0  38245000  382450  - Non-refractory mortars and concretes  0%  T0  38246000  382460  - Sorbitol other than that of subheading 290544  0%  T0  38247100  382471  -- Containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), whether or not containing hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) or hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)   0%   T0  38247200  382472  -- Containing bromochlorodifluoromethane, bromotrifluoromethane or dibromotetrafluoroethanes  0%  T0  38247300  382473  -- Containing hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs)  0%  T0  38247400  382474  -- Containing hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), whether or not containing perfluorocarbons (PFCs) or hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), but not containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)   0%   T0  38247500  382475  -- Containing carbon tetrachloride  0%  T0  38247600  382476  -- Containing 1,1,1-trichloroethane (methyl chloroform)  0%  T0  38247700  382477  -- Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane  0%  T0  38247800  382478  -- Containing perfluorocarbons (PFCs) or hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), but not containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) or hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)   0%   T0  38247900  382479  -- Other  0%  T0  38248100  382481  -- Containing oxirane (ethylene oxide)  0%  T0  38248200  382482  -- Containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs) or polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs)   0%   T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  38248300  382483  -- Containing tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate  0%  T0  38249010  382490  --- "Grey oxide" and "Black oxide" ("Lead dust")  0%  T0  38249090  382490  --- Other  0%  T0  38260000  382600  Biodiesel and mixtures thereof, not containing or containing less than 70 % by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals   0%   T0  39011000  390110  - Polyethylene having a specific gravity of less than 0,94  0%  T0  39012000  390120  - Polyethylene having a specific gravity of 0,94 or more  0%  T0  39013000  390130  - Ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers  0%  T0  39019000  390190  - Other  0%  T0  39021000  390210  - Polypropylene  0%  T0  39022000  390220  - Polyisobutylene  0%  T0  39023000  390230  - Propylene copolymers  0%  T0  39029000  390290  - Other  0%  T0  39031100  390311  -- Expansible  0%  T0  39031900  390319  -- Other  0%  T0  39032000  390320  - Styrene-acrylonitrile (SAN) copolymers  0%  T0  39033000  390330  - Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) copolymers  0%  T0  39039000  390390  - Other  0%  T0  39041000  390410  - Poly(vinyl chloride), not mixed with any other substances  0%  T0  39042100  390421  -- Non-plasticised  0%  T0  39042200  390422  -- Plasticised  0%  T0  39043000  390430  - Vinyl chloride-vinyl acetate copolymers  0%  T0  39044000  390440  - Other vinyl chloride copolymers  0%  T0  39045000  390450  - Vinylidene chloride polymers  0%  T0  39046100  390461  -- Polytetrafluoroethylene  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  39046900  390469  -- Other  0%  T0  39049000  390490  - Other  0%  T0  39071000  390710  - Polyacetals  0%  T0  39072000  390720  - Other polyethers  0%  T0  39073000  390730  - Epoxide resins  0%  T0  39074000  390740  - Polycarbonates  0%  T0  39076000  390760  - Poly(ethylene terephthalate)  0%  T0  39081000  390810  - Polyamide-6, -11, -12, -6,6, -6,9, -6,10 or -6,12  0%  T0  39089000  390890  - Other  0%  T0  39093000  390930  - Other amino-resins  0%  T0  39094000  390940  - Phenolic resins  0%  T0  39100000  391000  Silicones in primary forms  0%  T0  39111000  391110  - Petroleum resins, coumarone, indene or coumarone-indene resins and polyterpenes  0%  T0  39119000  391190  - Other  0%  T0  39121100  391211  -- Non-plasticised  0%  T0  39121200  391212  -- Plasticised  0%  T0  39122000  391220  - Cellulose nitrates (including collodions)  0%  T0  39123100  391231  -- Carboxymethylcellulose and its salts  0%  T0  39123900  391239  -- Other  0%  T0  39129000  391290  - Other  0%  T0  39131000  391310  - Alginic acid, its salts and esters  0%  T0  39139000  391390  - Other  0%  T0  39140000  391400  Ion-exchangers based on polymers of headings 3901 to 3913, in primary forms  0%  T0  39151000  391510  - Of polymers of ethylene  0%  T0  39152000  391520  - Of polymers of styrene  0%  T0     HS      Year of  39153000  391530  - Of polymers of vinyl chloride  0%  T0  39159000  391590  - Of other plastics  0%  T0  39161000  391610  - Of polymers of ethylene  0%  T0  39162000  391620  - Of polymers of vinyl chloride  0%  T0  39169000  391690  - Of other plastics  0%  T0  39171000  391710  - Artificial guts (sausage casings) of hardened protein or of cellulosic materials  0%  T0  39239010  392390  --- Empty gelatine capsules for pharmaceutical use  0%  T0  40011000  400110  - Natural rubber latex, whether or not prevulcanised  0%  T0  40012100  400121  -- Smoked sheets  0%  T0  40012200  400122  -- Technically specified natural rubber (TSNR)  0%  T0  40012900  400129  -- Other  0%  T0  40013000  400130  - Balata, gutta-percha, guayule, chicle and similar natural gums  0%  T0  40021100  400211  -- Latex  0%  T0  40021900  400219  -- Other  0%  T0  40022000  400220  - Butadiene rubber (BR)  0%  T0  40023100  400231  -- Isobutene-isoprene (butyl) rubber (IIR)  0%  T0  40023900  400239  -- Other  0%  T0  40024100  400241  -- Latex  0%  T0  40024900  400249  -- Other  0%  T0  40025100  400251  -- Latex  0%  T0  40025900  400259  -- Other  0%  T0  40026000  400260  - Isoprene rubber (IR)  0%  T0  40027000  400270  - Ethylene-propylene-non-conjugated diene rubber (EPDM)  0%  T0  40028000  400280  - Mixtures of any product of heading 4001 with any product of this heading  0%  T0  40029100  400291  -- Latex  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  40029900  400299  -- Other  0%  T0  40030000  400300  Reclaimed rubber in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip  0%  T0  40040000  400400  Waste, parings and scrap of rubber (other than hard rubber) and powders and granules obtained therefrom   0%   T0  40051000  400510  - Compounded with carbon black or silica  0%  T0  40052000  400520  - Solutions; dispersions other than those of subheading 400510  0%  T0  40059100  400591  -- Plates, sheets and strip  0%  T0  40059900  400599  -- Other  0%  T0  40061000  400610  -      -   0%  T0  40070000  400700  Vulcanised rubber thread and cord  0%  T0  40113000  401130  - Of a kind used on aircraft  0%  T0  40116100  401161  -- Of a kind used on agricultural or forestry vehicles and machines  0%  T0  40119200  401192  -- Of a kind used on agricultural or forestry vehicles and machines  0%  T0  40141000  401410  - Sheath contraceptives  0%  T0  40149000  401490  - Other  0%  T0  40151100  401511  -- Surgical  0%  T0  40170010  401700  --- Wastes and scrap  0%  T0  43011000  430110  - Of mink, whole, with or without head, tail or paws  0%  T0  43013000  430130  - Of lamb, the following: Astrakhan, Broadtail, Caracul, Persian and similar lamb, Indian, Chinese, Mongolian or Tibetan lamb, whole, with or without head, tail or paws   0%   T0  43016000  430160  - Of fox, whole, with or without head, tail or paws  0%  T0  43018000  430180  - Other furskins, whole, with or without head, tail or paws  0%  T0  43019000  430190  - Heads, tails, paws and other pieces or cuttings, suitable for furriers' use  0%  T0  44011000  440110  - Fuel wood, in logs, in billets, in twigs, in faggots or in similar forms  0%  T0  44012100  440121  -- Coniferous  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  44012200  440122  -- Non-coniferous  0%  T0  44013100  440131  -- Wood pellets  0%  T0  44013900  440139  -- Other  0%  T0  44021000  440210  - Of bamboo  0%  T0  44029000  440290  - Other  0%  T0  44031000  440310  - Treated with paint, stains, creosote or other preservatives  0%  T0  44032000  440320  - Other, coniferous  0%  T0  44034100  440341  -- Dark red meranti, light red meranti and meranti bakau  0%  T0  44034900  440349  -- Other  0%  T0  44039100  440391  -- Of oak (Quercus spp.)  0%  T0  44039200  440392  -- Of beech (Fagus spp.)  0%  T0  44039900  440399  -- Other  0%  T0  44041000  440410  - Coniferous  0%  T0  44042000  440420  - Non-coniferous  0%  T0  44050000  440500  Wood wool; wood flour  0%  T0  44061000  440610  - Not impregnated  0%  T0  44069000  440690  - Other  0%  T0  45011000  450110  - Natural cork, raw or simply prepared  0%  T0  45019000  450190  - Other  0%  T0  45020000  450200  Natural cork, debacked or roughly squared, or in rectangular (including square) blocks, plates, sheets or strip (including sharp-edged blanks for corks or stoppers)   0%   T0  47010000  470100  Mechanical wood pulp  0%  T0  47020000  470200  Chemical wood pulp, dissolving grades  0%  T0  47031100  470311  -- Coniferous  0%  T0  47031900  470319  -- Non-coniferous  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  47032100  470321  -- Coniferous  0%  T0  47032900  470329  -- Non-coniferous  0%  T0  47041100  470411  -- Coniferous  0%  T0  47041900  470419  -- Non-coniferous  0%  T0  47042100  470421  -- Coniferous  0%  T0  47042900  470429  -- Non-coniferous  0%  T0  47050000  470500  Wood pulp obtained by a combination of mechanical and chemical pulping processes  0%  T0  47061000  470610  - Cotton linters pulp  0%  T0  47062000  470620  - Pulps of fibres derived from recovered (waste and scrap) paper or paperboard  0%  T0  47063000  470630  - Other, of bamboo  0%  T0  47069100  470691  -- Mechanical  0%  T0  47069200  470692  -- Chemical  0%  T0  47069300  470693  -- Obtained by a combination of mechanical and chemical processes  0%  T0  47071000  470710  - Unbleached kraft paper or paperboard or corrugated paper or paperboard  0%  T0  47072000  470720  - Other paper or paperboard made mainly of bleached chemical pulp, not coloured in the mass  0%  T0  47073000  470730  - Paper or paperboard made mainly of mechanical pulp (for example, newspapers, journals and similar printed matter)   0%   T0  47079000  470790  - Other, including unsorted waste and scrap  0%  T0  48041910  480419  --- Dry battery Kraftliner  0%  T0  48114110  481141  --- Unprinted  0%  T0  48115910  481159  --- For labelling dry cells and dry batteries  0%  T0  48116010  481160  --- Unprinted  0%  T0  48120000  481200  Filter blocks, slabs and plates, of paper pulp  0%  T0  48131000  481310  - In the form of booklets or tubes  0%  T0  48132000  481320  - In rolls of a width not exceeding 5 cm  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  48139000  481390  - Other  0%  T0  49011000  490110  - In single sheets, whether or not folded  0%  T0  49019100  490191  -- Dictionaries and encyclopaedias, and serial instalments thereof  0%  T0  49019900  490199  -- Other  0%  T0  49021000  490210  - Appearing at least four times a week  0%  T0  49029000  490290  - Other  0%  T0  49030000  490300  Children's picture, drawing or colouring books  0%  T0  49040000  490400  Music, printed or in manuscript, whether or not bound or illustrated  0%  T0  49051000  490510  - Globes  0%  T0  49059100  490591  -- In book form  0%  T0  49059900  490599  -- Other  0%  T0   49060000   490600  Plans and drawings for architectural, engineering, industrial, commercial, topographical or similar purposes, being originals drawn by hand; handwritten texts; photographic reproductions on sensitised paper and carbon copies of the foregoing    0%    T0  49070090  490700  --- Other  0%  T0  49119910  491199  --- Instructional charts and diagrams  0%  T0  49119920  491199  --- Examination question papers  0%  T0  50010000  500100  Silkworm cocoons suitable for reeling  0%  T0  50020000  500200  Raw silk (not thrown)  0%  T0  50030000  500300  Silk waste (including cocoons unsuitable for reeling, yarn waste and garnetted stock)  0%  T0  51011100  510111  -- Shorn wool  0%  T0  51011900  510119  -- Other  0%  T0  51012100  510121  -- Shorn wool  0%  T0  51012900  510129  -- Other  0%  T0  51013000  510130  - Carbonised  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  51021100  510211  -- Of Kashmir (cashmere) goats  0%  T0  51021900  510219  -- Other  0%  T0  51022000  510220  - Coarse animal hair  0%  T0  51031000  510310  - Noils of wool or of fine animal hair  0%  T0  51032000  510320  - Other waste of wool or of fine animal hair  0%  T0  51033000  510330  - Waste of coarse animal hair  0%  T0  51040000  510400  Garnetted stock of wool or of fine or coarse animal hair  0%  T0  51051000  510510  - Carded wool  0%  T0  51052100  510521  -- Combed wool in fragments  0%  T0  51052900  510529  -- Other  0%  T0  51053100  510531  -- Of Kashmir (cashmere) goats  0%  T0  51053900  510539  -- Other  0%  T0  51054000  510540  - Coarse animal hair, carded or combed  0%  T0  52010000  520100  Cotton, not carded or combed  0%  T0  52021000  520210  - Yarn waste (including thread waste)  0%  T0  52029100  520291  -- Garnetted stock  0%  T0  52029900  520299  -- Other  0%  T0  52030000  520300  Cotton, carded or combed  0%  T0  53011000  530110  - Flax, raw or retted  0%  T0  53012100  530121  -- Broken or scutched  0%  T0  53012900  530129  -- Other  0%  T0  53013000  530130  - Flax tow and waste  0%  T0  53021000  530210  - True hemp, raw or retted  0%  T0  53029000  530290  - Other  0%  T0  53031000  530310  - Jute and other textile bast fibres, raw or retted  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  53039000  530390  - Other  0%  T0   53050000   530500  Coconut, abaca (Manila hemp or Musa textilis Nee), ramie and other vegetable textile fibres, not elsewhere specified or included, raw or processed but not spun; tow, noils and waste of these fibres (including yarn waste and garnetted stock)    0%    T0  55011000  550110  - Of nylon or other polyamides  0%  T0  55012000  550120  - Of polyesters  0%  T0  55013000  550130  - Acrylic or modacrylic  0%  T0  55014000  550140  - Of polypropylene  0%  T0  55019000  550190  - Other  0%  T0  55020000  550200  Artificial filament tow  0%  T0  55031100  550311  -- Of aramids  0%  T0  55031900  550319  -- Other  0%  T0  55032000  550320  - Of polyesters  0%  T0  55033000  550330  - Acrylic or modacrylic  0%  T0  55034000  550340  - Of polypropylene  0%  T0  55039000  550390  - Other  0%  T0  55041000  550410  - Of viscose rayon  0%  T0  55049000  550490  - Other  0%  T0  55051000  550510  - Of synthetic fibres  0%  T0  55052000  550520  - Of artificial fibres  0%  T0  55061000  550610  - Of nylon or other polyamides  0%  T0  55062000  550620  - Of polyesters  0%  T0  55063000  550630  - Acrylic or modacrylic  0%  T0  55069000  550690  - Other  0%  T0  55070000  550700  Artificial staple fibres, carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  59021000  590210  - Of nylon or other polyamides  0%  T0  59022000  590220  - Of polyesters  0%  T0  59029000  590290  - Other  0%  T0  59114000  591140  - Straining cloth of a kind used in oil-presses or the like, including that of human hair  0%  T0  63049110  630491  --- Mosquito net  0%  T0  63072000  630720  - Life jackets and lifebelts  0%  T0  65061000  650610  - Safety headgear  0%  T0  69021000  690210  - Containing, by weight, singly or together, more than 50 % of the elements Mg, Ca or Cr, expressed as MgO, CaO or Cr2O3   0%   T0  69022000  690220  - Containing, by weight, more than 50 % of alumina (Al2O3), of silica (SiO2) or of a mixture or compound of these products   0%   T0  69029000  690290  - Other  0%  T0  69091100  690911  -- Of porcelain or china  0%  T0  69091200  690912  -- Articles having a hardness equivalent to 9 or more on the Mohs scale  0%  T0  69091900  690919  -- Other  0%  T0  69099000  690990  - Other  0%  T0  70010000  700100  Cullet and other waste and scrap of glass; glass in the mass  0%  T0  70101010  701010  --- For pharmaceutical products  0%  T0  70151000  701510  - Glasses for corrective spectacles  0%  T0  70171000  701710  - Of fused quartz or other fused silica  0%  T0  70172000  701720  - Of other glass having a linear coefficient of expansion not exceeding 5 . 10 6 per Kelvin within a temperature range of 0 °C to 300 °C   0%   T0  70179000  701790  - Other  0%  T0  71031010  710310  --- Tanzanite  0%  T0  71031020  710310  --- Alexandrite  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  71039910  710399  --- Tanzanite  0%  T0  71039920  710399  --- Alexandrite  0%  T0  71082000  710820  - Monetary  0%  T0  71189000  711890  - Other  0%  T0  72011000  720110  - Non-alloy pig iron containing by weight 0,5 % or less of phosphorus  0%  T0  72012000  720120  - Non-alloy pig iron containing by weight more than 0,5 % of phosphorus  0%  T0  72015000  720150  - Alloy pig iron; spiegeleisen  0%  T0  72021100  720211  -- Containing by weight more than 2 % of carbon  0%  T0  72021900  720219  -- Other  0%  T0  72022100  720221  -- Containing by weight more than 55 % of silicon  0%  T0  72022900  720229  -- Other  0%  T0  72023000  720230  - Ferro-silico-manganese  0%  T0  72024100  720241  -- Containing by weight more than 4 % of carbon  0%  T0  72024900  720249  -- Other  0%  T0  72025000  720250  - Ferro-silico-chromium  0%  T0  72026000  720260  - Ferro-nickel  0%  T0  72027000  720270  - Ferro-molybdenum  0%  T0  72028000  720280  - Ferro-tungsten and ferro-silico-tungsten  0%  T0  72029100  720291  -- Ferro-titanium and ferro-silico-titanium  0%  T0  72029200  720292  -- Ferro-vanadium  0%  T0  72029300  720293  -- Ferro-niobium  0%  T0  72029900  720299  -- Other  0%  T0  72031000  720310  - Ferrous products obtained by direct reduction of iron ore  0%  T0  72039000  720390  - Other  0%  T0  72041000  720410  - Waste and scrap of cast iron  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  72042100  720421  -- Of stainless steel  0%  T0  72042900  720429  -- Other  0%  T0  72043000  720430  - Waste and scrap of tinned iron or steel  0%  T0  72044100  720441  -- Turnings, shavings, chips, milling waste, sawdust, filings, trimmings and stampings, whether or not in bundles   0%   T0  72044900  720449  -- Other  0%  T0  72045000  720450  - Remelting scrap ingots  0%  T0  72051000  720510  - Granules  0%  T0  72052100  720521  -- Of alloy steel  0%  T0  72052900  720529  -- Other  0%  T0  72061000  720610  - Ingots  0%  T0  72069000  720690  - Other  0%  T0  72071100  720711  -- Of rectangular (including square) cross-section, the width measuring less than twice the thickness  0%  T0  72071200  720712  -- Other, of rectangular (other than square) cross-section  0%  T0  72071900  720719  -- Other  0%  T0  72072000  720720  - Containing by weight 0,25 % or more of carbon  0%  T0  72081000  720810  - In coils, not further worked than hot-rolled, with patterns in relief  0%  T0  72082500  720825  -- Of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more  0%  T0  72082600  720826  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more but less than 4,75 mm  0%  T0  72082700  720827  -- Of a thickness of less than 3 mm  0%  T0  72083600  720836  -- Of a thickness exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72083700  720837  -- Of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more but not exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72083800  720838  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more but less than 4,75 mm  0%  T0  72083900  720839  -- Of a thickness of less than 3 mm  0%  T0  72084000  720840  - Not in coils, not further worked than hot-rolled, with patterns in relief  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  72085100  720851  -- Of a thickness exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72085200  720852  -- Of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more but not exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72085300  720853  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more but less than 4,75 mm  0%  T0  72085400  720854  -- Of a thickness of less than 3 mm  0%  T0  72089000  720890  - Other  0%  T0  72101200  721012  -- Of a thickness of less than 0,5 mm  0%  T0  72105000  721050  - Plated or coated with chromium oxides or with chromium and chromium oxides  0%  T0  72139100  721391  -- Of circular cross-section measuring less than 14 mm in diameter  0%  T0  72139900  721399  -- Other  0%  T0  72172000  721720  - Plated or coated with zinc  0%  T0  72173010  721730  --- Of a kind used in the manufacture of tyres  0%  T0  72181000  721810  - Ingots and other primary forms  0%  T0  72189100  721891  -- Of rectangular (other than square) cross-section  0%  T0  72189900  721899  -- Other  0%  T0  72191100  721911  -- Of a thickness exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72191200  721912  -- Of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more but not exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72191300  721913  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more but less than 4,75 mm  0%  T0  72191400  721914  -- Of a thickness of less than 3 mm  0%  T0  72192100  721921  -- Of a thickness exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72192200  721922  -- Of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more but not exceeding 10 mm  0%  T0  72192300  721923  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more but less than 4,75 mm  0%  T0  72192400  721924  -- Of a thickness of less than 3 mm  0%  T0  72193100  721931  -- Of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more  0%  T0  72193200  721932  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more but less than 4,75 mm  0%  T0  72193300  721933  -- Of a thickness exceeding 1 mm but less than 3 mm  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  72193400  721934  -- Of a thickness of 0,5 mm or more but not exceeding 1 mm  0%  T0  72193500  721935  -- Of a thickness of less than 0,5 mm  0%  T0  72199000  721990  - Other  0%  T0  72241000  722410  - Ingots and other primary forms  0%  T0  72249000  722490  - Other  0%  T0  73021000  730210  - Rails  0%  T0  73023000  730230  - Switch blades, crossing frogs, point rods and other crossing pieces  0%  T0  73024000  730240  - Fish-plates and sole plates  0%  T0  73029000  730290  - Other  0%  T0  73041100  730411  -- Of stainless steel  0%  T0  73041900  730419  -- Other  0%  T0  73042200  730422  -- Drill pipe of stainless steel  0%  T0  73042300  730423  -- Other drill pipe  0%  T0  73042400  730424  -- Other, of stainless steel  0%  T0  73042900  730429  -- Other  0%  T0  73051100  730511  -- Longitudinally submerged arc welded  0%  T0  73051200  730512  -- Other, longitudinally welded  0%  T0  73051900  730519  -- Other  0%  T0  73052000  730520  - Casing of a kind used in drilling for oil or gas  0%  T0  73061100  730611  -- Welded, of stainless steel  0%  T0  73061900  730619  -- Other  0%  T0  73062100  730621  -- Welded, of stainless steel  0%  T0  73062900  730629  -- Other  0%  T0  73081000  730810  - Bridges and bridge-sections  0%  T0  73082000  730820  - Towers and lattice masts  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  73084000  730840  - Equipment for scaffolding, shuttering, propping or pit-propping  0%  T0  73102920  731029  --- Cans and ends for beverages  0%  T0  73259100  732591  -- Grinding balls and similar articles for mills  0%  T0  73261100  732611  -- Grinding balls and similar articles for mills  0%  T0  73269010  732690  --- Traps and sneers for the destruction of pests  0%  T0  73269020  732690  --- Reels for fire hose  0%  T0  74010000  740100  Copper mattes; cement copper (precipitated copper)  0%  T0  74020000  740200  Unrefined copper; copper anodes for electrolytic refining  0%  T0  74040000  740400  Copper waste and scrap  0%  T0  74071000  740710  - Of refined copper  0%  T0  74081100  740811  -- Of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 mm  0%  T0  74082200  740822  -- Of copper-nickel base alloys (cupro-nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel silver)  0%  T0  75011000  750110  - Nickel mattes  0%  T0  75012000  750120  - Nickel oxide sinters and other intermediate products of nickel metallurgy  0%  T0  75021000  750210  - Nickel, not alloyed  0%  T0  75022000  750220  - Nickel alloys  0%  T0  75030000  750300  Nickel waste and scrap  0%  T0  75040000  750400  Nickel powders and flakes  0%  T0  76011000  760110  - Aluminium, not alloyed  0%  T0  76012000  760120  - Aluminium alloys  0%  T0  76020000  760200  Aluminium waste and scrap  0%  T0  76031000  760310  - Powders of non-lamellar structure  0%  T0  76032000  760320  - Powders of lamellar structure; flakes  0%  T0  76109000  761090  - Other  0%  T0  76129010  761290  ---Cans and ends for beverages  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  78011000  780110  - Refined lead  0%  T0  78019100  780191  -- Containing by weight antimony as the principal other element  0%  T0  78019900  780199  -- Other  0%  T0  78020000  780200  Lead waste and scrap  0%  T0  78042000  780420  - Powders and flakes  0%  T0  79011100  790111  -- Containing by weight 99,99 % or more of zinc  0%  T0  79011200  790112  -- Containing by weight less than 99,99 % of zinc  0%  T0  79012000  790120  - Zinc alloys  0%  T0  79020000  790200  Zinc waste and scrap  0%  T0  79031000  790310  - Zinc dust  0%  T0  79039000  790390  - Other  0%  T0  80011000  800110  - Tin, not alloyed  0%  T0  80012000  800120  - Tin alloys  0%  T0  80020000  800200  Tin waste and scrap  0%  T0  81011000  810110  - Powders  0%  T0  81019400  810194  -- Unwrought tungsten, including bars and rods obtained simply by sintering  0%  T0  81019600  810196  -- Wire  0%  T0  81019700  810197  -- Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81019900  810199  -- Other  0%  T0  81021000  810210  - Powders  0%  T0  81029400  810294  -- Unwrought molybdenum, including bars and rods obtained simply by sintering  0%  T0  81029500  810295  -- Bars and rods, other than those obtained simply by sintering, profiles, plates, sheets, strip and foil  0%  T0  81029600  810296  -- Wire  0%  T0  81029700  810297  -- Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81029900  810299  -- Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  81032000  810320  - Unwrought tantalum, including bars and rods obtained simply by sintering; powders  0%  T0  81033000  810330  - Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81039000  810390  - Other  0%  T0  81041100  810411  -- Containing at least 99,8 % by weight of magnesium  0%  T0  81041900  810419  -- Other  0%  T0  81042000  810420  - Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81043000  810430  - Raspings, turnings and granules, graded according to size; powders  0%  T0  81049000  810490  - Other  0%  T0  81052000  810520  - Cobalt mattes and other intermediate products of cobalt metallurgy; unwrought cobalt; powders  0%  T0  81053000  810530  - Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81059000  810590  - Other  0%  T0  81060000  810600  Bismuth and articles thereof, including waste and scrap  0%  T0  81072000  810720  - Unwrought cadmium; powders  0%  T0  81073000  810730  - Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81079000  810790  - Other  0%  T0  81082000  810820  - Unwrought titanium; powders  0%  T0  81083000  810830  - Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81089000  810890  - Other  0%  T0  81092000  810920  - Unwrought zirconium; powders  0%  T0  81093000  810930  - Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81099000  810990  - Other  0%  T0  81101000  811010  - Unwrought antimony; powders  0%  T0  81102000  811020  - Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81109000  811090  - Other  0%  T0  81110000  811100  Manganese and articles thereof, including waste and scrap  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  81121200  811212  -- Unwrought; powders  0%  T0  81121300  811213  -- Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81121900  811219  -- Other  0%  T0  81122100  811221  -- Unwrought; powders  0%  T0  81122200  811222  -- Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81122900  811229  -- Other  0%  T0  81125100  811251  -- Unwrought; powders  0%  T0  81125200  811252  -- Waste and scrap  0%  T0  81125900  811259  -- Other  0%  T0  81129200  811292  -- Unwrought; waste and scrap; powders  0%  T0  81129900  811299  -- Other  0%  T0  81130000  811300  Cermets and articles thereof, including waste and scrap  0%  T0  82084000  820840  - For agricultural, horticultural or forestry machines  0%  T0  84011000  840110  - Nuclear reactors (Euratom)  0%  T0  84012000  840120  - Machinery and apparatus for isotopic separation, and parts thereof (Euratom)  0%  T0  84013000  840130  - Fuel elements (cartridges), non-irradiated (Euratom)  0%  T0  84014000  840140  - Parts of nuclear reactors (Euratom)  0%  T0  84021100  840211  -- Watertube boilers with a steam production exceeding 45 tonnes per hour  0%  T0  84021200  840212  -- Watertube boilers with a steam production not exceeding 45 tonnes per hour  0%  T0  84021900  840219  -- Other vapour generating boilers, including hybrid boilers  0%  T0  84022000  840220  - Superheated water boilers  0%  T0  84029000  840290  - Parts  0%  T0  84031000  840310  - Boilers  0%  T0  84039000  840390  - Parts  0%  T0  84041000  840410  - Auxiliary plant for use with boilers of heading 8402 or 8403  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84042000  840420  - Condensers for steam or other vapour power units  0%  T0  84049000  840490  - Parts  0%  T0  84051000  840510  - Producer gas or water gas generators, with or without their purifiers; acetylene gas generators and similar water process gas generators, with or without their purifiers   0%   T0  84059000  840590  - Parts  0%  T0  84061000  840610  - Turbines for marine propulsion  0%  T0  84068100  840681  -- Of an output exceeding 40 MW  0%  T0  84068200  840682  -- Of an output not exceeding 40 MW  0%  T0  84069000  840690  - Parts  0%  T0  84071000  840710  - Aircraft engines  0%  T0  84072100  840721  -- Outboard motors  0%  T0  84079010  840790  --- For industrial, agricultural, water supply, sewerage and drainage  0%  T0  84081000  840810  - Marine propulsion engines  0%  T0  84089010  840890  --- For industrial, agricultural, water supply, sewerage and drainage  0%  T0  84101100  841011  -- Of a power not exceeding 1000 kW  0%  T0  84101200  841012  -- Of a power exceeding 1000 kW but not exceeding 10000 kW  0%  T0  84101300  841013  -- Of a power exceeding 10000 kW  0%  T0  84109000  841090  - Parts, including regulators  0%  T0  84111100  841111  -- Of a thrust not exceeding 25 kN  0%  T0  84111200  841112  -- Of a thrust exceeding 25 kN  0%  T0  84112100  841121  -- Of a power not exceeding 1100 kW  0%  T0  84112200  841122  -- Of a power exceeding 1100 kW  0%  T0  84118100  841181  -- Of a power not exceeding 5000 kW  0%  T0  84118200  841182  -- Of a power exceeding 5000 kW  0%  T0  84119100  841191  -- Of turbojets or turbopropellers  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84119900  841199  -- Other  0%  T0  84121000  841210  - Reaction engines other than turbojets  0%  T0  84122100  841221  -- Linear acting (cylinders)  0%  T0  84122900  841229  -- Other  0%  T0  84123100  841231  -- Linear acting (cylinders)  0%  T0  84123900  841239  -- Other  0%  T0  84128000  841280  - Other  0%  T0  84129000  841290  - Parts  0%  T0  84132000  841320  - Handpumps, other than those of subheading 841311 or 841319  0%  T0  84134000  841340  - Concrete pumps  0%  T0  84135000  841350  - Other reciprocating positive displacement pumps  0%  T0  84136000  841360  - Other rotary positive displacement pumps  0%  T0  84137000  841370  - Other centrifugal pumps  0%  T0  84138100  841381  -- Pumps  0%  T0  84138200  841382  -- Liquid elevators  0%  T0  84139100  841391  -- Of pumps  0%  T0  84139200  841392  -- Of liquid elevators  0%  T0  84161000  841610  - Furnace burners for liquid fuel  0%  T0  84162000  841620  - Other furnace burners, including combination burners  0%  T0  84163000  841630  - Mechanical stokers, including their mechanical grates, mechanical ash dischargers and similar appliances  0%  T0  84169000  841690  - Parts  0%  T0  84171000  841710  - Furnaces and ovens for the roasting, melting or other heat treatment of ores, pyrites or of metals  0%  T0  84172000  841720  - Bakery ovens, including biscuit ovens  0%  T0  84178000  841780  - Other  0%  T0  84179000  841790  - Parts  0%  T0   HS  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84186110  841861  --- For dairying or fishing  0%  T0  84186120  841861  --- For industrial use  0%  T0  84186910  841869  --- For dairying or fishing  0%  T0  84186920  841869  --- For industrial use  0%  T0  84191100  841911  -- Instantaneous gas water heaters  0%  T0  84191900  841919  -- Other  0%  T0  84192000  841920  - Medical, surgical or laboratory sterilisers  0%  T0  84193100  841931  -- For agricultural products  0%  T0  84193200  841932  -- For wood, paper pulp, paper or paperboard  0%  T0  84193900  841939  -- Other  0%  T0  84194000  841940  - Distilling or rectifying plant  0%  T0  84195000  841950  - Heat-exchange units  0%  T0  84196000  841960  - Machinery for liquefying air or other gases  0%  T0  84198100  841981  -- For making hot drinks or for cooking or heating food  0%  T0  84198900  841989  -- Other  0%  T0  84199000  841990  - Parts  0%  T0  84201000  842010  - Calendering or other rolling machines  0%  T0  84209100  842091  -- Cylinders  0%  T0  84209900  842099  -- Other  0%  T0  84211100  842111  -- Cream separators  0%  T0  84212100  842121  -- For filtering or purifying water  0%  T0  84212200  842122  -- For filtering or purifying beverages other than water  0%  T0  84221900  842219  -- Other  0%  T0  84222000  842220  - Machinery for cleaning or drying bottles or other containers  0%  T0  84223000  842230  - Machinery for filling, closing, sealing or labelling bottles, cans, boxes, bags or other containers;  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of      machinery for capsuling bottles, jars, tubes and similar containers; machinery for aerating beverages      84224000  842240  - Other packing or wrapping machinery (including heat-shrink wrapping machinery)  0%  T0  84232000  842320  - Scales for continuous weighing of goods on conveyors  0%  T0  84233000  842330  - Constant weight scales and scales for discharging a predetermined weight of material into a bag or container, including hopper scales   0%   T0  84238200  842382  -- Having a maximum weighing capacity exceeding 30 kg but not exceeding 5000 kg  0%  T0  84241000  842410  - Fire extinguishers, whether or not charged  0%  T0  84242000  842420  - Spray guns and similar appliances  0%  T0  84243000  842430  - Steam or sandblasting machines and similar jet projecting machines  0%  T0  84248100  842481  -- Agricultural or horticultural  0%  T0  84248900  842489  -- Other  0%  T0  84261100  842611  -- Overhead travelling cranes on fixed support  0%  T0  84261200  842612  -- Mobile lifting frames on tyres and straddle carriers  0%  T0  84261900  842619  -- Other  0%  T0  84262000  842620  - Tower cranes  0%  T0  84263000  842630  - Portal or pedestal jib cranes  0%  T0  84264100  842641  -- On tyres  0%  T0  84264900  842649  -- Other  0%  T0  84269100  842691  -- Designed for mounting on road vehicles  0%  T0  84269900  842699  -- Other  0%  T0  84271000  842710  - Self-propelled trucks powered by an electric motor  0%  T0  84272000  842720  - Other self-propelled trucks  0%  T0  84279000  842790  - Other trucks  0%  T0  84281000  842810  - Lifts and skip hoists  0%  T0  84282000  842820  - Pneumatic elevators and conveyors  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84283100  842831  -- Specially designed for underground use  0%  T0  84283200  842832  -- Other, bucket type  0%  T0  84283300  842833  -- Other, belt type  0%  T0  84283900  842839  -- Other  0%  T0  84284000  842840  - Escalators and moving walkways  0%  T0  84286000  842860  - Teleferics, chairlifts, ski-draglines; traction mechanisms for funiculars  0%  T0  84289000  842890  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84291100  842911  -- Track laying  0%  T0  84291900  842919  -- Other  0%  T0  84292000  842920  - Graders and levellers  0%  T0  84293000  842930  - Scrapers  0%  T0  84294000  842940  - Tamping machines and roadrollers  0%  T0  84295100  842951  -- Front-end shovel loaders  0%  T0  84295200  842952  -- Machinery with a 360° revolving superstructure  0%  T0  84295900  842959  -- Other  0%  T0  84301000  843010  - Piledrivers and pile extractors  0%  T0  84302000  843020  - Snowploughs and snowblowers  0%  T0  84303100  843031  -- Self-propelled  0%  T0  84303900  843039  -- Other  0%  T0  84304100  843041  -- Self-propelled  0%  T0  84304900  843049  -- Other  0%  T0  84305000  843050  - Other machinery, self-propelled  0%  T0  84306100  843061  -- Tamping or compacting machinery  0%  T0  84306900  843069  -- Other  0%  T0  84321000  843210  - Ploughs  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84322100  843221  -- Disc harrows  0%  T0  84322900  843229  -- Other  0%  T0  84323000  843230  - Seeders, planters and transplanters  0%  T0  84324000  843240  - Manure spreaders and fertiliser distributors  0%  T0  84328000  843280  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84329000  843290  - Parts  0%  T0  84332000  843320  - Other mowers, including cutter bars for tractor mounting  0%  T0  84333000  843330  - Other haymaking machinery  0%  T0  84334000  843340  - Straw or fodder balers, including pick-up balers  0%  T0  84335100  843351  -- Combine harvester-threshers  0%  T0  84335200  843352  -- Other threshing machinery  0%  T0  84335300  843353  -- Root or tuber harvesting machines  0%  T0  84335900  843359  -- Other  0%  T0  84336000  843360  - Machines for cleaning, sorting or grading eggs, fruit or other agricultural produce  0%  T0  84339000  843390  - Parts  0%  T0  84341000  843410  - Milking machines  0%  T0  84342000  843420  - Dairy machinery  0%  T0  84349000  843490  - Parts  0%  T0  84351000  843510  - Machinery  0%  T0  84359000  843590  - Parts  0%  T0  84361000  843610  - Machinery for preparing animal feedingstuffs  0%  T0  84362100  843621  -- Poultry incubators and brooders  0%  T0  84362900  843629  -- Other  0%  T0  84368000  843680  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84369100  843691  -- Of poultry-keeping machinery or poultry incubators and brooders  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84369900  843699  -- Other  0%  T0  84371000  843710  - Machines for cleaning, sorting or grading seed, grain or dried leguminous vegetables  0%  T0  84378000  843780  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84379000  843790  - Parts  0%  T0  84381000  843810  - Bakery machinery and machinery for the manufacture of macaroni, spaghetti or similar products  0%  T0  84382000  843820  - Machinery for the manufacture of confectionery, cocoa or chocolate  0%  T0  84383000  843830  - Machinery for sugar manufacture  0%  T0  84384000  843840  - Brewery machinery  0%  T0  84385000  843850  - Machinery for the preparation of meat or poultry  0%  T0  84386000  843860  - Machinery for the preparation of fruits, nuts or vegetables  0%  T0  84388000  843880  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84389000  843890  - Parts  0%  T0  84391000  843910  - Machinery for making pulp of fibrous cellulosic material  0%  T0  84392000  843920  - Machinery for making paper or paperboard  0%  T0  84393000  843930  - Machinery for finishing paper or paperboard  0%  T0  84399100  843991  -- Of machinery for making pulp of fibrous cellulosic material  0%  T0  84399900  843999  -- Other  0%  T0  84401000  844010  - Machinery  0%  T0  84409000  844090  - Parts  0%  T0  84411000  844110  - Cutting machines  0%  T0  84412000  844120  - Machines for making bags, sacks or envelopes  0%  T0  84413000  844130  - Machines for making cartons, boxes, cases, tubes, drums or similar containers, other than by moulding  0%  T0  84414000  844140  - Machines for moulding articles in paper pulp, paper or paperboard  0%  T0  84418000  844180  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84419000  844190  - Parts  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84423000  844230  - Machinery, apparatus and equipment  0%  T0  84424000  844240  - Parts of the foregoing machinery, apparatus or equipment  0%  T0  84425000  844250  - Plates, cylinders and other printing components; plates, cylinders and lithographic stones, prepared for printing purposes (for example, planed, grained or polished)   0%   T0  84431100  844311  -- Offset printing machinery, reel fed  0%  T0  84431200  844312  -- Offset printing machinery, sheet fed, office type (using sheets with one side not exceeding 22 cm and the other side not exceeding 36 cm in the unfolded state)   0%   T0  84431300  844313  -- Other offset printing machinery  0%  T0  84431400  844314  -- Letterpress printing machinery, reel fed, excluding flexographic printing  0%  T0  84431500  844315  -- Letterpress printing machinery, other than reel fed, excluding flexographic printing  0%  T0  84431600  844316  -- Flexographic printing machinery  0%  T0  84431700  844317  -- Gravure printing machinery  0%  T0  84431900  844319  -- Other  0%  T0  84433100  844331  -- Machines which perform two or more of the functions of printing, copying or facsimile transmission, capable of connecting to an automatic data-processing machine or to a network   0%   T0  84433200  844332  -- Other, capable of connecting to an automatic data-processing machine or to a network  0%  T0  84439100  844391  -- Parts and accessories of printing machinery used for printing by means of plates, cylinders and other printing components of heading 8442   0%   T0  84440000  844400  Machines for extruding, drawing, texturing or cutting man-made textile materials  0%  T0  84451100  844511  -- Carding machines  0%  T0  84451200  844512  -- Combing machines  0%  T0  84451300  844513  -- Drawing or roving machines  0%  T0  84451900  844519  -- Other  0%  T0  84452000  844520  - Textile spinning machines  0%  T0  84453000  844530  - Textile doubling or twisting machines  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84454000  844540  - Textile winding (including weft-winding) or reeling machines  0%  T0  84459000  844590  - Other  0%  T0  84461000  844610  - For weaving fabrics of a width not exceeding 30 cm  0%  T0  84462100  844621  -- Power looms  0%  T0  84462900  844629  -- Other  0%  T0  84463000  844630  - For weaving fabrics of a width exceeding 30 cm, shuttleless type  0%  T0  84471100  844711  -- With cylinder diameter not exceeding 165 mm  0%  T0  84471200  844712  -- With cylinder diameter exceeding 165 mm  0%  T0  84472000  844720  - Flat knitting machines; stitch-bonding machines  0%  T0  84479000  844790  - Other  0%  T0  84481100  844811  -- Dobbies and jacquards; card-reducing, copying, punching or assembling machines for use therewith  0%  T0  84481900  844819  -- Other  0%  T0  84482000  844820  - Parts and accessories of machines of heading 8444 or of their auxiliary machinery  0%  T0  84483100  844831  -- Card clothing  0%  T0  84483200  844832  -- Of machines for preparing textile fibres, other than card clothing  0%  T0  84483300  844833  -- Spindles, spindle flyers, spinning rings and ring travellers  0%  T0  84483900  844839  -- Other  0%  T0  84484200  844842  -- Reeds for looms, healds and heald-frames  0%  T0  84484900  844849  -- Other  0%  T0  84485100  844851  -- Sinkers, needles and other articles used in forming stitches  0%  T0  84485900  844859  -- Other  0%  T0  84490000  844900  Machinery for the manufacture or finishing of felt or nonwovens in the piece or in shapes, including machinery for making felt hats; blocks for making hats   0%   T0  84511000  845110  - Dry-cleaning machines  0%  T0  84512100  845121  -- Each of a dry linen capacity not exceeding 10 kg  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84512900  845129  -- Other  0%  T0  84513000  845130  - Ironing machines and presses (including fusing presses)  0%  T0  84514000  845140  - Washing, bleaching or dyeing machines  0%  T0  84515000  845150  - Machines for reeling, unreeling, folding, cutting or pinking textile fabrics  0%  T0  84518000  845180  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84519000  845190  - Parts  0%  T0  84521000  845210  - Sewing machines of the household type  0%  T0  84522100  845221  -- Automatic units  0%  T0  84522900  845229  -- Other  0%  T0  84523000  845230  - Sewing machine needles  0%  T0  84529000  845290  - Furniture, bases and covers for sewing machines and parts thereof; other parts of sewing machines  0%  T0  84531000  845310  - Machinery for preparing, tanning or working hides, skins or leather  0%  T0  84532000  845320  - Machinery for making or repairing footwear  0%  T0  84538000  845380  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84539000  845390  - Parts  0%  T0  84541000  845410  - Converters  0%  T0  84542000  845420  - Ingot moulds and ladles  0%  T0  84543000  845430  - Casting machines  0%  T0  84549000  845490  - Parts  0%  T0  84551000  845510  - Tube mills  0%  T0  84552100  845521  -- Hot or combination hot and cold  0%  T0  84552200  845522  -- Cold  0%  T0  84553000  845530  - Rolls for rolling mills  0%  T0  84559000  845590  - Other parts  0%  T0  84561000  845610  - Operated by laser or other light or photon beam processes  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84562000  845620  - Operated by ultrasonic processes  0%  T0  84563000  845630  - Operated by electrodischarge processes  0%  T0  84569000  845690  - Other  0%  T0  84571000  845710  - Machining centres  0%  T0  84572000  845720  - Unit construction machines (single station)  0%  T0  84573000  845730  - Multi-station transfer machines  0%  T0  84581100  845811  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84581900  845819  -- Other  0%  T0  84589100  845891  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84589900  845899  -- Other  0%  T0  84591000  845910  - Way-type unit head machines  0%  T0  84592100  845921  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84592900  845929  -- Other  0%  T0  84593100  845931  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84593900  845939  -- Other  0%  T0  84594000  845940  - Other boring machines  0%  T0  84595100  845951  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84595900  845959  -- Other  0%  T0  84596100  845961  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84596900  845969  -- Other  0%  T0  84597000  845970  - Other threading or tapping machines  0%  T0  84601100  846011  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84601900  846019  -- Other  0%  T0  84602100  846021  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84602900  846029  -- Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84603100  846031  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84603900  846039  -- Other  0%  T0  84604000  846040  - Honing or lapping machines  0%  T0  84609000  846090  - Other  0%  T0  84612000  846120  - Shaping or slotting machines  0%  T0  84613000  846130  - Broaching machines  0%  T0  84614000  846140  - Gear-cutting, gear-grinding or gear-finishing machines  0%  T0  84615000  846150  - Sawing or cutting-off machines  0%  T0  84619000  846190  - Other  0%  T0  84621000  846210  - Forging or die-stamping machines (including presses) and hammers  0%  T0  84622100  846221  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84622900  846229  -- Other  0%  T0  84623100  846231  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84623900  846239  -- Other  0%  T0  84624100  846241  -- Numerically controlled  0%  T0  84624900  846249  -- Other  0%  T0  84629100  846291  -- Hydraulic presses  0%  T0  84629900  846299  -- Other  0%  T0  84631000  846310  - Drawbenches for bars, tubes, profiles, wire or the like  0%  T0  84632000  846320  - Thread-rolling machines  0%  T0  84633000  846330  - Machines for working wire  0%  T0  84639000  846390  - Other  0%  T0  84641000  846410  - Sawing machines  0%  T0  84642000  846420  - Grinding or polishing machines  0%  T0  84649000  846490  - Other  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84651000  846510  - Machines which can carry out different types of machining operations without tool change between such operations   0%   T0  84659100  846591  -- Sawing machines  0%  T0  84659200  846592  -- Planing, milling or moulding (by cutting) machines  0%  T0  84659300  846593  -- Grinding, sanding or polishing machines  0%  T0  84659400  846594  -- Bending or assembling machines  0%  T0  84659500  846595  -- Drilling or morticing machines  0%  T0  84659600  846596  -- Splitting, slicing or paring machines  0%  T0  84659900  846599  -- Other  0%  T0  84661000  846610  - Tool holders and self-opening dieheads  0%  T0  84662000  846620  - Work holders  0%  T0  84663000  846630  - Dividing heads and other special attachments for machine tools  0%  T0  84669100  846691  -- For machines of heading 8464  0%  T0  84669200  846692  -- For machines of heading 8465  0%  T0  84669300  846693  -- For machines of headings 8456 to 8461  0%  T0  84669400  846694  -- For machines of heading 8462 or 8463  0%  T0  84671100  846711  -- Rotary type (including combined rotary-percussion)  0%  T0  84671900  846719  -- Other  0%  T0  84672100  846721  -- Drills of all kinds  0%  T0  84672200  846722  -- Saws  0%  T0  84672900  846729  -- Other  0%  T0  84678100  846781  -- Chainsaws  0%  T0  84678900  846789  -- Other  0%  T0  84679100  846791  -- Of chainsaws  0%  T0  84679200  846792  -- Of pneumatic tools  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84679900  846799  -- Other  0%  T0  84681000  846810  - Hand-held blow pipes  0%  T0  84682000  846820  - Other gas-operated machinery and apparatus  0%  T0  84688000  846880  - Other machinery and apparatus  0%  T0  84689000  846890  - Parts  0%  T0  84690000  846900  Typewriters other than printers of heading 8443; word-processing machines  0%  T0  84713000  847130  - Portable automatic data-processing machines, weighing not more than 10 kg, consisting of at least a central processing unit, a keyboard and a display   0%   T0  84714100  847141  -- Comprising in the same housing at least a central processing unit and an input and output unit, whether or not combined   0%   T0  84714900  847149  -- Other, presented in the form of systems  0%  T0  84715000  847150  - Processing units other than those of subheading 847141 or 847149, whether or not containing in the same housing one or two of the following types of unit: storage units, input units, output units   0%   T0  84716000  847160  - Input or output units, whether or not containing storage units in the same housing  0%  T0  84717000  847170  - Storage units  0%  T0  84718000  847180  - Other units of automatic data-processing machines  0%  T0  84719000  847190  - Other  0%  T0  84721000  847210  - Duplicating machines  0%  T0  84733000  847330  - Parts and accessories of the machines of heading 8471  0%  T0  84741000  847410  - Sorting, screening, separating or washing machines  0%  T0  84742000  847420  - Crushing or grinding machines  0%  T0  84743100  847431  -- Concrete or mortar mixers  0%  T0  84743200  847432  -- Machines for mixing mineral substances with bitumen  0%  T0  84743900  847439  -- Other  0%  T0  84748000  847480  - Other machinery  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84749000  847490  - Parts  0%  T0  84751000  847510  - Machines for assembling electric or electronic lamps, tubes or valves or flashbulbs, in glass envelopes  0%  T0  84752100  847521  -- Machines for making optical fibres and preforms thereof  0%  T0  84752900  847529  -- Other  0%  T0  84759000  847590  - Parts  0%  T0  84771000  847710  - Injection-moulding machines  0%  T0  84772000  847720  - Extruders  0%  T0  84773000  847730  - Blow-moulding machines  0%  T0  84774000  847740  - Vacuum-moulding machines and other thermoforming machines  0%  T0  84775100  847751  -- For moulding or retreading pneumatic tyres or for moulding or otherwise forming inner tubes  0%  T0  84775900  847759  -- Other  0%  T0  84778000  847780  - Other machinery  0%  T0  84779000  847790  - Parts  0%  T0  84781000  847810  - Machinery  0%  T0  84789000  847890  - Parts  0%  T0  84791000  847910  - Machinery for public works, building or the like  0%  T0  84792000  847920  - Machinery for the extraction or preparation of animal or fixed vegetable fats or oils  0%  T0  84793000  847930  - Presses for the manufacture of particle board or fibre building board of wood or other ligneous materials and other machinery for treating wood or cork   0%   T0  84794000  847940  - Rope- or cable-making machines  0%  T0  84795000  847950  - Industrial robots, not elsewhere specified or included  0%  T0  84796000  847960  - Evaporative air coolers  0%  T0  84797100  847971  -- Of a kind used in airports  0%  T0  84797900  847979  -- Other  0%  T0  84798100  847981  -- For treating metal, including electric wire coil-winders  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  84798200  847982  -- Mixing, kneading, crushing, grinding, screening, sifting, homogenising, emulsifying or stirring machines  0%  T0  84798900  847989  -- Other  0%  T0  84799000  847990  - Parts  0%  T0  84801000  848010  - Moulding boxes for metal foundry  0%  T0  84802000  848020  - Mould bases  0%  T0  84803000  848030  - Moulding patterns  0%  T0  84804100  848041  -- Injection or compression types  0%  T0  84804900  848049  -- Other  0%  T0  84805000  848050  - Moulds for glass  0%  T0  84806000  848060  - Moulds for mineral materials  0%  T0  84807100  848071  -- Injection or compression types  0%  T0  84807900  848079  -- Other  0%  T0  84861000  848610  - Machines and apparatus for the manufacture of boules or wafers  0%  T0  84862000  848620  - Machines and apparatus for the manufacture of semiconductor devices or of electronic integrated circuits   0%   T0  84863000  848630  - Machines and apparatus for the manufacture of flat panel displays  0%  T0  84864000  848640  - Machines and apparatus specified in note 9(C) to this chapter  0%  T0  84869000  848690  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  85011000  850110  - Motors of an output not exceeding 37,5 W  0%  T0  85012000  850120  - Universal AC/DC motors of an output exceeding 37,5 W  0%  T0  85013100  850131  -- Of an output not exceeding 750 W  0%  T0  85013200  850132  -- Of an output exceeding 750 W but not exceeding 75 kW  0%  T0  85013300  850133  -- Of an output exceeding 75 kW but not exceeding 375 kW  0%  T0  85013400  850134  -- Of an output exceeding 375 kW  0%  T0  85014000  850140  - Other AC motors, single-phase  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  85015100  850151  -- Of an output not exceeding 750 W  0%  T0  85015200  850152  -- Of an output exceeding 750 W but not exceeding 75 kW  0%  T0  85015300  850153  -- Of an output exceeding 75 kW  0%  T0  85016100  850161  -- Of an output not exceeding 75 kVA  0%  T0  85016200  850162  -- Of an output exceeding 75 kVA but not exceeding 375 kVA  0%  T0  85016300  850163  -- Of an output exceeding 375 kVA but not exceeding 750 kVA  0%  T0  85016400  850164  -- Of an output exceeding 750 kVA  0%  T0  85021100  850211  -- Of an output not exceeding 75 kVA  0%  T0  85021200  850212  -- Of an output exceeding 75 kVA but not exceeding 375 kVA  0%  T0  85021300  850213  -- Of an output exceeding 375 kVA  0%  T0  85022000  850220  - Generating sets with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engines  0%  T0  85023100  850231  -- Wind-powered  0%  T0  85023900  850239  -- Other  0%  T0  85024000  850240  - Electric rotary converters  0%  T0  85030000  850300  Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the machines of heading 8501 or 8502  0%  T0  85041000  850410  - Ballasts for discharge lamps or tubes  0%  T0  85042100  850421  -- Having a power handling capacity not exceeding 650 kVA  0%  T0  85042200  850422  -- Having a power handling capacity exceeding 650 kVA but not exceeding 10000 kVA  0%  T0  85042300  850423  -- Having a power handling capacity exceeding 10000 kVA  0%  T0  85043300  850433  -- Having a power handling capacity exceeding 16 kVA but not exceeding 500 kVA  0%  T0  85043400  850434  -- Having a power handling capacity exceeding 500 kVA  0%  T0  85044000  850440  - Static converters  0%  T0  85045000  850450  - Other inductors  0%  T0  85049000  850490  - Parts  0%  T0  85051100  850511  -- Of metal  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  85051900  850519  -- Other  0%  T0  85052000  850520  - Electromagnetic couplings, clutches and brakes  0%  T0  85059000  850590  - Other, including parts  0%  T0  85069000  850690  - Parts  0%  T0  85079000  850790  - Parts  0%  T0  85131010  851310  ---   0%  T0  85141000  851410  - Resistance heated furnaces and ovens  0%  T0  85142000  851420  - Furnaces and ovens functioning by induction or dielectric loss  0%  T0  85143000  851430  - Other furnaces and ovens  0%  T0  85144000  851440  - Other equipment for the heat treatment of materials by induction or dielectric loss  0%  T0  85149000  851490  - Parts  0%  T0  85151100  851511  -- Soldering irons and guns  0%  T0  85151900  851519  -- Other  0%  T0  85152100  851521  -- Fully or partly automatic  0%  T0  85152900  851529  -- Other  0%  T0  85153100  851531  -- Fully or partly automatic  0%  T0  85153900  851539  -- Other  0%  T0  85158000  851580  - Other machines and apparatus  0%  T0  85159000  851590  - Parts  0%  T0  85167100  851671  -- Coffee or tea makers  0%  T0  85167200  851672  -- Toasters  0%  T0  85171200  851712  -- Telephones for cellular networks or for other wireless networks  0%  T0  85176100  851761  -- Base stations  0%  T0  85255000  852550  - Transmission apparatus  0%  T0  85256000  852560  - Transmission apparatus incorporating reception apparatus  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  85261000  852610  - Radar apparatus  0%  T0  85269100  852691  -- Radio navigational aid apparatus  0%  T0  85269200  852692  -- Radio remote control apparatus  0%  T0  85284100  852841  -- Of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data-processing system of heading 8471  0%  T0  85285100  852851  -- Of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data-processing system of heading 8471  0%  T0  85286100  852861  -- Of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data-processing system of heading 8471  0%  T0  85301000  853010  - Equipment for railways or tramways  0%  T0  85308000  853080  - Other equipment  0%  T0  85351000  853510  - Fuses  0%  T0  85352100  853521  -- For a voltage of less than 72,5 kV  0%  T0  85352900  853529  -- Other  0%  T0  85353000  853530  - Isolating switches and make-and-break switches  0%  T0  85354000  853540  - Lightning arresters, voltage limiters and surge suppressors  0%  T0  85359000  853590  - Other  0%  T0  85367000  853670  - Connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables  0%  T0  85372000  853720  - For a voltage exceeding 1000 V  0%  T0  85411000  854110  - Diodes, other than photosensitive or light-emitting diodes  0%  T0  85412100  854121  -- With a dissipation rate of less than 1 W  0%  T0  85412900  854129  -- Other  0%  T0  85413000  854130  - Thyristors, diacs and triacs, other than photosensitive devices  0%  T0  85414000  854140  - Photosensitive semiconductor devices, including photovoltaic cells whether or not assembled in modules or made up into panels; light-emitting diodes   0%   T0  85415000  854150  - Other semiconductor devices  0%  T0  85416000  854160  - Mounted piezoelectric crystals  0%  T0  85419000  854190  - Parts  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  85433000  854330  - Machines and apparatus for electroplating, electrolysis or electrophoresis  0%  T0  85447000  854470  - Optical fibre cables  0%  T0  85451100  854511  -- Of a kind used for furnaces  0%  T0  86011000  860110  - Powered from an external source of electricity  0%  T0  86012000  860120  - Powered by electric accumulators  0%  T0  86021000  860210  - Diesel-electric locomotives  0%  T0  86029000  860290  - Other  0%  T0  86031000  860310  - Powered from an external source of electricity  0%  T0  86039000  860390  - Other  0%  T0  86040000  860400  Railway or tramway maintenance or service vehicles, whether or not self-propelled (for example, workshops, cranes, ballast tampers, trackliners, testing coaches and track inspection vehicles)   0%   T0  86050000  860500  Railway or tramway passenger coaches, not self-propelled; luggage vans, post office coaches and other special purpose railway or tramway coaches, not self-propelled (excluding those of heading 8604)   0%   T0  86061000  860610  - Tank wagons and the like  0%  T0  86063000  860630  - Self-discharging vans and wagons, other than those of subheading 860610  0%  T0  86069100  860691  -- Covered and closed  0%  T0  86069200  860692  -- Open, with non-removable sides of a height exceeding 60 cm  0%  T0  86069900  860699  -- Other  0%  T0  86071100  860711  -- Driving bogies and bissel-bogies  0%  T0  86071200  860712  -- Other bogies and bissel-bogies  0%  T0  86071900  860719  -- Other, including parts  0%  T0  86072100  860721  -- Air brakes and parts thereof  0%  T0  86072900  860729  -- Other  0%  T0  86073000  860730  - Hooks and other coupling devices, buffers, and parts thereof  0%  T0  86079100  860791  -- Of locomotives  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  86079900  860799  -- Other  0%  T0   86080000   860800  Railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings; mechanical (including electromechanical) signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields; parts of the foregoing    0%    T0  86090000  860900  Containers (including containers for the transport of fluids) specially designed and equipped for carriage by one or more modes of transport   0%   T0  87011000  870110  - Pedestrian-controlled tractors  0%  T0  87012010  870120  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87013000  870130  - Track-laying tractors  0%  T0  87019000  870190  - Other  0%  T0  87021011  870210  ---- Unassembled  0%  T0  87021021  870210  ---- Unassembled  0%  T0  87021091  870210  ---- Unassembled  0%  T0  87029011  870290  ---- Unassembled  0%  T0  87029021  870290  ---- Unassembled  0%  T0  87029091  870290  ---- Unassembled  0%  T0  87032110  870321  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87032210  870322  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87032310  870323  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87032410  870324  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87033110  870331  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87033210  870332  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87033310  870333  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87039010  870390  --- Ambulances and hearses  0%  T0  87039020  870390  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  87041010  870410  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87042110  870421  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87042210  870422  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87042310  870423  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87043110  870431  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87043210  870432  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87049010  870490  --- Unassembled  0%  T0  87051000  870510  - Crane lorries  0%  T0  87052000  870520  - Mobile drilling derricks  0%  T0  87053000  870530  - Fire fighting vehicles  0%  T0  87054000  870540  - Concrete-mixer lorries  0%  T0  87059000  870590  - Other  0%  T0  87091100  870911  -- Electrical  0%  T0  87091900  870919  -- Other  0%  T0  87099000  870990  - Parts  0%  T0  87100000  871000  Tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles, motorised, whether or not fitted with weapons, and parts of such vehicles   0%   T0  87131000  871310  - Not mechanically propelled  0%  T0  87139000  871390  - Other  0%  T0  87142000  871420  - Of carriages for disabled persons  0%  T0  87161010  871610  --- Unassembled or disassembled  0%  T0  87162010  871620  --- Unassembled or disassembled  0%  T0  87163110  871631  --- Unassembled or disassembled  0%  T0  87163910  871639  --- Unassembled or disassembled  0%  T0  87164010  871640  --- Unassembled or disassembled  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  88010000  880100  Balloons and dirigibles; gliders, hang gliders and other non-powered aircraft  0%  T0  88021100  880211  -- Of an unladen weight not exceeding 2000 kg  0%  T0  88021200  880212  -- Of an unladen weight exceeding 2000 kg  0%  T0  88022000  880220  - Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight not exceeding 2000 kg  0%  T0  88023000  880230  - Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding 2000 kg but not exceeding 15000 kg  0%  T0  88024000  880240  - Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding 15000 kg  0%  T0  88026000  880260  - Spacecraft (including satellites) and suborbital and spacecraft launch vehicles  0%  T0  88031000  880310  - Propellers and rotors and parts thereof  0%  T0  88032000  880320  - Undercarriages and parts thereof  0%  T0  88033000  880330  - Other parts of aeroplanes or helicopters  0%  T0  88039000  880390  - Other  0%  T0  88040000  880400  Parachutes (including dirigible parachutes and paragliders) and rotochutes; parts thereof and accessories thereto   0%   T0  88051000  880510  - Aircraft launching gear and parts thereof; deck-arrestor or similar gear and parts thereof  0%  T0  88052100  880521  -- Air combat simulators and parts thereof  0%  T0  88052900  880529  -- Other  0%  T0  89011000  890110  - Cruise ships, excursion boats and similar vessels principally designed for the transport of persons; ferry- boats of all kinds   0%   T0  89012000  890120  - Tankers  0%  T0  89013000  890130  - Refrigerated vessels, other than those of subheading 890120  0%  T0  89019000  890190  - Other vessels for the transport of goods and other vessels for the transport of both persons and goods  0%  T0  89020000  890200  Fishing vessels; factory ships and other vessels for processing or preserving fishery products  0%  T0  89040000  890400  Tugs and pusher craft  0%  T0  89051000  890510  - Dredgers  0%  T0  89052000  890520  - Floating or submersible drilling or production platforms  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  89059000  890590  - Other  0%  T0  89061000  890610  - Warships  0%  T0  89069000  890690  - Other  0%  T0  89071000  890710  - Inflatable rafts  0%  T0  89079000  890790  - Other  0%  T0  89080000  890800  Vessels and other floating structures for breaking up  0%  T0  90011000  900110  - Optical fibres, optical fibre bundles and cables  0%  T0  90012000  900120  - Sheets and plates of polarising material  0%  T0  90013000  900130  - Contact lenses  0%  T0  90014000  900140  - Spectacle lenses of glass  0%  T0  90015000  900150  - Spectacle lenses of other materials  0%  T0  90019000  900190  - Other  0%  T0  90049010  900490  --- For correcting vision  0%  T0  90061000  900610  - Cameras of a kind used for preparing printing plates or cylinders  0%  T0  90063000  900630  - Cameras specially designed for underwater use, for aerial survey or for medical or surgical examination of internal organs; comparison cameras for forensic or criminological purposes   0%   T0  90111000  901110  - Stereoscopic microscopes  0%  T0  90112000  901120  - Other microscopes, for photomicrography, cinephotomicrography or microprojection  0%  T0  90118000  901180  - Other microscopes  0%  T0  90119000  901190  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90121000  901210  - Microscopes other than optical microscopes; diffraction apparatus  0%  T0  90129000  901290  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90131000  901310  - Telescopic sights for fitting to arms; periscopes; telescopes designed to form parts of machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus of this chapter or Section XVI   0%   T0  90132000  901320  - Lasers, other than laser diodes  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  90138000  901380  - Other devices, appliances and instruments  0%  T0  90139000  901390  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90141000  901410  - Direction finding compasses  0%  T0  90142000  901420  - Instruments and appliances for aeronautical or space navigation (other than compasses)  0%  T0  90148000  901480  - Other instruments and appliances  0%  T0  90149000  901490  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90151000  901510  - Rangefinders  0%  T0  90152000  901520  - Theodolites and tachymeters (tacheometers)  0%  T0  90153000  901530  - Levels  0%  T0  90154000  901540  - Photogrammetrical, surveying instruments and appliances  0%  T0  90158000  901580  - Other instruments and appliances  0%  T0  90159000  901590  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90160000  901600  Balances of a sensitivity of 5 cg or better, with or without weights  0%  T0  90171000  901710  - Drafting tables and machines, whether or not automatic  0%  T0  90172000  901720  - Other drawing, marking-out or mathematical calculating instruments  0%  T0  90173000  901730  - Micrometers, callipers and gauges  0%  T0  90178000  901780  - Other instruments  0%  T0  90179000  901790  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90181100  901811  -- Electrocardiographs  0%  T0  90181200  901812  -- Ultrasonic scanning apparatus  0%  T0  90181300  901813  -- Magnetic resonance imaging apparatus  0%  T0  90181400  901814  -- Scintigraphic apparatus  0%  T0  90181900  901819  -- Other  0%  T0  90182000  901820  - Ultraviolet or infra-red ray apparatus  0%  T0  90183100  901831  -- Syringes, with or without needles  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  90183200  901832  -- Tubular metal needles and needles for sutures  0%  T0  90183900  901839  -- Other  0%  T0  90184100  901841  -- Dental drill engines, whether or not combined on a single base with other dental equipment  0%  T0  90184900  901849  -- Other  0%  T0  90185000  901850  - Other ophthalmic instruments and appliances  0%  T0  90189000  901890  - Other instruments and appliances  0%  T0  90191000  901910  - Mechano-therapy appliances; massage apparatus; psychological aptitude-testing apparatus  0%  T0  90192000  901920  - Ozone therapy, oxygen therapy, aerosol therapy, artificial respiration or other therapeutic respiration apparatus   0%   T0  90200000  902000  Other breathing appliances and gas masks, excluding protective masks having neither mechanical parts nor replaceable filters   0%   T0  90211000  902110  - Orthopaedic or fracture appliances  0%  T0  90212100  902121  -- Artificial teeth  0%  T0  90212900  902129  -- Other  0%  T0  90213100  902131  -- Artificial joints  0%  T0  90213900  902139  -- Other  0%  T0  90214000  902140  - Hearing aids, excluding parts and accessories  0%  T0  90215000  902150  - Pacemakers for stimulating heart muscles, excluding parts and accessories  0%  T0  90219000  902190  - Other  0%  T0  90221200  902212  -- Computed tomography apparatus  0%  T0  90221300  902213  -- Other, for dental uses  0%  T0  90221400  902214  -- Other, for medical, surgical or veterinary uses  0%  T0  90221900  902219  -- For other uses  0%  T0  90222100  902221  -- For medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses  0%  T0  90222900  902229  -- For other uses  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  90223000  902230  - X-ray tubes  0%  T0  90229000  902290  - Other, including parts and accessories  0%  T0  90230000  902300  Instruments, apparatus and models, designed for demonstrational purposes (for example, in education or exhibitions), unsuitable for other uses   0%   T0  90241000  902410  - Machines and appliances for testing metals  0%  T0  90248000  902480  - Other machines and appliances  0%  T0  90249000  902490  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90251100  902511  -- Liquid-filled, for direct reading  0%  T0  90251900  902519  -- Other  0%  T0  90258000  902580  - Other instruments  0%  T0  90259000  902590  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90261000  902610  - For measuring or checking the flow or level of liquids  0%  T0  90262000  902620  - For measuring or checking pressure  0%  T0  90268000  902680  - Other instruments or apparatus  0%  T0  90269000  902690  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90271000  902710  - Gas or smoke analysis apparatus  0%  T0  90272000  902720  - Chromatographs and electrophoresis instruments  0%  T0  90273000  902730  - Spectrometers, spectrophotometers and spectrographs using optical radiation (UV, visible, IR)  0%  T0  90275000  902750  - Other instruments and apparatus using optical radiation (UV, visible, IR)  0%  T0  90278000  902780  - Other instruments and apparatus  0%  T0  90279000  902790  - Microtomes; parts and accessories  0%  T0  90281000  902810  - Gas meters  0%  T0  90282000  902820  - Liquid meters  0%  T0  90283000  902830  - Electricity meters  0%  T0  90289000  902890  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0   HS  HS  Description  Duty  Year of  90301000  903010  - Instruments and apparatus for measuring or detecting ionising radiation  0%  T0  90302000  903020  - Oscilloscopes and oscillographs  0%  T0  90303100  903031  -- Multimeters, without a recording device  0%  T0  90303200  903032  -- Multimeters, with a recording device  0%  T0  90303300  903033  -- Other, without a recording device  0%  T0  90303900  903039  -- Other, with a recording device  0%  T0  90304000  903040  - Other instruments and apparatus, specially designed for telecommunications (for example, cross-talk meters, gain measuring instruments, distortion factor meters, psophometers)   0%   T0  90308200  903082  -- For measuring or checking semiconductor wafers or devices  0%  T0  90308400  903084  -- Other, with a recording device  0%  T0  90308900  903089  -- Other  0%  T0  90309000  903090  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90311000  903110  - Machines for balancing mechanical parts  0%  T0  90312000  903120  - Test benches  0%  T0  90314100  903141  -- For inspecting semiconductor wafers or devices or for inspecting photomasks or reticles used in manufacturing semiconductor devices   0%   T0  90314900  903149  -- Other  0%  T0  90318000  903180  - Other instruments, appliances and machines  0%  T0  90319000  903190  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90321000  903210  - Thermostats  0%  T0  90322000  903220  - Manostats  0%  T0  90328100  903281  -- Hydraulic or pneumatic  0%  T0  90328900  903289  -- Other  0%  T0  90329000  903290  - Parts and accessories  0%  T0  90330000  903300  Parts and accessories (not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter) for machines, appliances,  0%  T0   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  Year of      instruments or apparatus of Chapter 90      94021010  940210  --- Dentists' chairs and parts thereof  0%  T0  94029010  940290  --- Operating tables, examination tables and hospital beds with mechanical fittings  0%  T0  94060010  940600  --- Green houses, cold rooms  0%  T0  96089100  960891  -- Pen nibs and nib points  0%  T0  ANNEX II(B) Number of tariff lines 1082    Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15   05100000   051000  Ambergris, castoreum, civet and musk; cantharides; bile, whether or not dried; glands and other animal products used in the preparation of pharmaceutical products, fresh, chilled, frozen or otherwise provisionally preserved   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  08021100  080211  -- In shell  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  08022100  080221  -- In shell  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  11081100  110811  -- Wheat starch  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  11081200  110812  -- Maize (corn) starch  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  11081300  110813  -- Potato starch  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  11081400  110814  -- Manioc (cassava) starch  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  11081900  110819  -- Other starches  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  11082000  110820  - Inulin  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  11090000  110900  Wheat gluten, whether or not dried  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12011000  120110  - Seed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12019000  120190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12023000  120230  - Seed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12024100  120241  -- In shell  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12024200  120242  -- Shelled, whether or not broken  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12030000  120300  Copra  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12040000  120400  Linseed, whether or not broken  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12051000  120510  - Low erucic acid rape or colza seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  12059000  120590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12060000  120600  Sunflower seeds, whether or not broken  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12071000  120710  - Palm nuts and kernels  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12072100  120721  -- Seed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12072900  120729  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12073000  120730  - Castor oil seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12074000  120740  - Sesamum seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12075000  120750  - Mustard seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12076000  120760  - Safflower (Carthamus tinctorius) seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12077000  120770  - Melon seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12079100  120791  -- Poppy seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12079900  120799  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12081000  120810  - Of soya beans  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12089000  120890  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12112000  121120  - Ginseng roots  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12113000  121130  - Coca leaf  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12114000  121140  - Poppy straw  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12119020  121190  -- Pyrethrum  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12119090  121190  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12122100  121221  -- Fit for human consumption  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12122900  121229  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12129100  121291  -- Sugar beet  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  12129200  121292  -- Locust beans (carob)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12129300  121293  -- Sugar cane  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12129400  121294  -- Chicory roots  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12129900  121299  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12130000  121300  Cereal straw and husks, unprepared, whether or not chopped, ground, pressed or in the form of pellets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12141000  121410  - Lucerne (alfalfa) meal and pellets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  12149000  121490  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  14011000  140110  - Bamboos  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  14012000  140120  - Rattans  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  14019000  140190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  14042000  140420  - Cotton linters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15011000  150110  - Lard  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15012000  150120  - Other pig fat  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15019000  150190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15021000  150210  - Tallow  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15030000  150300  Lard stearin, lard oil, oleostearin, oleo-oil and tallow oil, not emulsified or mixed or otherwise prepared  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15041000  150410  - Fish-liver oils and their fractions  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15042000  150420  - Fats and oils and their fractions, of fish, other than liver oils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15043000  150430  - Fats and oils and their fractions, of marine mammals  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15060000  150600  Other animal fats and oils and their fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%   0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  15121100  151211  -- Crude oil  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15122100  151221  -- Crude oil, whether or not gossypol has been removed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15153000  151530  - Castor oil and its fractions  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15211000  152110  - Vegetable waxes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  15219000  152190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  18010000  180100  Cocoa beans, whole or broken, raw or roasted  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  18020000  180200  Cocoa shells, husks, skins and other cocoa waste  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23011000  230110  - Flours, meals and pellets, of meat or meat offal; greaves  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23012000  230120  - Flours, meals and pellets, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23021000  230210  - Of maize (corn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23024000  230240  - Of other cereals  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23025000  230250  - Of leguminous plants  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23031000  230310  - Residues of starch manufacture and similar residues  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23032000  230320  - Beet-pulp, bagasse and other waste of sugar manufacture  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23033000  230330  - Brewing or distilling dregs and waste  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23040000  230400  Oilcake and other solid residues, whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of soya-bean oil  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23050000  230500  Oilcake and other solid residues, whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of groundnut oil  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23061000  230610  - Of cotton seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23062000  230620  - Of linseed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23063000  230630  - Of sunflower seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  23064100  230641  -- Of low erucic acid rape or colza seeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23064900  230649  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23065000  230650  - Of coconut or copra  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23066000  230660  - Of palm nuts or kernels  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23069000  230690  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23070000  230700  Wine lees; argol  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   23080000   230800  Vegetable materials and vegetable waste, vegetable residues and by-products, whether or not in the form of pellets, of a kind used in animal feeding, not elsewhere specified or included   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  23099010  230990  - - - Premixes used in the manufacture of animal and poultry feeds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  23099090  230990  - - - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25070000  250700  Kaolin and other kaolinic clays, whether or not calcined  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   25171000   251710  - Pebbles, gravel, broken or crushed stone, of a kind commonly used for concrete aggregates, for road metalling or for railway or other ballast, shingle and flint, whether or not heat-treated   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  25172000  251720  - Macadam of slag, dross or similar industrial waste, whether or not incorporating the materials cited in subheading 251710  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25173000  251730  - Tarred macadam  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25174100  251741  -- Of marble  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25174900  251749  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25181000  251810  - Dolomite, not calcined or sintered  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25182000  251820  - Calcined or sintered dolomite  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25183000  251830  - Dolomite ramming mix  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  25191000  251910  - Natural magnesium carbonate (magnesite)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25199000  251990  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25210000  252100  Limestone flux; limestone and other calcareous stone, of a kind used for the manufacture of lime or cement  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25221000  252210  - Quicklime  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25222000  252220  - Slaked lime  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25223000  252230  - Hydraulic lime  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25251000  252510  - Crude mica and mica rifted into sheets or splittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25252000  252520  - Mica powder  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25253000  252530  - Mica waste  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25261000  252610  - Not crushed, not powdered  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25262000  252620  - Crushed or powdered  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   25280000   252800  Natural borates and concentrates thereof (whether or not calcined), but not including borates separated from natural brine; natural boric acid containing not more than 85 % of H3BO3 calculated on the dry weight   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  25291000  252910  - Feldspar  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25292100  252921  -- Containing by weight 97 % or less of calcium fluoride  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25292200  252922  -- Containing by weight more than 97 % of calcium fluoride  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25293000  252930  - Leucite; nepheline and nepheline syenite  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25301000  253010  - Vermiculite, perlite and chlorites, unexpanded  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25302000  253020  - Kieserite, epsomite (natural magnesium sulphates)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  25309000  253090  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  27011100  270111  -- Anthracite  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27011200  270112  -- Bituminous coal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27011900  270119  -- Other coal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27012000  270120  - Briquettes, ovoids and similar solid fuels manufactured from coal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27021000  270210  - Lignite, whether or not pulverised, but not agglomerated  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27022000  270220  - Agglomerated lignite  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27030000  270300  Peat (including peat litter), whether or not agglomerated  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27040000  270400  Coke and semi-coke of coal, of lignite or of peat, whether or not agglomerated; retort carbon  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27050000  270500  Coal gas, water gas, producer gas and similar gases, other than petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   27060000   270600  Tar distilled from coal, from lignite or from peat, and other mineral tars, whether or not dehydrated or partially distilled, including reconstituted tars   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  27071000  270710  - Benzol (benzene)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27072000  270720  - Toluol (toluene)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27073000  270730  - Xylol (xylenes)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27074000  270740  - Naphthalene  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   27075000   270750  - Other aromatic hydrocarbon mixtures of which 65 % or more by volume (including losses) distils at 250 °C by the ASTM D 86 method   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  27079100  270791  -- Creosote oils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27079900  270799  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  27081000  270810  - Pitch  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27082000  270820  - Pitch coke  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27101953  271019  ---- Mould release oils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27101956  271019  ---- Non-lubrcating oils (cutting oils, coolants, anti-rust, brake fluids and similar oils nes.)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27101959  271019  ---- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27109100  271091  -- Containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs) or polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27109900  271099  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27131100  271311  -- Not calcined  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27132000  271320  - Petroleum bitumen  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27139000  271390  - Other residues of petroleum oils or of oils obtained from bituminous minerals  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27141000  271410  - Bituminous or oil-shale and tar sands  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  27149000  271490  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   27150000   271500  Bituminous mixtures based on natural asphalt, on natural bitumen, on petroleum bitumen, on mineral tar or on mineral tar pitch (for example, bituminous mastics, cut-backs)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  27160000  271600  Electrical energy  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  28070000  280700  Sulphuric acid; oleum  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  28111100  281111  -- Hydrogen fluoride (hydrofluoric acid)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  30041000  300410  - Containing penicillins or derivatives thereof, with a penicillanic acid structure, or streptomycins or their derivatives  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  30042000  300420  - Containing other antibiotics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  30043200  300432  -- Containing corticosteroid hormones, their derivatives or structural analogues  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  30043900  300439  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  30044000  300440  - Containing alkaloids or derivatives thereof but not containing hormones, other products of heading 2937 or antibiotics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  30045000  300450  - Other medicaments containing vitamins or other products of heading 2936  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  30049000  300490  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  30065000  300650  - First-aid boxes and kits  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  32100010  321000  - Water pigments of kind used for finishing leather  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  32110000  321100  Prepared driers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  32121000  321210  - Stamping foils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   32129010   321290  --- Pigments (including metallic powders and flakes) dispersed in non-aqueous media, in liquid or paste form, of a kind used in the manufacture of paints (including enamels)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  32129090  321290  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  32151100  321511  -- Black  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  32151900  321519  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   34070000   340700  Modelling pastes, including those put up for children's   or in plates, horseshoe shapes, sticks or similar forms; other   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      preparations for use in dentistry, with a basis of plaster (of calcined gypsum or calcium sulphate)                      35011000  350110  - Casein  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  35019000  350190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  35021100  350211  -- Dried  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  35021900  350219  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  35022000  350220  - Milk albumin, including concentrates of two or more whey proteins  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  35029000  350290  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   35030000   350300  Gelatin (including gelatin in rectangular (including square) sheets, whether or not surface-worked or coloured) and gelatin derivatives; isinglass; other glues of animal origin, excluding casein glues of heading 3501   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   35040000   350400  Peptones and their derivatives; other protein substances and their derivatives, not elsewhere specified or included; hide powder, whether or not chromed   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  35051000  350510  - Dextrins and other modified starches  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  36010000  360100  Propellent powders  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  36020000  360200  Prepared explosives, other than propellent powders  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  36030000  360300  Safety fuses; detonating fuses; percussion or detonating caps; igniters; electric detonators  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37012000  370120  - Instant print film  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37013000  370130  - Other plates and film, with any side exceeding 255 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  37019100  370191  -- For colour photography (polychrome)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37019900  370199  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37023100  370231  -- For colour photography (polychrome)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37023200  370232  -- Other, with silver halide emulsion  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37023900  370239  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37024100  370241  -- Of a width exceeding 610 mm and of a length exceeding 200 m, for colour photography (polychrome)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37024200  370242  -- Of a width exceeding 610 mm and of a length exceeding 200 m, other than for colour photography  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37024300  370243  -- Of a width exceeding 610 mm and of a length not exceeding 200 m  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37024400  370244  -- Of a width exceeding 105 mm but not exceeding 610 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37025200  370252  -- Of a width not exceeding 16 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37025300  370253  -- Of a width exceeding 16 mm but not exceeding 35 mm and of a length not exceeding 30 m, for slides  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37025400  370254  -- Of a width exceeding 16 mm but not exceeding 35 mm and of a length not exceeding 30 m, other than for slides  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37025500  370255  -- Of a width exceeding 16 mm but not exceeding 35 mm and of a length exceeding 30 m  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37025600  370256  -- Of a width exceeding 35 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37029600  370296  -- Of a width not exceeding 35 mm and of a length not exceeding 30 m  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37029700  370297  -- Of a width not exceeding 35 mm and of a length exceeding 30 m  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  37029800  370298  -- Of a width exceeding 35 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37031000  370310  - In rolls of a width exceeding 610 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37032000  370320  - Other, for colour photography (polychrome)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37039000  370390  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37040000  370400  Photographic plates, film, paper, paperboard and textiles, exposed but not developed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37051000  370510  - For offset reproduction  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37059000  370590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37061000  370610  - Of a width of 35 mm or more  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37069000  370690  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37071000  370710  - Sensitising emulsions  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  37079000  370790  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38089111  380891  - - - - Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or Bromochloromethane  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38089119  380891  - - - - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38089121  380891  -- - - Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or Bromochloromethane  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38089129  380891  - - - - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   38101000   381010  - Pickling preparations for metal surfaces; soldering, brazing or welding powders and pastes consisting of metal and other materials   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  38109000  381090  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38111100  381111  -- Based on lead compounds  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  38111900  381119  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38112100  381121  -- Containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38112900  381129  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38119000  381190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38151100  381511  -- With nickel or nickel compounds as the active substance  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38151200  381512  -- With precious metal or precious-metal compounds as the active substance  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38151900  381519  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  38159000  381590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   38180000   381800  Chemical elements doped for use in electronics, in the form of discs, wafers or similar forms; chemical compounds doped for use in electronics   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   38190000   381900  Hydraulic brake fluids and other prepared liquids for hydraulic transmission, not containing or containing less than 70 % by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  38200000  382000  Anti-freezing preparations and prepared de-icing fluids  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39069000  390690  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39095000  390950  - Polyurethanes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39199010  391990  --- In rolls of a width exceeding 100 cm, unprinted  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39203010  392030  --- Unprinted  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39203090  392030  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  39206310  392063  --- Unprinted  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39206390  392063  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39234000  392340  - Spools, cops, bobbins and similar supports  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  39239020  392390  --- Plastic tubes for packing of toothpaste, cosmetics and similar products  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40069000  400690  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40081900  400819  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40082100  400821  -- Plates, sheets and strip  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40091100  400911  -- Without fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40091200  400912  -- With fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40092100  400921  -- Without fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40092200  400922  -- With fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40093100  400931  -- Without fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40093200  400932  -- With fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40094100  400941  -- Without fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40094200  400942  -- With fittings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40101100  401011  -- Reinforced only with metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40101200  401012  -- Reinforced only with textile materials  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40101900  401019  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   40103100   401031  -- Endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts), V-ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 60 cm but not exceeding 180 cm   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  40103200  401032  -- Endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts),  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      other than V-ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 60 cm but not exceeding 180 cm                       40103300   401033  -- Endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts), V-ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 180 cm but not exceeding 240 cm   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   40103400   401034  -- Endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts), other than V-ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 180 cm but not exceeding 240 cm   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  40103500  401035  -- Endless synchronous belts, of an outside circumference exceeding 60 cm but not exceeding 150 cm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40103600  401036  -- Endless synchronous belts, of an outside circumference exceeding 150 cm but not exceeding 198 cm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40103900  401039  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40114000  401140  - Of a kind used on motorcycles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40115000  401150  - Of a kind used on bicycles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40116200  401162  -- Of a kind used on construction or industrial handling vehicles and machines and having a rim size not exceeding 61 cm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40116300  401163  -- Of a kind used on construction or industrial handling vehicles and machines and having a rim size exceeding 61 cm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40116900  401169  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40119300  401193  -- Of a kind used on construction or industrial handling vehicles and machines and having a rim size not exceeding 61 cm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40119400  401194  -- Of a kind used on construction or industrial handling vehicles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      and machines and having a rim size exceeding 61 cm                      40119900  401199  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40129010  401290  --- Treads for cold retreading  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40132000  401320  - Of a kind used on bicycles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40151900  401519  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40159000  401590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40161000  401610  - Of cellular rubber  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40169200  401692  -- Erasers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40169300  401693  -- Gaskets, washers and other seals  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40169400  401694  -- Boat or dock fenders, whether or not inflatable  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40169500  401695  -- Other inflatable articles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  40169900  401699  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   41012000   410120  - Whole hides and skins, unsplit, of a weight per skin not exceeding 8 kg when simply dried, 10 kg when dry-salted, or 16 kg when fresh, wet-salted or otherwise preserved   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  41015000  410150  - Whole hides and skins, of a weight exceeding 16 kg  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41019000  410190  - Other, including butts, bends and bellies  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41021000  410210  - With wool on  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41022100  410221  -- Pickled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41022900  410229  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41032000  410320  - Of reptiles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41033000  410330  - Of swine  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41039000  410390  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  41041100  410411  -- Full grains, unsplit; grain splits  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41041900  410419  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41044100  410441  -- Full grains, unsplit; grain splits  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41044900  410449  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41051000  410510  - In the wet state (including wet-blue)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41053000  410530  - In the dry state (crust)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41062100  410621  -- In the wet state (including wet-blue)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41062200  410622  -- In the dry state (crust)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41063100  410631  -- In the wet state (including wet-blue)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41063200  410632  -- In the dry state (crust)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41064000  410640  - Of reptiles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41069100  410691  -- In the wet state (including wet-blue)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41069200  410692  -- In the dry state (crust)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41071100  410711  -- Full grains, unsplit  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41071200  410712  -- Grain splits  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41071900  410719  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41079100  410791  -- Full grains, unsplit  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41079200  410792  -- Grain splits  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41079900  410799  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   41120000   411200  Leather further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, of sheep or lamb, without wool on, whether or not split, other than leather of heading 4114   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  41131000  411310  - Of goats or kids  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  41132000  411320  - Of swine  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41133000  411330  - Of reptiles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41139000  411390  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41141000  411410  - Chamois (including combination chamois) leather  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41142000  411420  - Patent leather and patent laminated leather; metallised leather  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  41151000  411510  - Composition leather with a basis of leather or leather fibre, in slabs, sheets or strip, whether or not in rolls  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   41152000   411520  - Parings and other waste of leather or of composition leather, not suitable for the manufacture of leather articles; leather dust, powder and flour   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  43021100  430211  -- Of mink  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  43021900  430219  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  43022000  430220  - Heads, tails, paws and other pieces or cuttings, not assembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  43023000  430230  - Whole skins and pieces or cuttings thereof, assembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44071000  440710  - Coniferous  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44072100  440721  -- Mahogany (Swietenia spp.)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44072200  440722  -- Virola, imbuia and balsa  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44072500  440725  -- Dark red meranti, light red meranti and meranti bakau  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44072600  440726  -- White lauan, white meranti, white seraya, yellow meranti and alan  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44072700  440727  -- Sapelli  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44072800  440728  -- Iroko  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44072900  440729  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  44079100  440791  -- Of oak (Quercus spp.)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44079200  440792  -- Of beech (Fagus spp.)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44079300  440793  -- Of maple (Acer spp.)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44079400  440794  -- Of cherry (Prunus spp.)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44079500  440795  -- Of ash (Fraxinus spp.)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  44079900  440799  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  45041000  450410  - Blocks, plates, sheets and strip; tiles of any shape; solid cylinders, including discs  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48010010  480100  --- Weighing less than 42g/m2  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48021000  480210  - Handmade paper and paperboard  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   48022000   480220  - Paper and paperboard of a kind used as a base for photosensitive, heat-sensitive or electrosensitive paper or paperboard   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  48024000  480240  - Wallpaper base  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48025400  480254  -- Weighing less than 40 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48062000  480620  - Greaseproof papers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48063000  480630  - Tracing papers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48064000  480640  - Glassine and other glazed transparent or translucent papers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48092000  480920  - Self-copy paper  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48102200  481022  -- Lightweight coated paper  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48102900  481029  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48111000  481110  - Tarred, bituminised or asphalted paper and paperboard  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48115990  481159  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  48116090  481160  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  48192010  481920  --- Skillets, free hinge lid packets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  49070010  490700  --- Cheque form and/or books  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  49081000  490810  - Transfers (decalcomanias), vitrifiable  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  49089000  490890  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  50040000  500400  Silk yarn (other than yarn spun from silk waste) not put up for retail sale  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  50050000  500500  Yarn spun from silk waste, not put up for retail sale  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  50060000  500600  Silk yarn and yarn spun from silk waste, put up for retail sale; silkworm gut  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51061000  510610  - Containing 85 % or more by weight of wool  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51062000  510620  - Containing less than 85 % by weight of wool  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51071000  510710  - Containing 85 % or more by weight of wool  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51072000  510720  - Containing less than 85 % by weight of wool  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51081000  510810  - Carded  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51082000  510820  - Combed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51091000  510910  - Containing 85 % or more by weight of wool or of fine animal hair  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51099000  510990  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  51100000  511000  Yarn of coarse animal hair or of horsehair (including gimped horsehair yarn), whether or not put up for retail sale  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52051100  520511  -- Measuring 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52051200  520512  -- Measuring less than 714,29 decitex but not less than  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number)                       52051300   520513  -- Measuring less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52051400   520514  -- Measuring less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52051500  520515  -- Measuring less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52052100  520521  -- Measuring 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   52052200   520522  -- Measuring less than 714,29 decitex but not less than 232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52052300   520523  -- Measuring less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52052400   520524  -- Measuring less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52052600   520526  -- Measuring less than 125 decitex but not less than 106,38 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number but not exceeding 94 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15   52052700   520527  -- Measuring less than 106,38 decitex but not less than 83,33 decitex (exceeding 94 metric number but not exceeding 120 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52052800  520528  -- Measuring less than 83,33 decitex (exceeding 120 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52053100  520531  -- Measuring per single yarn 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   52053200   520532  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 714,29 decitex but not less than 232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52053300   520533  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52053400   520534  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52053500  520535  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52054100  520541  -- Measuring per single yarn 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   52054200   520542  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 714,29 decitex but not less than 232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15   52054300   520543  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52054400   520544  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52054600   520546  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 125 decitex but not less than 106,38 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number but not exceeding 94 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52054700   520547  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 106,38 decitex but not less than 83,33 decitex (exceeding 94 metric number but not exceeding 120 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52054800  520548  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 83,33 decitex (exceeding 120 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52061100  520611  -- Measuring 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   52061200   520612  -- Measuring less than 714,29 decitex but not less than 232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52061300   520613  -- Measuring less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52061400  520614  -- Measuring less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number)                      52061500  520615  -- Measuring less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52062100  520621  -- Measuring 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   52062200   520622  -- Measuring less than 714,29 decitex but not less than 232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52062300   520623  -- Measuring less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52062400   520624  -- Measuring less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52062500  520625  -- Measuring less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52063100  520631  -- Measuring per single yarn 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   52063200   520632  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 714,29 decitex but not less than 232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52063300   520633  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15   52063400   520634  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52063500  520635  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52064100  520641  -- Measuring per single yarn 714,29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   52064200   520642  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 714,29 decitex but not less than 232,56 decitex (exceeding 14 metric number but not exceeding 43 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52064300   520643  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 232,56 decitex but not less than 192,31 decitex (exceeding 43 metric number but not exceeding 52 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   52064400   520644  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 192,31 decitex but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 metric number but not exceeding 80 metric number per single yarn)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  52064500  520645  -- Measuring per single yarn less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number per single yarn)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52071000  520710  - Containing 85 % or more by weight of cotton  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  52079000  520790  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  53061000  530610  - Single  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  53062000  530620  - Multiple (folded) or cabled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  53071000  530710  - Single  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  53072000  530720  - Multiple (folded) or cabled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  53081000  530810  - Coir yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  53082000  530820  - True hemp yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  53089000  530890  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54021100  540211  -- Of aramids  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54021900  540219  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54022000  540220  - High-tenacity yarn of polyesters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54023100  540231  -- Of nylon or other polyamides, measuring per single yarn not more than 50 tex  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54023200  540232  -- Of nylon or other polyamides, measuring per single yarn more than 50 tex  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54023300  540233  -- Of polyesters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54023400  540234  -- Of polypropylene  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54023900  540239  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54024400  540244  -- Elastomeric  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54024500  540245  -- Other, of nylon or other polyamides  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54024600  540246  -- Other, of polyesters, partially oriented  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54024700  540247  -- Other, of polyesters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54024800  540248  -- Other, of polypropylene  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54024900  540249  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54025100  540251  -- Of nylon or other polyamides  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54025200  540252  -- Of polyesters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54025900  540259  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  54026100  540261  -- Of nylon or other polyamides  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54026200  540262  -- Of polyesters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54026900  540269  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54031000  540310  - High-tenacity yarn of viscose rayon  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54033100  540331  -- Of viscose rayon, untwisted or with a twist not exceeding 120 turns per metre  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54033200  540332  -- Of viscose rayon, with a twist exceeding 120 turns per metre  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54033300  540333  -- Of cellulose acetate  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54033900  540339  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54034100  540341  -- Of viscose rayon  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54034200  540342  -- Of cellulose acetate  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54034900  540349  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54041100  540411  -- Elastomeric  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54041200  540412  -- Other, of polypropylene  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54041900  540419  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  54049000  540490  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   54050000   540500  Artificial monofilament of 67 decitex or more and of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1 mm; strip and the like (for example, artificial straw), of artificial textile materials, of an apparent width not exceeding 5 mm   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  54060000  540600  Man-made filament yarn (other than sewing thread), put up for retail sale  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55091100  550911  -- Single yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  55091200  550912  -- Multiple (folded) or cabled yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55092100  550921  -- Single yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55092200  550922  -- Multiple (folded) or cabled yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55093100  550931  -- Single yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55093200  550932  -- Multiple (folded) or cabled yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55094100  550941  -- Single yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55094200  550942  -- Multiple (folded) or cabled yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55095100  550951  -- Mixed mainly or solely with artificial staple fibres  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55095200  550952  -- Mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55095300  550953  -- Mixed mainly or solely with cotton  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55095900  550959  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55096100  550961  -- Mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55096200  550962  -- Mixed mainly or solely with cotton  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55096900  550969  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55099100  550991  -- Mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55099200  550992  -- Mixed mainly or solely with cotton  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55099900  550999  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55101100  551011  -- Single yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55101200  551012  -- Multiple (folded) or cabled yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55102000  551020  - Other yarn, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55103000  551030  - Other yarn, mixed mainly or solely with cotton  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55109000  551090  - Other yarn  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  55111000  551110  - Of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85 % or more by weight of such fibres  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55112000  551120  - Of synthetic staple fibres, containing less than 85 % by weight of such fibres  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  55113000  551130  - Of artificial staple fibres  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56031100  560311  -- Weighing not more than 25 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56031200  560312  -- Weighing more than 25 g/m. but not more than 70 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56031300  560313  -- Weighing more than 70 g/m. but not more than 150 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56031400  560314  -- Weighing more than 150 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56039100  560391  -- Weighing not more than 25 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56039200  560392  -- Weighing more than 25 g/m. but not more than 70 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56039300  560393  -- Weighing more than 70 g/m. but not more than 150 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56039400  560394  -- Weighing more than 150 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56041000  560410  - Rubber thread and cord, textile covered  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  56049000  560490  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   56050000   560500  Metallised yarn, whether or not gimped, being textile yarn, or strip or the like of heading 5404 or 5405, combined with metal in the form of thread, strip or powder or covered with metal   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%   56060000   560600  Gimped yarn, and strip and the like of heading 5404 or 5405, gimped (other than those of heading 5605 and gimped horsehair yarn); chenille yarn (including flock chenille yarn); loop wale-yarn   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  59011000  590110  - Textile fabrics coated with gum or amylaceous substances, of a kind used for the outer covers of books or the like  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  59019000  590190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  59031000  590310  - With poly(vinyl chloride)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  59032000  590320  - With polyurethane  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  59039000  590390  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   59080000   590800  Textile wicks, woven, plaited or knitted, for lamps, stoves, lighters, candles or the like; incandescent gas mantles and tubular knitted gas-mantle fabric therefor, whether or not impregnated   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%    59111000    591110  - Textile fabrics, felt and felt-lined woven fabrics, coated, covered or laminated with rubber, leather or other material, of a kind used for card clothing, and similar fabrics of a kind used for other technical purposes, including narrow fabrics made of velvet impregnated with rubber, for covering weaving spindles (weaving beams)    10%    8%    7%    6%    5%    4%    3%    2%    1%    0%  59112000  591120  - Bolting cloth, whether or not made up  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  59113100  591131  -- Weighing less than 650 g/m.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  59113200  591132  -- Weighing 650 g/m. or more  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  59119000  591190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  63101000  631010  - Sorted  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  63109000  631090  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  64061000  640610  - Uppers and parts thereof, other than stiffeners  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  64062000  640620  - Outer soles and heels, of rubber or plastics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  64069000  640690  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  65010000  650100  Hat-forms, hat bodies and hoods of felt, neither blocked to shape  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      nor with made brims; plateaux and manchons (including slit manchons), of felt                       65020000   650200  Hat-shapes, plaited or made by assembling strips of any material, neither blocked to shape, nor with made brims, nor lined, nor trimmed   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  65070000  650700  Headbands, linings, covers, hat foundations, hat frames, peaks and chinstraps, for headgear  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  66032000  660320  - Umbrella frames, including frames mounted on shafts (sticks)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  66039000  660390  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  68109910  681099  ---     10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  68128000  681280  - Of crocidolite  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  68129100  681291  -- Clothing, clothing accessories, footwear and headgear  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  68138910  681389  --- Friction material  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  68138990  681389  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  69031000  690310  - Containing, by weight, more than 50 % of graphite or other carbon or of a mixture of these products  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  69032000  690320  - Containing, by weight, more than 50 % of alumina (Al2O3) or of a mixture or compound of alumina and of silica (SiO2)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  69039000  690390  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70021000  700210  - Balls  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70022000  700220  - Rods  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70023100  700231  -- Of fused quartz or other fused silica  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70023200  700232  -- Of other glass having a linear coefficient of expansion not  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      exceeding 5 . 10 6 per Kelvin within a temperature range of 0 °C to 300 °C                      70023900  700239  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70031200  700312  -- Coloured throughout the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or having an absorbent, reflecting or non-reflecting layer  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70031900  700319  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70032000  700320  - Wired sheets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70033000  700330  - Profiles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70051000  700510  - Non-wired glass, having an absorbent, reflecting or non-reflecting layer  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70072900  700729  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70080000  700800  Multiple-walled insulating units of glass  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70111000  701110  - For electric lighting  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70112000  701120  - For cathode ray tubes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70191100  701911  -- Chopped strands, of a length of not more than 50 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70191200  701912  -- Rovings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70191900  701919  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70193100  701931  -- Mats  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70193200  701932  -- Thin sheets (voiles)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70194000  701940  - Woven fabrics of rovings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70195100  701951  -- Of a width not exceeding 30 cm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70195200  701952  -- Of a width exceeding 30 cm, plain weave, weighing less than 250 g/m., of filaments measuring per single yarn not more than  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      136 tex                      70195900  701959  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70199010  701990  --- Interwoven netting glass fibre for manufacture of grinding and cutting wheels  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70199090  701990  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70200010  702000  --- Floats for fishing nets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  70200091  702000  ---- Inner glass in-fills for vacuum flasks  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72091500  720915  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72091600  720916  -- Of a thickness exceeding 1 mm but less than 3 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72091700  720917  -- Of a thickness of 0,5 mm or more but not exceeding 1 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72091800  720918  -- Of a thickness of less than 0,5 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72092500  720925  -- Of a thickness of 3 mm or more  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72092600  720926  -- Of a thickness exceeding 1 mm but less than 3 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72092700  720927  -- Of a thickness of 0,5 mm or more but not exceeding 1 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72092800  720928  -- Of a thickness of less than 0,5 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72099000  720990  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   72111300   721113  -- Rolled on four faces or in a closed box pass, of a width exceeding 150 mm and a thickness of not less than 4 mm, not in coils and without patterns in relief   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  72111400  721114  -- Other, of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72111900  721119  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72112300  721123  -- Containing by weight less than 0,25 % of carbon  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72119000  721190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  72121000  721210  - Plated or coated with tin  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72122000  721220  - Electrolytically plated or coated with zinc  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72123000  721230  - Otherwise plated or coated with zinc  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72124000  721240  - Painted, varnished or coated with plastics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72125000  721250  - Otherwise plated or coated  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72126000  721260  - Clad  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72131000  721310  - Containing indentations, ribs, grooves or other deformations produced during the rolling process  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72132000  721320  - Other, of free-cutting steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72141000  721410  - Forged  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72142000  721420  - Containing indentations, ribs, grooves or other deformations produced during the rolling process or twisted after rolling  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72143000  721430  - Other, of free-cutting steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72149100  721491  -- Of rectangular (other than square) cross-section  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72149900  721499  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72151000  721510  - Of free-cutting steel, not further worked than cold-formed or cold-finished  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72155000  721550  - Other, not further worked than cold-formed or cold-finished  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72159000  721590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72161000  721610  - U, I or H sections, not further worked than hot-rolled, hot-drawn or extruded, of a height of less than 80 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72162100  721621  -- L sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72162200  721622  -- T sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  72163100  721631  -- U sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72163200  721632  -- I sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72163300  721633  -- H sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72164000  721640  - L or T sections, not further worked than hot-rolled, hot-drawn or extruded, of a height of 80 mm or more  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72165000  721650  - Other angles, shapes and sections, not further worked than hot- rolled, hot-drawn or extruded  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72166100  721661  -- Obtained from flat-rolled products  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72166900  721669  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72169100  721691  -- Cold-formed or cold-finished from flat-rolled products  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72169900  721699  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72171000  721710  - Not plated or coated, whether or not polished  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72173090  721730  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72179000  721790  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72201100  722011  -- Of a thickness of 4,75 mm or more  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72201200  722012  -- Of a thickness of less than 4,75 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72202000  722020  - Not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72209000  722090  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72210000  722100  Bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, of stainless steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72221100  722211  -- Of circular cross-section  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72221900  722219  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72222000  722220  - Bars and rods, not further worked than cold-formed or cold-  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      finished                      72223000  722230  - Other bars and rods  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72224000  722240  - Angles, shapes and sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72230000  722300  Wire of stainless steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72251100  722511  -- Grain-oriented  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72251900  722519  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72253000  722530  - Other, not further worked than hot-rolled, in coils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72254000  722540  - Other, not further worked than hot-rolled, not in coils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72255000  722550  - Other, not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72259100  722591  -- Electrolytically plated or coated with zinc  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72259200  722592  -- Otherwise plated or coated with zinc  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72259900  722599  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72261100  722611  -- Grain-oriented  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72261900  722619  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72262000  722620  - Of high-speed steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72269100  722691  -- Not further worked than hot-rolled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72269200  722692  -- Not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72269900  722699  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72271000  722710  - Of high-speed steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72272000  722720  - Of silico-manganese steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72279000  722790  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72281000  722810  - Bars and rods, of high-speed steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  72282000  722820  - Bars and rods, of silico-manganese steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72283000  722830  - Other bars and rods, not further worked than hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72284000  722840  - Other bars and rods, not further worked than forged  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72285000  722850  - Other bars and rods, not further worked than cold-formed or cold-finished  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72286000  722860  - Other bars and rods  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72287000  722870  - Angles, shapes and sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72288000  722880  - Hollow drill bars and rods  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72292000  722920  - Of silico-manganese steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  72299000  722990  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73011000  730110  - Sheet piling  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73012000  730120  - Angles, shapes and sections  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73043100  730431  -- Cold-drawn or cold-rolled (cold-reduced)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73043900  730439  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73044100  730441  -- Cold-drawn or cold-rolled (cold-reduced)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73044900  730449  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73045100  730451  -- Cold-drawn or cold-rolled (cold-reduced)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73045900  730459  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73053100  730531  -- Longitudinally welded  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73053900  730539  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73059000  730590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73102910  731029  --- Aerosol cans  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  73129000  731290  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73151100  731511  -- Roller chain  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73151900  731519  -- Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73152000  731520  - Skid chain  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73158100  731581  -- Stud-link  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73158200  731582  -- Other, welded link  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73158900  731589  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73159000  731590  - Other parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73160000  731600  Anchors, grapnels and parts thereof, of iron or steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73181100  731811  -- Coach screws  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73181200  731812  -- Other wood screws  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73181300  731813  -- Screw hooks and screw rings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73181400  731814  -- Self-tapping screws  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73181900  731819  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73182100  731821  -- Spring washers and other lock washers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73182200  731822  -- Other washers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73182300  731823  -- Rivets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73182400  731824  -- Cotters and cotter pins  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73182900  731829  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73221100  732211  -- Of cast iron  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73221900  732219  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73229000  732290  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  73251000  732510  - Of non-malleable cast iron  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73259900  732599  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  73261900  732619  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74031100  740311  -- Cathodes and sections of cathodes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74031200  740312  -- Wire-bars  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74031300  740313  -- Billets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74031900  740319  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74032100  740321  -- Copper-zinc base alloys (brass)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74032200  740322  -- Copper-tin base alloys (bronze)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74032900  740329  -- Other copper alloys (other than master alloys of heading 7405)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74050000  740500  Master alloys of copper  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74061000  740610  - Powders of non-lamellar structure  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74062000  740620  - Powders of lamellar structure; flakes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74072100  740721  -- Of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74072900  740729  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74081900  740819  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74082100  740821  -- Of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74082900  740829  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74091100  740911  -- In coils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74091900  740919  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74092100  740921  -- In coils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74092900  740929  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  74093100  740931  -- In coils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74093900  740939  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74094000  740940  - Of copper-nickel base alloys (cupro-nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel silver)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74099000  740990  - Of other copper alloys  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74101100  741011  -- Of refined copper  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74101200  741012  -- Of copper alloys  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74102100  741021  -- Of refined copper  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74102200  741022  -- Of copper alloys  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  74130090  741300  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  75051100  750511  -- Of nickel, not alloyed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  75051200  750512  -- Of nickel alloys  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  75052100  750521  -- Of nickel, not alloyed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  75052200  750522  -- Of nickel alloys  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  75061000  750610  - Of nickel, not alloyed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  75062000  750620  - Of nickel alloys  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76051100  760511  -- Of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 7 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76051900  760519  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76052100  760521  -- Of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 7 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76052900  760529  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76061100  760611  -- Of aluminium, not alloyed  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76071100  760711  -- Rolled but not further worked  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76071910  760719  --- Unprinted aluminium foil  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  76071990  760719  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76072010  760720  --- Unprinted aluminium foil  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76072090  760720  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76121000  761210  - Collapsible tubular containers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76129090  761290  - - -Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76130000  761300  Aluminium containers for compressed or liquefied gas  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76141000  761410  - With steel core  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  76149000  761490  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  78041100  780411  -- Sheets, strip and foil of a thickness (excluding any backing) not exceeding 0,2 mm  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  78041900  780419  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  78060000  780600  Other articles of lead  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  79040000  790400  Zinc bars, rods, profiles and wire  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  79050000  790500  Zinc plates, sheets, strip and foil  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  79070000  790700  Other articles of zinc  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  80030000  800300  Tin bars, rods, profiles and wire  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  80070000  800700  Other articles of tin  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82011000  820110  - Spades and shovels  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82013000  820130  - Mattocks, picks, hoes and rakes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82014000  820140  - Axes, billhooks and similar hewing tools  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82015000  820150  - Secateurs and similar one-handed pruners and shears (including poultry shears)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82016000  820160  - Hedge shears, two-handed pruning shears and similar two-  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      handed shears                      82019000  820190  - Other hand tools of a kind used in agriculture, horticulture or forestry  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82021000  820210  - Handsaws  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82022000  820220  - Bandsaw blades  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82023100  820231  -- With working part of steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82023900  820239  -- Other, including parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82024000  820240  - Chainsaw blades  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82029100  820291  -- Straight saw blades, for working metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82029900  820299  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82031000  820310  - Files, rasps and similar tools  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82032000  820320  - Pliers (including cutting pliers), pincers, tweezers and similar tools  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82033000  820330  - Metal-cutting shears and similar tools  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82034000  820340  - Pipe-cutters, bolt croppers, perforating punches and similar tools  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82041100  820411  -- Non-adjustable  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82041200  820412  -- Adjustable  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82042000  820420  - Interchangeable spanner sockets, with or without handles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82051000  820510  - Drilling, threading or tapping tools  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82052000  820520  - Hammers and sledge hammers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82053000  820530  - Planes, chisels, gouges and similar cutting tools for working wood  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82054000  820540  - Screwdrivers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82055900  820559  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82056000  820560  - Blowlamps  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  82057000  820570  - Vices, clamps and the like  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82059000  820590  - Other, including sets of articles of two or more subheadings of this heading  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82060000  820600  Tools of two or more of headings 8202 to 8205, put up in sets for retail sale  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82071300  820713  -- With working part of cermets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82071900  820719  -- Other, including parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82072000  820720  - Dies for drawing or extruding metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82073000  820730  - Tools for pressing, stamping or punching  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82074000  820740  - Tools for tapping or threading  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82075000  820750  - Tools for drilling, other than for rock-drilling  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82076000  820760  - Tools for boring or broaching  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82077000  820770  - Tools for milling  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82078000  820780  - Tools for turning  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82079000  820790  - Other interchangeable tools  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82081000  820810  - For metalworking  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82082000  820820  - For woodworking  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82083000  820830  - For kitchen appliances or for machines used by the food industry  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82089000  820890  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82090000  820900  Plates, sticks, tips and the like for tools, unmounted, of cermets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82100000  821000  Hand-operated mechanical appliances, weighing 10 kg or less, used in the preparation, conditioning or serving of food or drink  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82111000  821110  - Sets of assorted articles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  82119100  821191  -- Table knives having fixed blades  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82119200  821192  -- Other knives having fixed blades  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82119300  821193  -- Knives having other than fixed blades  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82119400  821194  -- Blades  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82119500  821195  -- Handles of base metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82129000  821290  - Other parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82130000  821300  Scissors, tailors' shears and similar shears, and blades therefor  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82141000  821410  - Paperknives, letter openers, erasing knives, pencil sharpeners and blades therefor  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82151000  821510  - Sets of assorted articles containing at least one article plated with precious metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82152000  821520  - Other sets of assorted articles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82159100  821591  -- Plated with precious metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  82159900  821599  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83021000  830210  - Hinges  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83022000  830220  - Castors  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83024100  830241  -- Suitable for buildings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83024200  830242  -- Other, suitable for furniture  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83024900  830249  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83051000  830510  - Fittings for loose-leaf binders or files  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83071000  830710  - Of iron or steel  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83079000  830790  - Of other base metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83081000  830810  - Hooks, eyes and eyelets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  83082000  830820  - Tubular or bifurcated rivets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83089000  830890  - Other, including parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83112000  831120  - Cored wire of base metal, for electric arc-welding  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  83119000  831190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84072900  840729  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84073100  840731  -- Of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cm.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84073200  840732  -- Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 50 cm. but not exceeding 250 cm.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84073300  840733  -- Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 250 cm. but not exceeding 1000 cm.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84073400  840734  -- Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1000 cm.  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84079090  840790  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84082000  840820  - Engines of a kind used for the propulsion of vehicles of Chapter 87  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84089090  840890  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84091000  840910  - For aircraft engines  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84099100  840991  -- Suitable for use solely or principally with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engines  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84099900  840999  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84131100  841311  -- Pumps for dispensing fuel or lubricants, of the type used in filling stations or in garages  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84131900  841319  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84133000  841330  - Fuel, lubricating or cooling medium pumps for internal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      combustion piston engines                      84141000  841410  - Vacuum pumps  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84142000  841420  - Hand- or foot-operated air pumps  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84143000  841430  - Compressors of a kind used in refrigerating equipment  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84144000  841440  - Air compressors mounted on a wheeled chassis for towing  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84149000  841490  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84159000  841590  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   84185000   841850  - Other furniture (chests, cabinets, display counters, showcases and the like) for storage and display, incorporating refrigerating or freezing equipment   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  84189100  841891  -- Furniture designed to receive refrigerating or freezing equipment  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84189900  841899  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84211200  842112  -- Clothes dryers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84211900  842119  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84212300  842123  -- Oil or petrol filters for internal combustion engines  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84212900  842129  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84213100  842131  -- Intake air filters for internal combustion engines  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84213910  842139  --- Industrial filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for gases  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84213990  842139  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84219100  842191  -- Of centrifuges, including centrifugal dryers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84219900  842199  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  84229000  842290  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84231000  842310  - Personal weighing machines, including baby scales; household scales  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84238100  842381  -- Having a maximum weighing capacity not exceeding 30 kg  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84238910  842389  --- Weighing machinery having a maximum weighing capacity exceeding 5,000 kg  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84238990  842389  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84239000  842390  - Weighing machine weights of all kinds; parts of weighing machinery  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84249000  842490  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84251100  842511  -- Powered by electric motor  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84251900  842519  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84253100  842531  -- Powered by electric motor  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84253900  842539  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84254100  842541  -- Built-in jacking systems of a type used in garages  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84254200  842542  -- Other jacks and hoists, hydraulic  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84254900  842549  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84311000  843110  - Of machinery of heading 8425  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84312000  843120  - Of machinery of heading 8427  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84313100  843131  -- Of lifts, skip hoists or escalators  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84313900  843139  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84314100  843141  -- Buckets, shovels, grabs and grips  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84314200  843142  -- Bulldozer or angledozer blades  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  84314300  843143  -- Parts for boring or sinking machinery of subheading 843041 or 843049  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84314900  843149  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84433900  844339  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84439900  844399  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84501110  845011  --- Unassembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84501210  845012  --- Unassembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84501910  845019  --- Unassembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84502010  845020  --- Unassembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84509000  845090  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   84701000   847010  - Electronic calculators capable of operation without an external source of electric power and pocket-size data-recording, reproducing and displaying machines with calculating functions   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  84702100  847021  -- Incorporating a printing device  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84702900  847029  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84703000  847030  - Other calculating machines  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84705000  847050  - Cash registers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84709000  847090  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   84723000   847230  - Machines for sorting or folding mail or for inserting mail in envelopes or bands, machines for opening, closing or sealing mail and machines for affixing or cancelling postage stamps   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  84729000  847290  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84731000  847310  - Parts and accessories of the machines of heading 8469  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  84732100  847321  -- Of the electronic calculating machines of subheading 847010, 847021 or 847029  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84732900  847329  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84734000  847340  - Parts and accessories of the machines of heading 8472  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84735000  847350  - Parts and accessories equally suitable for use with machines of two or more of the headings 8469 to 8472  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84762100  847621  -- Incorporating heating or refrigerating devices  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84762900  847629  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84768100  847681  -- Incorporating heating or refrigerating devices  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84768900  847689  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84769000  847690  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84811000  848110  - Pressure-reducing valves  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84812000  848120  - Valves for oleohydraulic or pneumatic transmissions  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84813000  848130  - Check (non-return) valves  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84814000  848140  - Safety or relief valves  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84818000  848180  - Other appliances  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84819000  848190  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84821000  848210  - Ball bearings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84822000  848220  - Tapered roller bearings, including cone and tapered roller assemblies  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84823000  848230  - Spherical roller bearings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84824000  848240  - Needle roller bearings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84825000  848250  - Other cylindrical roller bearings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  84828000  848280  - Other, including combined ball/roller bearings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84829100  848291  -- Balls, needles and rollers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84829900  848299  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84831000  848310  - Transmission shafts (including cam shafts and crank shafts) and cranks  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84832000  848320  - Bearing housings, incorporating ball or roller bearings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84833000  848330  - Bearing housings, not incorporating ball or roller bearings; plain shaft bearings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   84834000   848340  - Gears and gearing, other than toothed wheels, chain sprockets and other transmission elements presented separately; ball or roller screws; gear boxes and other speed changers, including torque converters   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  84835000  848350  - Flywheels and pulleys, including pulley blocks  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84836000  848360  - Clutches and shaft couplings (including universal joints)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84839000  848390  - Toothed wheels, chain sprockets and other transmission elements presented separately; parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84841000  848410  - Gaskets and similar joints of metal sheeting combined with other material or of two or more layers of metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84842000  848420  - Mechanical seals  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84849000  848490  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84871000  848710  - Ships' or boats' propellers and blades therefor  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  84879000  848790  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85043100  850431  -- Having a power handling capacity not exceeding 1 kVA  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  85043200  850432  -- Having a power handling capacity exceeding 1 kVA but not exceeding 16 kVA  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85111000  851110  - Sparking plugs  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85112000  851120  - Ignition magnetos; magneto-dynamos; magnetic flywheels  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85113000  851130  - Distributors; ignition coils  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85114000  851140  - Starter motors and dual purpose starter-generators  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85115000  851150  - Other generators  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85118000  851180  - Other equipment  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85119000  851190  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85121000  851210  - Lighting or visual signalling equipment of a kind used on bicycles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85122000  851220  - Other lighting or visual signalling equipment  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85123000  851230  - Sound signalling equipment  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85124000  851240  - Windscreen wipers, defrosters and demisters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85129000  851290  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85131090  851310  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85139000  851390  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85163100  851631  -- Hairdryers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85163200  851632  -- Other hairdressing apparatus  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85163300  851633  -- Hand-drying apparatus  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85164000  851640  - Electric smoothing irons  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85165000  851650  - Microwave ovens  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85166000  851660  - Other ovens; cookers, cooking plates, boiling rings; grillers and roasters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  85167900  851679  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85168000  851680  - Electric heating resistors  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85169000  851690  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85171100  851711  -- Line telephone sets with cordless handsets  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85171800  851718  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   85176200   851762  -- Machines for the reception, conversion and transmission or regeneration of voice, images or other data, including switching and routing apparatus   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  85176900  851769  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85177000  851770  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85232110  852321  --- unrecorded  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85232910  852329  ---un recorded  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85235100  852351  -- Solid-state non-volatile storage devices  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85235200  852352  --   10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85235900  852359  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85238010  852380  ---Software  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85285910  852859  --- Unassembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85287210  852872  --- Unassembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85287290  852872  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85287310  852873  --- Unassembled  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85287390  852873  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85311000  853110  - Burglar or fire alarms and similar apparatus  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85312000  853120  - Indicator panels incorporating liquid crystal devices (LCD) or light  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15      emitting diodes (LED)                      85318000  853180  - Other apparatus  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85319000  853190  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   85321000   853210  - Fixed capacitors designed for use in 50/60 Hz circuits and having a reactive power handling capacity of not less than 0,5 kvar (power capacitors)   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  85322100  853221  -- Tantalum  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85322200  853222  -- Aluminium electrolytic  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85322300  853223  -- Ceramic dielectric, single layer  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85322400  853224  -- Ceramic dielectric, multilayer  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85322500  853225  -- Dielectric of paper or plastics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85322900  853229  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85323000  853230  - Variable or adjustable (pre-set) capacitors  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85329000  853290  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85331000  853310  - Fixed carbon resistors, composition or film types  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85332100  853321  -- For a power handling capacity not exceeding 20 W  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85332900  853329  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85333100  853331  -- For a power handling capacity not exceeding 20 W  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85333900  853339  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85334000  853340  - Other variable resistors, including rheostats and potentiometers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85339000  853390  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85340000  853400  Printed circuits  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85361000  853610  - Fuses  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  85362000  853620  - Automatic circuit breakers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85363000  853630  - Other apparatus for protecting electrical circuits  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85364100  853641  -- For a voltage not exceeding 60 V  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85364900  853649  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85365000  853650  - Other switches  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85366100  853661  -- Lamp holders  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85366900  853669  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85369000  853690  - Other apparatus  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85371000  853710  - For a voltage not exceeding 1000 V  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85381000  853810  - Boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases for the goods of heading 8537, not equipped with their apparatus  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85389000  853890  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85401100  854011  -- Colour  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85401200  854012  -- Monochrome  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85402000  854020  - Television camera tubes; image converters and intensifiers; other photocathode tubes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   85404000   854040  - Data/graphic display tubes, monochrome; data/graphic display tubes, colour, with a phosphor dot screen pitch smaller than 0,4 mm   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  85406000  854060  - Other cathode ray tubes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85407100  854071  -- Magnetrons  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85407900  854079  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85408100  854081  -- Receiver or amplifier valves and tubes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  85408900  854089  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85409100  854091  -- Of cathode ray tubes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85409900  854099  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   85423100   854231  -- Processors and controllers, whether or not combined with memories, converters, logic circuits, amplifiers, clock and timing circuits, or other circuits   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  85423200  854232  -- Memories  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85423300  854233  -- Amplifiers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85423900  854239  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85429000  854290  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85431000  854310  - Particle accelerators  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85432000  854320  - Signal generators  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85437000  854370  - Other machines and apparatus  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85439000  854390  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85451900  854519  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85452000  854520  - Brushes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85459000  854590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85461000  854610  - Of glass  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85462000  854620  - Of ceramics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85469000  854690  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85471000  854710  - Insulating fittings of ceramics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85472000  854720  - Insulating fittings of plastics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  85479000  854790  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  87012090  870120  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87041090  870410  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87049090  870490  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87081000  870810  - Bumpers and parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87082100  870821  -- Safety seat belts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87082900  870829  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87083000  870830  - Brakes and servo-brakes; parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87084000  870840  - Gear boxes and parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87085000  870850  - Drive-axles with differential, whether or not provided with other transmission components, and non-driving axles; parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87087000  870870  - Road wheels and parts and accessories thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87088000  870880  - Suspension systems and parts thereof (including shock- absorbers)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87089300  870893  -- Clutches and parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87089400  870894  -- Steering wheels, steering columns and steering boxes; parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87089500  870895  -- Safety airbags with inflator system; parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87089900  870899  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87141000  871410  - Of motorcycles (including mopeds)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87149100  871491  -- Frames and forks, and parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87149200  871492  -- Wheel rims and spokes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87149300  871493  -- Hubs, other than coaster braking hubs and hub brakes, and free- wheel sprocket-wheels  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  87149400  871494  -- Brakes, including coaster braking hubs and hub brakes, and parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87149500  871495  -- Saddles  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87149600  871496  -- Pedals and crank-gear, and parts thereof  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87149900  871499  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87161090  871610  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87162090  871620  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87163190  871631  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87163990  871639  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87164090  871640  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  87169000  871690  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90021100  900211  -- For cameras, projectors or photographic enlargers or reducers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90021900  900219  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90022000  900220  - Filters  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90029000  900290  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90031100  900311  -- Of plastics  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90031900  900319  -- Of other materials  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90039000  900390  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90041000  900410  - Sunglasses  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90049090  900490  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90051000  900510  - Binoculars  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90058000  900580  - Other instruments  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90059000  900590  - Parts and accessories (including mountings)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  90071000  900710  - Cameras  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90072000  900720  - Projectors  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90079100  900791  -- For cameras  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90079200  900792  -- For projectors  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90085000  900850  - Projectors, enlargers and reducers  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90089000  900890  - Parts and accessories  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%   90101000   901010  - Apparatus and equipment for automatically developing photographic (including cinematographic) film or paper in rolls or for automatically exposing developed film to rolls of photographic paper   10%   8%   7%   6%   5%   4%   3%   2%   1%   0%  90105000  901050  - Other apparatus and equipment for photographic (including cinematographic) laboratories; negatoscopes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90106000  901060  - Projection screens  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90109000  901090  - Parts and accessories  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90291000  902910  - Revolution counters, production counters, taximeters, milometers, pedometers and the like  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90292000  902920  - Speed indicators and tachometers; stroboscopes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  90299000  902990  - Parts and accessories  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92011000  920110  - Upright pianos  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92012000  920120  - Grand pianos  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92019000  920190  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92021000  920210  - Played with a bow  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92029000  920290  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  92051000  920510  - Brass-wind instruments  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92059000  920590  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92060000  920600  Percussion musical instruments (for example, drums, xylophones, cymbals, castanets, maracas)  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92071000  920710  - Keyboard instruments, other than accordions  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92079000  920790  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92081000  920810  - Musical boxes  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92089000  920890  - Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92093000  920930  - Musical instrument strings  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92099100  920991  -- Parts and accessories for pianos  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92099200  920992  -- Parts and accessories for the musical instruments of heading 9202  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92099400  920994  -- Parts and accessories for the musical instruments of heading 9207  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  92099900  920999  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  93039000  930390  - Other  25%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  93069000  930690  - Other  25%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  94029090  940290  --- Other  25%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  94038100  940381  -- Of bamboo or rattan  25%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  94038900  940389  -- Other  25%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  94060090  940600  --- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96061000  960610  - Press-fasteners, snap-fasteners and press studs and parts therefor  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%     Reduction rate    20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate   T0+7   T0+8   T0+9   T0+10   T0+11   T0+12   T0+13   T0+14   T0+15  96062100  960621  -- Of plastics, not covered with textile material  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96062200  960622  -- Of base metal, not covered with textile material  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96062900  960629  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96063000  960630  - Button moulds and other parts of buttons; button blanks  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96071100  960711  -- Fitted with chain scoops of base metal  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96071900  960719  -- Other  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96072000  960720  - Parts  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  96190010  961900  ---Sanitary towels (pads) and tampons  10%  8%  7%  6%  5%  4%  3%  2%  1%  0%  ANNEX II(C) NUMBER OF TARIFF LINES 990   Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  01012900  010129  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01013090  010130  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01019010  010190  --- Pure-bred breeding animals  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01019090  010190  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01022900  010229  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01023900  010239  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01029090  010290  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01039100  010391  -- Weighing less than 50 kg  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01039200  010392  -- Weighing 50 kg or more  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01041090  010410  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01042090  010420  ---Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  01051200  010512  -- Turkeys  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01051300  010513  -- Ducks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01051400  010514  -- Geese  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01051500  010515  -- Guinea fowls  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01059400  010594  -- Fowls of the species Gallus domesticus  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01059900  010599  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01061100  010611  -- Primates  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     01061200     010612  -- Whales, dolphins and porpoises (mammals of the order Cetacea); manatees and dugongs (mammals of the order Sirenia); seals, sea lions and walruses (mammals of the suborder Pinnipedia)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  01061300  010613  -- Camels and other camelids (Camelidae)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01061400  010614  -- Rabbits and hares  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          01061900  010619  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01062000  010620  - Reptiles (including snakes and turtles)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01063100  010631  -- Birds of prey  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   01063200   010632  -- Psittaciformes (including parrots, parakeets, macaws and cockatoos)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  01063300  010633  -- Ostriches; emus (Dromaius novaehollandiae)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01063900  010639  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01064100  010641  -- Bees  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01064900  010649  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  01069000  010690  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02011000  020110  - Carcases and half-carcases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02021000  020210  - Carcases and half-carcases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  02031100  020311  -- Carcases and half-carcases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02031900  020319  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02032100  020321  -- Carcases and half-carcases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02041000  020410  - Carcases and half-carcases of lamb, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02042100  020421  -- Carcases and half-carcases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02043000  020430  - Carcases and half-carcases of lamb, frozen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02044100  020441  -- Carcases and half-carcases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   02050000   020500  Meat of horses, asses, mules or hinnies, fresh, chilled or frozen   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  02062100  020621  -- Tongues  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02063000  020630  - Of swine, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02064100  020641  -- Livers  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02064900  020649  -- Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          02068000  020680  - Other, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02071300  020713  -- Cuts and offal, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02071400  020714  -- Cuts and offal, frozen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02072400  020724  -- Not cut in pieces, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02072500  020725  -- Not cut in pieces, frozen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02072600  020726  -- Cuts and offal, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02072700  020727  -- Cuts and offal, frozen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02074100  020741  -- Not cut in pieces, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02074200  020742  -- Not cut in pieces, frozen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02074300  020743  -- Fatty livers, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02074400  020744  -- Other, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02074500  020745  -- Other, frozen  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          02075100  020751  -- Not cut in pieces, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02075200  020752  -- Not cut in pieces, frozen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02075300  020753  -- Fatty livers, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02075400  020754  -- Other, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02075500  020755  -- Other, frozen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02076000  020760  - Of guinea fowls  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02081000  020810  - Of rabbits or hares  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02083000  020830  - Of primates  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     02084000     020840  - Of whales, dolphins and porpoises (mammals of the order Cetacea); of manatees and dugongs (mammals of the order Sirenia); of seals, sea lions and walruses (mammals of the suborder Pinnipedia)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  02085000  020850  - Of reptiles (including snakes and turtles)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02086000  020860  - Of camels and other camelids (Camelidae)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02089000  020890  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02091000  020910  - Of pigs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02099000  020990  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02109100  021091  -- Of primates  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     02109200     021092  -- Of whales, dolphins and porpoises (mammals of the order Cetacea); of manatees and dugongs (mammals of the order Sirenia); of seals, sea lions and walruses (mammals of the suborder Pinnipedia)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  02109300  021093  -- Of reptiles (including snakes and turtles)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  02109900  021099  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03011100  030111  -- Freshwater fish  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          03011900  030119  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     03019100     030191  -- Trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  03019200  030192  -- Eels (Anguilla spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    03019300    030193  -- Carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus)    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%   03019400   030194  -- Atlantic and Pacific bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus, Thunnus orientalis)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03019500  030195  -- Southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03019900  030199  -- Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %             03021100     030211  -- Trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%     03021300     030213  -- Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou and Oncorhynchus rhodurus)     25%     23.8 %     22.5 %     21.3 %     20.0 %     17.5 %     16.3 %     15.0 %     13.8 %     12.5 %     10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%   03021400   030214  -- Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and Danube salmon (Hucho hucho)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03021900  030219  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03022100   030221  -- Halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides, Hippoglossus hippoglossus, Hippoglossus   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      stenolepis)                                03022200  030222  -- Plaice (Pleuronectes platessa)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03022300  030223  -- Sole (Solea spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03022400  030224  -- Turbot (Psetta maxima)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03022900  030229  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03023100  030231  -- Albacore or longfinned tuna (Thunnus alalunga)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03023200  030232  -- Yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03023300  030233  -- Skipjack or stripe-bellied bonito  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03023400  030234  -- Bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03023500   030235  -- Atlantic and Pacific bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus, Thunnus orientalis)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03023600  030236  -- Southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03024100  030241  -- Herring (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  03024200  030242  -- Anchovies (Engraulis spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03024300   030243  -- Sardines (Sardina pilchardus, Sardinops spp.), sardinella (Sardinella spp.), brisling or sprats (Sprattus sprattus)   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   03024400   030244  -- Mackerel (Scomber scombrus, Scomber australasicus, Scomber japonicus)   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03024500  030245  -- Jack and horse mackerel (Trachurus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03024600  030246  -- Cobia (Rachycentron canadum)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03024700  030247  -- Swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03025100  030251  -- Cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03025200  030252  -- Haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03025300  030253  -- Coalfish (Pollachius virens)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03025400  030254  -- Hake (Merluccius spp., Urophycis spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%      Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  03025500  030255  -- Alaska pollack (Theragra chalcogramma)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03025600   030256  -- Blue whiting (Micromesistius poutassou, Micromesistius australis)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03025900  030259  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03027100  030271  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03027200   030272  -- Catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%    03027300    030273  -- Carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus)    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  03027400  030274  -- Eels (Anguilla spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03027900  030279  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03028100  030281  -- Dogfish and other sharks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  03028200  030282  -- Rays and skates (Rajidae)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03028300  030283  -- Toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03028400  030284  -- Sea bass (Dicentrarchus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03028500  030285  -- Sea bream (Sparidae)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03028900  030289  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03029000  030290  - Livers and roes  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03031100  030311  -- Sockeye salmon (red salmon) (Oncorhynchus nerka)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     03031200     030312  -- Other Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou and Oncorhynchus rhodurus)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%   03031300   030313  -- Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and Danube salmon (Hucho hucho)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5     03031400     030314  -- Trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  03031900  030319  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03032300  030323  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03032400   030324  -- Catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%    03032500    030325  -- Carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus)    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  03032600  030326  -- Eels (Anguilla spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03032900  030329  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5   03033100   030331  -- Halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides, Hippoglossus hippoglossus, Hippoglossus stenolepis)   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03033200  030332  -- Plaice (Pleuronectes platessa)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03033300  030333  -- Sole (Solea spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03033400  030334  -- Turbot (Psetta maxima)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03033900  030339  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03034100  030341  -- Albacore or longfinned tuna (Thunnus alalunga)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03034200  030342  -- Yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03034300  030343  -- Skipjack or stripe-bellied bonito  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03034400  030344  -- Bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03034500   030345  -- Atlantic and Pacific bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus, Thunnus orientalis)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03034600  030346  -- Southern bluefin tuna  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      (Thunnus maccoyii)    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          03034900  030349  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03035100  030351  -- Herring (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03035300   030353  -- Sardines (Sardina pilchardus, Sardinops spp.), sardinella (Sardinella spp.), brisling or sprats (Sprattus sprattus)   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   03035400   030354  -- Mackerel (Scomber scombrus, Scomber australasicus, Scomber japonicus)   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03035500  030355  -- Jack and horse mackerel (Trachurus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03035600  030356  -- Cobia (Rachycentron canadum)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03035700  030357  -- Swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03036300  030363  -- Cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03036400  030364  -- Haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03036500  030365  -- Coalfish (Pollachius virens)  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          03036600  030366  -- Hake (Merluccius spp., Urophycis spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03036700  030367  -- Alaska pollack (Theragra chalcogramma)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03036800   030368  -- Blue whiting (Micromesistius poutassou, Micromesistius australis)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03036900  030369  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03038100  030381  -- Dogfish and other sharks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03038200  030382  -- Rays and skates (Rajidae)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03038300  030383  -- Toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03038400  030384  -- Sea bass (Dicentrarchus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03038900  030389  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03039000  030390  - Livers and roes  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03052000  030520  - Livers and roes of fish, dried, smoked, salted or in brine  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5       03054100       030541  -- Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou and Oncorhynchus rhodurus), Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and Danube salmon (Hucho hucho)       25%      23.8 %      22.5 %      21.3 %      20.0 %      17.5 %      16.3 %      15.0 %      13.8 %      12.5 %      10.0 %       7.5%       5.0%       2.5%       0.0%  03054200  030542  -- Herring (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03055100  030551  -- Cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03056100  030561  -- Herring (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03056200  030562  -- Cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03056300  030563  -- Anchovies (Engraulis spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03061100   030611  -- Rock lobster and other sea crawfish (Palinurus spp., Panulirus spp., Jasus spp.)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  03061200  030612  -- Lobsters (Homarus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03061400  030614  -- Crabs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03061500  030615  -- Norway lobsters (Nephrops norvegicus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03061600   030616  -- Cold-water shrimps and prawns (Pandalus spp., Crangon crangon)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03061700  030617  -- Other shrimps and prawns  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03061900   030619  -- Other, including flours, meals and pellets of crustaceans, fit for human consumption   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   03062100   030621  -- Rock lobster and other sea crawfish (Palinurus spp., Panulirus spp., Jasus spp.)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03062200  030622  -- Lobsters (Homarus spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03062400  030624  -- Crabs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03062500  030625  -- Norway lobsters (Nephrops norvegicus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5   03062600   030626  -- Cold-water shrimps and prawns (Pandalus spp., Crangon crangon)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03062700  030627  -- Other shrimps and prawns  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   03062900   030629  -- Other, including flours, meals and pellets of crustaceans, fit for human consumption   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  03071100  030711  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03071900  030719  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03072100  030721  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03072900  030729  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03073100  030731  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03073900  030739  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03074100  030741  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03074900  030749  -- Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          03075100  030751  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03075900  030759  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03076000  030760  - Snails, other than sea snails  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03077100  030771  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03077900  030779  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03078100  030781  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03078900  030789  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03079100  030791  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03079900  030799  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03081100  030811  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03081900  030819  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03082100  030821  -- Live, fresh or chilled  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          03082900  030829  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03083000  030830  - Jellyfish (Rhopilema spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  03089000  030890  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  04081100  040811  -- Dried  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  04089100  040891  -- Dried  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   04100000   041000  Edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   05010000   050100  Human hair, unworked, whether or not washed or scoured; waste of human hair   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  05021000  050210  - Pigs', hogs' or boars' bristles and hair and waste thereof  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05029000  050290  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   05040000   050400  Guts, bladders and stomachs of animals (other than fish), whole and pieces thereof,   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      fresh, chilled, frozen, salted, in brine, dried or smoked                                05051000  050510  - Feathers of a kind used for stuffing; down  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05059000  050590  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05061000  050610  - Ossein and bones treated with acid  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05069000  050690  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05071010  050710  --- Elephant tusks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05071020  050710  --- Hippo teeth  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05071030  050710  --- Rhinoceros horns  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05071090  050710  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05079000  050790  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   05080000   050800  Coral and similar materials, unworked or simply prepared but not otherwise worked; shells of molluscs, crustaceans   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      or echinoderms and cuttle- bone, unworked or simply prepared but not cut to shape, powder and waste thereof                                05119190  051191  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  05119990  051199  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  06039000  060390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  06042000  060420  - Fresh  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  06049000  060490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07011000  070110  - Seed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07052100  070521  -- Witloof chicory (Cichorium intybus var. foliosum)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07052900  070529  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07115100  071151  -- Mushrooms of the genus Agaricus  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07123100  071231  -- Mushrooms of the genus Agaricus  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  07123200  071232  -- Wood ears (Auricularia spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07123300  071233  -- Jelly fungi (Tremella spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07123900  071239  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07141000  071410  - Manioc (cassava)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07142000  071420  - Sweet potatoes  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07143000  071430  - Yams (Dioscorea spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07144000  071440  - Taro (Colocasia spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07145000  071450  - Yautia (Xanthosoma spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  07149000  071490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08011100  080111  -- Desiccated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08011200  080112  -- In the inner shell (endocarp)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08011900  080119  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  08012100  080121  -- In shell  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08012200  080122  -- Shelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08021200  080212  -- Shelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08022200  080222  -- Shelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08023100  080231  -- In shell  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08023200  080232  -- Shelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08024100  080241  -- In shell  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08024200  080242  -- Shelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08025100  080251  -- In shell  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08025200  080252  -- Shelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08041000  080410  - Dates  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08042000  080420  - Figs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  08054000  080540  - Grapefruit, including pomelos  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   08055000   080550  - Lemons (Citrus limon, Citrus limonum) and limes (Citrus aurantifolia, Citrus latifolia)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  08061000  080610  - Fresh  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08091000  080910  - Apricots  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08092100  080921  -- Sour cherries (Prunus cerasus)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08092900  080929  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08101000  081010  - Strawberries  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08102000  081020  - Raspberries, blackberries, mulberries and loganberries  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08103000  081030  - Black-, white- or redcurrants and gooseberries  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   08104000   081040  - Cranberries, bilberries and other fruit of the genus Vaccinium   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  08105000  081050  - Kiwifruit  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  08106000  081060  - Durians  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   08112000   081120  - Raspberries, blackberries, mulberries, loganberries, black-, white- or redcurrants and gooseberries   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  08121000  081210  - Cherries  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08129000  081290  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08131000  081310  - Apricots  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08132000  081320  - Prunes  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  08133000  081330  - Apples  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  09030000  090300  Maté  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  09061100  090611  -- Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum Blume)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  09061900  090619  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  09082100  090821  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  09082200  090822  -- Crushed or ground  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  09093100  090931  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  09093200  090932  -- Crushed or ground  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10039000  100390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10071000  100710  - Seed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10079000  100790  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10082100  100821  -- Seed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10082900  100829  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10083000  100830  - Canary seed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10084000  100840  - Fonio (Digitaria spp.)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10085000  100850  - Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  10086000  100860  - Triticale  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  10089000  100890  - Other cereals  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11031900  110319  -- Of other cereals  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11032000  110320  - Pellets  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11042200  110422  -- Of oats  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11042300  110423  -- Of maize (corn)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11043000  110430  - Germ of cereals, whole, rolled, flaked or ground  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11061000  110610  - Of the dried leguminous vegetables of heading 0713  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11062000  110620  - Of sago or of roots or tubers of heading 0714  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  11063000  110630  - Of the products of Chapter 8  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  15089000  150890  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   15100000   151000  Other oils and their fractions, obtained solely from olives, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified,   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      including blends of these oils or fractions with oils or fractions of heading 1509                                15132900  151329  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  15141900  151419  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  15149900  151499  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  15151900  151519  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  15159000  151590  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  15161000  151610  - Animal fats and oils and their fractions  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   16030000   160300  Extracts and juices of meat, fish or crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  16051000  160510  - Crab  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16052100  160521  -- Not in airtight containers  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16052900  160529  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  16053000  160530  - Lobster  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16054000  160540  - Other crustaceans  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055100  160551  -- Oysters  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055200  160552  -- Scallops, including queen scallops  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055300  160553  -- Mussels  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055400  160554  -- Cuttlefish and squid  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055500  160555  -- Octopus  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055600  160556  -- Clams, cockles and arkshells  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055700  160557  -- Abalone  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055800  160558  -- Snails, other than sea snails  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16055900  160559  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16056100  160561  -- Sea cucumbers  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  16056200  160562  -- Sea urchins  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16056300  160563  -- Jellyfish  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  16056900  160569  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  17031000  170310  - Cane molasses  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  17039000  170390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  19043000  190430  - Bulgur wheat  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  20039000  200390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  25233000  252330  - Aluminous cement  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  25241000  252410  - Crocidolite  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  25249000  252490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27101951  271019  ---- Lubricants in liquid form  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27101952  271019  ---- Lubricating greases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  27101954  271019  ---- Batching oils  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27111100  271111  -- Natural gas  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27111200  271112  -- Propane  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27111300  271113  -- Butanes  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27111400  271114  -- Ethylene, propylene, butylene and butadiene  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27111900  271119  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27112100  271121  -- Natural gas  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  27112900  271129  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  28112100  281121  -- Carbon dioxide  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  30069200  300692  -- Waste pharmaceuticals  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  32100090  321000  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  32131000  321310  - Colours in sets  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  32139000  321390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  32159090  321590  ---Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  33062000  330620  - Yarn used to clean between the teeth (dental floss)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  36041000  360410  - Fireworks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  36049000  360490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  36069000  360690  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  38089131  380891  ---- Pyrethrum based  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   38089132   380891  - - - - Containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  38089139  380891  ---- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  38251000  382510  - Municipal waste  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  38252000  382520  - Sewage sludge  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  38253000  382530  - Clinical waste  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  38254100  382541  -- Halogenated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  38254900  382549  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   38255000   382550  - Wastes of metal-pickling liquors, hydraulic fluids, brake fluids and anti-freeze fluids   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  38256100  382561  -- Mainly containing organic constituents  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  38256900  382569  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  38259000  382590  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  39199090  391990  ---Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  39204310  392043  --- Unprinted  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  39204390  392043  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  39204900  392049  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  39206210  392062  --- Unprinted  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          39206290  392062  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  39239090  392390  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   39251000   392510  - Reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers, of a capacity exceeding 300 litres   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   39252000   392520  - Doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   39253000   392530  - Shutters, blinds (including venetian blinds) and similar articles and parts thereof   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  39263000  392630  - Fittings for furniture, coachwork or the like  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  39264000  392640  - Statuettes and other ornamental articles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   40121100   401211  -- Of a kind used on motor cars (including station wagons and racing cars)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  40121200  401212  -- Of a kind used on buses or lorries  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  40121300  401213  -- Of a kind used on aircraft  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          40121900  401219  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  40122000  401220  - Used pneumatic tyres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  40129090  401290  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  40170090  401700  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    42010000    420100  Saddlery and harness for any animal (including traces, leads, knee pads, muzzles, saddle- cloths, saddlebags, dog coats and the like), of any material    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%   42060000   420600  Articles of gut (other than silkworm gut), of goldbeater's skin, of bladders or of tendons   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  43031000  430310  - Articles of apparel and clothing accessories  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  43039000  430390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  43040000  430400  Artificial fur and articles thereof  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  44151000  441510  - Cases, boxes, crates, drums  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      and similar packings; cable- drums    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          44219010  442190  --- Splints for matches  10%  9,5%  8,6%  7,3%  5,8%  4,1%  2,6%  1,6%  0,9%  0,4%  0,2%  0,1%  0,0%  0,0%  0,0%  44219090  442190   --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46012100  460121  -- Of bamboo  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46012200  460122  -- Of rattan  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46012900  460129  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46019200  460192  -- Of bamboo  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46019300  460193  -- Of rattan  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46019400  460194  -- Of other vegetable materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46019900  460199  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46021100  460211  -- Of bamboo  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46021200  460212  -- Of rattan  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  46021900  460219  -- Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          48010090  480100  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   48025500   480255  -- Weighing 40 g/m. or more but not more than 150 g/m., in rolls   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  48041990  480419  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     48044200     480442  -- Bleached uniformly throughout the mass and of which more than 95 % by weight of the total fibre content consists of wood fibres obtained by a chemical process     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  48054000  480540  - Filter paper and paperboard  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  48055000  480550  - Felt paper and paperboard  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   48059200   480592  -- Weighing more than 150 g/m. but less than 225 g/m.   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  48101300  481013  -- In rolls  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  48114900  481149  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     48142000     481420  - Wallpaper and similar wallcoverings, consisting of paper coated or covered, on the face side, with a grained, embossed, coloured, design- printed or otherwise decorated layer of plastics     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  48192090  481920  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   48234000   482340  - Rolls, sheets and dials, printed for self-recording apparatus   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  49119100  491191  -- Pictures, designs and photographs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  49119990  491199  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  50071000  500710  - Fabrics of noil silk  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   50072000   500720  - Other fabrics, containing 85 % or more by weight of silk or of silk waste other than noil silk   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  50079000  500790  - Other fabrics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51111100  511111  -- Of a weight not exceeding 300 g/m.  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51111900  511119  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51112000  511120  - Other, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51113000  511130  - Other, mixed mainly or solely with man-made staple fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51119000  511190  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51121100  511211  -- Of a weight not exceeding 200 g/m.  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51121900  511219  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51122000  511220  - Other, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51123000  511230  - Other, mixed mainly or solely with man-made staple fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51129000  511290  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  51130000  511300  Woven fabrics of coarse animal hair or of horsehair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  52041100  520411  -- Containing 85 % or more by weight of cotton  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52042000  520420  - Put up for retail sale  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52082300  520823  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52114100  521141  -- Plain weave  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52121100  521211  -- Unbleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52121300  521213  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52121400  521214  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52122100  521221  -- Unbleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52122200  521222  -- Bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  52122300  521223  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  53091100  530911  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  53091900  530919  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  53092100  530921  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  53092900  530929  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  53101000  531010  - Unbleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  53109000  531090  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   53110000   531100  Woven fabrics of other vegetable textile fibres; woven fabrics of paper yarn   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  54011000  540110  - Of synthetic filaments  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  54012000  540120  - Of artificial filaments  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  54079400  540794  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   54081000   540810  - Woven fabrics obtained from high-tenacity yarn of viscose rayon   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  54082100  540821  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  54082200  540822  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  54082300  540823  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  54082400  540824  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  54083100  540831  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  54083200  540832  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  54083300  540833  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  55081000  550810  - Of synthetic staple fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  55082000  550820  - Of artificial staple fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  55163300  551633  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  55164300  551643  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  55169100  551691  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  55169200  551692  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  55169300  551693  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  56013000  560130  - Textile flock and dust and mill neps  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  56021000  560210  - Needleloom felt and stitch- bonded fibre fabrics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  56022100  560221  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  56022900  560229  -- Of other textile materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  56074100  560741  -- Binder or baler twine  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   57021000   570210  - - woven rugs   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  57022000  570220  - Floor coverings of coconut fibres (coir)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  57023100  570231  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  57023200  570232  -- Of man-made textile materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  57023900  570239  -- Of other textile materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  57024100  570241  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  57024200  570242  -- Of man-made textile  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      materials    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          57041000  570410  - Tiles, having a maximum surface area of 0,3 m.  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58011000  580110  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58012100  580121  -- Uncut weft pile fabrics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58013100  580131  -- Uncut weft pile fabrics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58013200  580132  -- Cut corduroy  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58023000  580230  - Tufted textile fabrics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58043000  580430  - Handmade lace  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     58050000     580500  Hand-woven tapestries of the type Gobelins, Flanders, Aubusson, Beauvais and the like, and needle-worked tapestries (for example, petit point, cross stitch), whether or not made up     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  58081000  580810  - Braids, in the piece  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5     58090000     580900  Woven fabrics of metal thread and woven fabrics of metallised yarn of heading 5605, of a kind used in apparel, as furnishing fabrics or for similar purposes, not elsewhere specified or included     25%     23.8 %     22.5 %     21.3 %     20.0 %     17.5 %     16.3 %     15.0 %     13.8 %     12.5 %     10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  58101000  581010  - Embroidery without visible ground  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58109100  581091  -- Of cotton  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58109200  581092  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  58109900  581099  -- Of other textile materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  59041000  590410  - Linoleum  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  59049000  590490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  59050000  590500  Textile wall coverings  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  59061000  590610  - Adhesive tape of a width not exceeding 20 cm  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  59069100  590691  -- Knitted or crocheted  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  59069900  590699  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    59070000    590700  Textile fabrics otherwise impregnated, coated or covered; painted canvas being theatrical scenery, studio backcloths or the like    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%   59090000   590900  Textile hosepiping and similar textile tubing, with or without lining, armour or accessories of other materials   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%    59100000    591000  Transmission or conveyor belts or belting, of textile material, whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with plastics, or reinforced with metal or other material    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  60011000  600110  -  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60012200  600122  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60012900  600129  -- Of other textile materials  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          60019200  600192  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   60024000   600240  - Containing by weight 5 % or more of elastomeric yarn, but not containing rubber thread   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  60029000  600290  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60031000  600310  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60032000  600320  - Of cotton  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60033000  600330  - Of synthetic fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60034000  600340  - Of artificial fibres  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60039000  600390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   60041000   600410  - Containing by weight 5 % or more of elastomeric yarn, but not containing rubber thread   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  60049000  600490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60052100  600521  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          60052200  600522  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60052300  600523  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60052400  600524  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60053100  600531  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60053200  600532  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60053300  600533  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60053400  600534  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60054100  600541  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60054200  600542  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60054300  600543  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60054400  600544  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60059000  600590  - Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          60061000  600610  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60062100  600621  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60062200  600622  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60062300  600623  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60062400  600624  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60063100  600631  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60063200  600632  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60063300  600633  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60063400  600634  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60064100  600641  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60064200  600642  -- Dyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60064300  600643  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          60064400  600644  -- Printed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  60069000  600690  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  61101100  611011  -- Of wool  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  61101200  611012  -- Of Kashmir (cashmere) goats  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  61101900  611019  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   65040000   650400  Hats and other headgear, plaited or made by assembling strips of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     65050000     650500  Hats and other headgear, knitted or crocheted, or made up from lace, felt or other textile fabric, in the piece (but not in strips), whether or not lined or trimmed; hairnets of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed     25%     23.8 %     22.5 %     21.3 %     20.0 %     17.5 %     16.3 %     15.0 %     13.8 %     12.5 %     10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  65069100  650691  -- Of rubber or of plastics  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          65069900  650699  -- Of other materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  66019100  660191  -- Having a telescopic shaft  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  66019900  660199  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  66020000  660200  Walking sticks, seat-sticks, whips, riding-crops and the like  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     67010000     670100  Skins and other parts of birds with their feathers or down, feathers, parts of feathers, down and articles thereof (other than goods of heading 0505 and worked quills and scapes)     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  67021000  670210  - Of plastics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  67029000  670290  - Of other materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   67030000   670300  Human hair, dressed, thinned, bleached or otherwise worked; wool or other animal hair or other textile materials,   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      prepared for use in making wigs or the like                                67041100  670411  -- Complete wigs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  67041900  670419  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  67042000  670420  - Of human hair  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  67049000  670490  - Of other materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   68010000   680100  Setts, curbstones and flagstones, of natural stone (except slate)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  68022100  680221  -- Marble, travertine and alabaster  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68022300  680223  -- Granite  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68022900  680229  -- Other stone  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68029100  680291  -- Marble, travertine and alabaster  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68029200  680292  -- Other calcareous stone  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68029300  680293  -- Granite  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          68029900  680299  -- Other stone  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68030000  680300  Worked slate and articles of slate or of agglomerated slate  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68041000  680410  - Millstones and grindstones for milling, grinding or pulping  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68043000  680430  - Hand sharpening or polishing stones  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68051000  680510  - On a base of woven textile fabric only  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68053000  680530  - On a base of other materials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   68061000   680610  - Slag-wool, rock-wool and similar mineral wools (including intermixtures thereof), in bulk, sheets or rolls   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%    68062000    680620  - Exfoliated vermiculite, expanded clays, foamed slag and similar expanded mineral materials (including intermixtures thereof)    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  68091100  680911  -- Faced or reinforced with paper or paperboard only  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  68091900  680919  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68099000  680990  - Other articles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68101100  681011  -- Building blocks and bricks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68101900  681019  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   68109100   681091  -- Prefabricated structural components for building or civil engineering   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  68109990  681099  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68114000  681140  - Containing asbestos  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68118100  681181  -- Corrugated sheets  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68118200  681182  -- Other sheets, panels, tiles and similar articles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68118900  681189  -- Other articles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68129200  681292  -- Paper, millboard and felt  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68129300  681293  -- Compressed asbestos fibre  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      jointing, in sheets or rolls    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          68129900  681299  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   68141000   681410  - Plates, sheets and strips of agglomerated or reconstituted mica, whether or not on a support   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  68149000  681490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68151000  681510  - Non-electrical articles of graphite or other carbon  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68152000  681520  - Articles of peat  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  68159100  681591  -- Containing magnesite, dolomite or chromite  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  69041000  690410  - Building bricks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  69131000  691310  - Of porcelain or china  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  69139000  691390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   70181000   701810  - Glass beads, imitation pearls, imitation precious or semi- precious stones and similar   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      glass smallwares                                70182000  701820  - Glass microspheres not exceeding 1 mm in diameter  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  70200099  702000  ---- Other  10%  9,5%  8,6%  7,3%  5,8%  4,1%  2,6%  1,6%  0,9%  0,4%  0,2%  0,1%  0,0%  0,0%  0,0%  71011000  710110  - Natural pearls  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71012100  710121  -- Unworked  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71012200  710122  -- Worked  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71021000  710210  - Unsorted  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71022100  710221  -- Unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or bruted  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71022900  710229  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71023100  710231  -- Unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or bruted  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71023900  710239  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71031090  710310  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71039100  710391  -- Rubies, sapphires and emeralds  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  71039990  710399  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71041000  710410  - Piezoelectric quartz  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71042000  710420  - Other, unworked or simply sawn or roughly shaped  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71049000  710490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71051000  710510  - Of diamonds  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71059000  710590  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71061000  710610  - Powder  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71069100  710691  -- Unwrought  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71069200  710692  -- Semi-manufactured  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   71070000   710700  Base metals clad with silver, not further worked than semi- manufactured   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  71081100  710811  -- Powder  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71081200  710812  -- Other unwrought forms  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          71081300  710813  -- Other semi-manufactured forms  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   71090000   710900  Base metals or silver, clad with gold, not further worked than semi-manufactured   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  71101100  711011  -- Unwrought or in powder form  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71101900  711019  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71102100  711021  -- Unwrought or in powder form  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71102900  711029  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71103100  711031  -- Unwrought or in powder form  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71103900  711039  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71104100  711041  -- Unwrought or in powder form  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71104900  711049  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71110000  711100  Base metals, silver or gold, clad with platinum, not further  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      worked than semi- manufactured                                 71123000   711230  - Ash containing precious metal or precious-metal compounds   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   71129100   711291  -- Of gold, including metal clad with gold but excluding sweepings containing other precious metals   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%    71129200    711292  -- Of platinum, including metal clad with platinum but excluding sweepings containing other precious metals    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  71129900  711299  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   71131100   711311  -- Of silver, whether or not plated or clad with other precious metal   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   71131900   711319  -- Of other precious metal, whether or not plated or clad with precious metal   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  71132000  711320  - Of base metal clad with precious metal  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5   71141100   711411  -- Of silver, whether or not plated or clad with other precious metal   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   71141900   711419  -- Of other precious metal, whether or not plated or clad with precious metal   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  71142000  711420  - Of base metal clad with precious metal  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71151000  711510  - Catalysts in the form of wire cloth or grill, of platinum  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71159000  711590  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71161000  711610  - Of natural or cultured pearls  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   71162000   711620  - Of precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  71171100  711711  -- Cuff links and studs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71171900  711719  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71179000  711790  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  71181000  711810  - Coin (other than gold coin),  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      not being legal tender    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          72102000  721020  - Plated or coated with lead, including terne-plate  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  72106900  721069  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  72112900  721129  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73030000  730300  Tubes, pipes and hollow profiles, of cast iron  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   73063000   730630  - Other, welded, of circular cross-section, of iron or non- alloy steel   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  73064000  730640  - Other, welded, of circular cross-section, of stainless steel  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   73065000   730650  - Other, welded, of circular cross-section, of other alloy steel   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  73066100  730661  -- Of square or rectangular cross-section  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73066900  730669  -- Of other non-circular cross- section  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73071100  730711  -- Of non-malleable cast iron  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73072100  730721  -- Flanges  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          73072300  730723  -- Butt welding fittings  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73072900  730729  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73079100  730791  -- Flanges  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73079300  730793  -- Butt welding fittings  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73101000  731010  - Of a capacity of 50 l or more  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73102990  731029  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73141200  731412  -- Endless bands for machinery, of stainless steel  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73141400  731414  -- Other woven cloth, of stainless steel  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    73142000    731420  - Grill, netting and fencing, welded at the intersection, of wire with a maximum cross- sectional dimension of 3 mm or more and having a mesh size of 100 cm. or more    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  73143100  731431  -- Plated or coated with zinc  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          73143900  731439  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73144100  731441  -- Plated or coated with zinc  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73144200  731442  -- Coated with plastics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73145000  731450  - Expanded metal  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73194000  731940  - Safety pins and other pins  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73199000  731990  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73202000  732020  - Helical springs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73209000  732090  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73211100  732111  -- For gas fuel or for both gas and other fuels  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73211900  732119  -- Other, including appliances for solid fuel  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73219000  732190  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73231000  732310  - Iron or steel wool; pot  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          73239100  732391  -- Of cast iron, not enamelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73239200  732392  -- Of cast iron, enamelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73239300  732393  -- Of stainless steel  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73241000  732410  - Sinks and washbasins, of stainless steel  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73242100  732421  -- Of cast iron, whether or not enamelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73242900  732429  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73249000  732490  - Other, including parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  73262000  732620  - Articles of iron or steel wire  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74111000  741110  - Of refined copper  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74112100  741121  -- Of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74112200  741122  -- Of copper-nickel base alloys  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      (cupro-nickel) or copper- nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel silver)    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          74112900  741129  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74121000  741210  - Of refined copper  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74122000  741220  - Of copper alloys  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74130010  741300  --- Cables  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74151000  741510  - Nails and tacks, drawing pins, staples and similar articles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74152100  741521  -- Washers (including spring washers)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74152900  741529  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74153300  741533  -- Screws; bolts and nuts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74153900  741539  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   74181000   741810  - Table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof; pot scourers and   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like                                74182000  741820  - Sanitary ware and parts thereof  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74191000  741910  - Chain and parts thereof  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74199100  741991  -- Cast, moulded, stamped or forged, but not further worked  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  74199900  741999  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  75071100  750711  -- Of nickel, not alloyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  75071200  750712  -- Of nickel alloys  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  75072000  750720  - Tube or pipe fittings  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  75081000  750810  - Cloth, grill and netting, of nickel wire  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  75089000  750890  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  76041000  760410  - Of aluminium, not alloyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  76042100  760421  -- Hollow profiles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  76061200  760612  -- Of aluminium alloys  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  76069200  760692  -- Of aluminium alloys  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  76081000  760810  - Of aluminium, not alloyed  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  76152000  761520  - Sanitary ware and parts thereof  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    76161000    761610  - Nails, tacks, staples (other than those of heading 8305), screws, bolts, nuts, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter pins, washers and similar articles    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  76169100  761691  -- Cloth, grill, netting and fencing, of aluminium wire  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   82142000   821420  - Manicure or pedicure sets and instruments (including nail files)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  82149000  821490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83012000  830120  - Locks of a kind used for motor vehicles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83013000  830130  - Locks of a kind used for  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      furniture    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          83014000  830140  - Other locks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83015000  830150  - Clasps and frames with clasps, incorporating locks  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83017000  830170  - Keys presented separately  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83025000  830250  - Hat-racks, hat-pegs, brackets and similar fixtures  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83026000  830260  - Automatic door closers  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    83030000    830300  Armoured or reinforced safes, strongboxes and doors and safe deposit lockers for strong- rooms, cash or deed boxes and the like, of base metal    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%     83040000     830400  Filing cabinets, card-index cabinets, paper trays, paper rests, pen trays, office-stamp stands and similar office or desk equipment, of base metal, other than office furniture of heading 9403     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  83061000  830610  - Bells, gongs and the like  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          83062100  830621  -- Plated with precious metal  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83062900  830629  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  83063000  830630  - Photograph, picture or similar frames; mirrors  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   84145100   841451  -- Table, floor, wall, window, ceiling or roof fans, with a self- contained electric motor of an output not exceeding 125 W   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  84145900  841459  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   84146000   841460  - Hoods having a maximum horizontal side not exceeding 120 cm   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  84148010  841480  --- Fixed compressors  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84148090  841480  --- other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84151000  841510  - Window or wall types, self- -  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84152000  841520  - Of a kind used for persons, in motor vehicles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5   84158100   841581  -- Incorporating a refrigerating unit and a valve for reversal of the cooling/heat cycle (reversible heat pumps)   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  84158200  841582  -- Other, incorporating a refrigerating unit  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84158300  841583  -- Not incorporating a refrigerating unit  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   84181000   841810  - Combined refrigerator- freezers, fitted with separate external doors   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  84182100  841821  -- Compression-type  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84182900  841829  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   84183000   841830  - Freezers of the chest type, not exceeding 800 litres capacity   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   84184000   841840  - Freezers of the upright type, not exceeding 900 litres capacity   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  84186190  841861  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84186990  841869  --- Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          84221100  842211  -- Of the household type  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   84331100   843311  -- Powered, with the cutting device rotating in a horizontal plane   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  84331900  843319  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84501190  845011  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84501290  845012  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84501990  845019  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  84502090  845020  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85072000  850720  - Other lead-acid accumulators  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85073000  850730  - Nickel-cadmium  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85074000  850740  - Nickel-iron  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85075000  850750  - Nickel-metal hydride  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  85076000  850760  - Lithium-ion  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85078000  850780  - Other accumulators  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85081100   850811  -- Of a power not exceeding 1500 W and having a dust bag or other receptacle capacity not exceeding 20 l   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85081900  850819  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85086000  850860  - Other vacuum cleaners  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85087000  850870  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85094000   850940  - Food grinders and mixers; fruit or vegetable juice extractors   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85098000  850980  - Other appliances  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85099000  850990  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85101000  851010  - Shavers  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85102000  851020  - Hair clippers  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          85103000  851030  - Hair-removing appliances  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85109000  851090  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85161000   851610  - Electric instantaneous or storage water heaters and immersion heaters   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85162100  851621  -- Storage heating radiators  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85162900  851629  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85181000  851810  - Microphones and stands therefor  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85182100  851821  -- Single loudspeakers, mounted in their enclosures  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85182200   851822  -- Multiple loudspeakers, mounted in the same enclosure   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85182900  851829  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85183000   851830  - Headphones and earphones, whether or not combined with a microphone, and sets   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      consisting of a microphone and one or more loudspeakers                                85184000  851840  - Audio-frequency electric amplifiers  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85185000  851850  - Electric sound amplifier sets  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85189000  851890  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85192000   851920  - Apparatus operated by coins, banknotes, bank cards, tokens or by other means of payment   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85193000  851930  - Turntables (record-decks)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85195000  851950  - Telephone answering machines  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85198100  851981  -- Using magnetic, optical or semiconductor media  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85198900  851989  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85211000  852110  - Magnetic tape-type  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85219000  852190  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85221000  852210  - Pick-up cartridges  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          85229000  852290  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85232190  852321  --- recorded  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85232990  852329  --- recorded  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85234100  852341  -- Unrecorded  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85234900  852349  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85238090  852380  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85258000   852580  - Television cameras, digital cameras and video camera recorders   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85271200  852712  -- Pocket-size radio cassette players  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85271300   852713  -- Other apparatus combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85271900  852719  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85272100  852721  -- Combined with sound  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      recording or reproducing apparatus    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          85272900  852729  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85279100   852791  -- Combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   85279200   852792  -- Not combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus but combined with a clock   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85279900  852799  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85284900  852849  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85285990  852859  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85286900  852869  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85287100  852871  -- Not designed to incorporate a video display or screen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85291000   852910  - Aerials and aerial reflectors of all kinds; parts suitable for use therewith   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  85299000  852990  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85309000  853090  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85391000  853910  - Sealed beam lamp units  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85392100  853921  -- Tungsten halogen  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85392200   853922  -- Other, of a power not exceeding 200 W and for a voltage exceeding 100 V   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85392900  853929  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85393100  853931  -- Fluorescent, hot cathode  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85393200  853932  -- Mercury or sodium vapour lamps; metal halide lamps  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85393900  853939  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85394100  853941  -- Arc lamps  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85394900  853949  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85399000  853990  - Parts  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          85441100  854411  -- Of copper  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85441900  854419  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  85442000  854420  - Coaxial cable and other coaxial electric conductors  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   85443000   854430  - Ignition wiring sets and other wiring sets of a kind used in vehicles, aircraft or ships   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  85446000  854460  - Other electric conductors, for a voltage exceeding 1000 V  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    85481000    854810  - Waste and scrap of primary cells, primary batteries and electric accumulators; spent primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric accumulators    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%   87031000   870310  - Vehicles specially designed for travelling on snow; golf cars and similar vehicles   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  87039090  870390  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  87071000  870710  - For the vehicles of  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      heading 8703    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          87150000  871500  Baby carriages and parts thereof  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  89031000  890310  - Inflatable  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  89039100  890391  -- Sailboats, with or without auxiliary motor  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  89039200  890392  -- Motor boats, other than outboard motor boats  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  89039900  890399  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  90064000  900640  - Instant print cameras  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   90065100   900651  -- With a through-the-lens viewfinder (single lens reflex (SLR)), for roll film of a width not exceeding 35 mm   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  90066100  900661  -- Discharge lamp (electronic) flashlight apparatus  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  90066900  900669  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  90069100  900691  -- For cameras  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  90069900  900699  -- Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          91011100  910111  -- With mechanical display only  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91011900  910119  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91012100  910121  -- With automatic winding  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91012900  910129  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91019100  910191  -- Electrically operated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91019900  910199  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91021100  910211  -- With mechanical display only  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91021200  910212  -- With opto-electronic display only  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91021900  910219  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91022100  910221  -- With automatic winding  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91022900  910229  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91029100  910291  -- Electrically operated  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          91029900  910299  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91031000  910310  - Electrically operated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91039000  910390  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   91040000   910400  Instrument panel clocks and clocks of a similar type for vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  91051100  910511  -- Electrically operated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91051900  910519  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91052100  910521  -- Electrically operated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91052900  910529  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91059100  910591  -- Electrically operated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91059900  910599  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91061000  910610  - Time-registers; time-  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      recorders    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          91069000  910690  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   91070000   910700  Time switches, with clock or watch movement or with synchronous motor   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   91081100   910811  -- With mechanical display only or with a device to which a mechanical display can be incorporated   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  91081200  910812  -- With opto-electronic display only  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91081900  910819  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91082000  910820  - With automatic winding  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91089000  910890  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91091000  910910  - Electrically operated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91099000  910990  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91101100  911011  -- Complete movements, unassembled or partly  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      assembled (movement sets)                                91101200  911012  -- Incomplete movements, assembled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91101900  911019  -- Rough movements  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91109000  911090  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91111000  911110  - Cases of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91112000  911120  - Cases of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91118000  911180  - Other cases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91119000  911190  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91122000  911220  - Cases  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91129000  911290  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91131000  911310  - Of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91132000  911320  - Of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91139000  911390  - Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          91141000  911410  - Springs, including hairsprings  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91143000  911430  - Dials  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91144000  911440  - Plates and bridges  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  91149000  911490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   93011000   930110  - Artillery weapons (for example, guns, howitzers and mortars)   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   93012000   930120  - Rocket launchers; flame- throwers; grenade launchers; torpedo tubes and similar projectors   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  93019000  930190  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   93020000   930200  Revolvers and pistols, other than those of heading 9303 or 9304   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  93031000  930310  - Muzzle-loading firearms  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93032000  930320  - Other sporting, hunting or  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      target-shooting shotguns, including combination shotgun-rifles    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          93033000  930330  - Other sporting, hunting or target-shooting rifles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   93040000   930400  Other arms (for example, spring, air or gas guns and pistols, truncheons), excluding those of heading 9307   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  93051000  930510  - Of revolvers or pistols  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93052000  930520  - Of shotguns or rifles of heading 9303  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93059100  930591  -- Of military weapons of heading 9301  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93059900  930599  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93062100  930621  -- Cartridges  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93062900  930629  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93063000  930630  - Other cartridges and parts thereof  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  93070000  930700  Swords, cutlasses, bayonets,  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      lances and similar arms and parts thereof and scabbards and sheaths therefor    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          94011000  940110  - Seats of a kind used for aircraft  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  94015100  940151  -- Of bamboo or rattan  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  94015900  940159  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  94021090  940210  --- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  94049000  940490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     95030000     950300  Tricycles, scooters, pedal cars and similar wheeled toys; dolls' carriages; dolls; other toys; reduced- models and similar recreational models, working or not; puzzles of all kinds     25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %     7.5%     5.0%     2.5%     0.0%  95042000  950420  - Articles and accessories for billiards of all kinds  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95043000  950430  - Other games, operated by coins, banknotes, bank cards,  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      tokens or by any other means of payment, other than automatic bowling alley equipment                                95044000  950440  - Playing cards  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   95045000   950450  - Video game consoles and machines, other than those of subheading 950430   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  95049000  950490  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95051000  950510  - Articles for Christmas festivities  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95059000  950590  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95061100  950611  -- Skis  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95061200  950612  -- Ski-fastenings (ski-bindings)  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95061900  950619  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95062100  950621  -- Sailboards  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95062900  950629  -- Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          95063100  950631  -- Clubs, complete  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95063200  950632  -- Balls  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95063900  950639  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95064000  950640  - Articles and equipment for table tennis  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95065100  950651  -- Lawn-tennis rackets, whether or not strung  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95065900  950659  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95066100  950661  -- Lawn-tennis balls  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95066200  950662  -- Inflatable  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95066900  950669  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   95067000   950670  - Ice skates and roller skates, including skating boots with skates attached   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  95069100  950691  -- Articles and equipment for general physical exercise,  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      gymnastics or athletics                                95069900  950699  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95071000  950710  - Fishing rods  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95072000  950720  - Fish-hooks, whether or not snelled  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95073000  950730  - Fishing reels  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95079000  950790  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95081000  950810  - Travelling circuses and travelling menageries  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  95089000  950890  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96011000  960110  - Worked ivory and articles of ivory  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96019000  960190  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    96020000    960200  Worked vegetable or mineral carving material and articles of these materials; moulded or carved articles of wax, of stearin, of natural gums or    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      natural resins or of modelling pastes, and other moulded or carved articles, not elsewhere specified or included; worked, unhardened gelatin (except gelatin of heading 3503) and articles of unhardened gelatin                                  96031000    960310  - Brooms and brushes, consisting of twigs or other vegetable materials bound together, with or without handles    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  96032900  960329  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   96033000   960330  - Artists' brushes, writing brushes and similar brushes for the application of cosmetics   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%    96034000    960340  - Paint, distemper, varnish or similar brushes (other than brushes of subheading 960330); paint pads and rollers    25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  96035000  960350  - Other brushes constituting  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      parts of machines, appliances or vehicles    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          96040000  960400  Hand sieves and hand riddles  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   96050000   960500  Travel sets for personal toilet, sewing or shoe or clothes cleaning   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  96083000  960830  - Fountain pens, stylograph pens and other pens  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96084000  960840  - Propelling or sliding pencils  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   96085000   960850  - Sets of articles from two or more of the foregoing subheadings   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   96086000   960860  - Refills for ballpoint pens, comprising the ball point and ink-reservoir   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  96089900  960899  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96091000  960910  - Pencils and crayons, with leads encased in a rigid sheath  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96092000  960920  - Pencil leads, black or coloured  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96099000  960990  - Other  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5          %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          96121000  961210  - Ribbons  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96122000  961220  - Ink-pads  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96131000  961310  - Pocket lighters, gas fuelled, non-refillable  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96132000  961320  - Pocket lighters, gas fuelled, refillable  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96138000  961380  - Other lighters  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96139000  961390  - Parts  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   96140000   961400  Smoking pipes (including pipe bowls) and cigar or cigarette holders, and parts thereof   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  96151100  961511  -- Of hard rubber or plastics  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96151900  961519  -- Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96159000  961590  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  96161010  961610  - - - Heads used in the manufacture of sprays.  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5  96161090  961610  - - - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%   96162000   961620  - Powder-puffs and pads for the application of cosmetics or toilet preparations   25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%   96180000   961800  Tailors' dummies and other lay figures; automata and other animated displays used for shop window dressing   25%   23.8 %   22.5 %   21.3 %   20.0 %   17.5 %   16.3 %   15.0 %   13.8 %   12.5 %   10.0 %   7.5%   5.0%   2.5%   0.0%  97011000  970110  - Paintings, drawings and pastels  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  97019000  970190  - Other  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  97020000  970200  Original engravings, prints and lithographs  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  97030000  970300  Original sculptures and statuary, in any material  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%    97040000    970400  Postage or revenue stamps, stamp-postmarks, first-day covers, postal stationery (stamped paper), and the like, used or unused, other than those of heading 4907    25%    23.8 %    22.5 %    21.3 %    20.0 %    17.5 %    16.3 %    15.0 %    13.8 %    12.5 %    10.0 %    7.5%    5.0%    2.5%    0.0%  97050000  970500  Collections and collectors'  25%  23.8  22.5  21.3  20.0  17.5  16.3  15.0  13.8  12.5  10.0  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%     Reduction rate    5%  10%  15%  20%  30%  35%  40%  45%  50%  60%  70%  80%  90%  100%      Year and rate applicable  HS Code, 8 Digits  HS Code, 6 Digits   Description  Duty rate  T0+1 2  T0+1 3  T0+1 4  T0+1 5  T0+1 6  T0+1 7  T0+1 8  T0+1 9  T0+2 0  T0+2 1  T0+2 2  T0+2 3  T0+2 4  T0+2 5      pieces of zoological, botanical, mineralogical, anatomical, historical, archaeological, palaeontological, ethnographic or numismatic interest    %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %          97060000  970600  Antiques of an age exceeding 100 years  25%  23.8 %  22.5 %  21.3 %  20.0 %  17.5 %  16.3 %  15.0 %  13.8 %  12.5 %  10.0 %  7.5%  5.0%  2.5%  0.0%  ANNEX II(D) NUMBER OF TARIFF LINES 1432 HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  01051100  010511  -- Fowls of the species Gallus domesticus  25%  02012000  020120  - Other cuts with bone in  25%  02013000  020130  - Boneless  25%  02022000  020220  - Other cuts with bone in  25%  02023000  020230  - Boneless  25%  02031200  020312  -- Hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, with bone in  25%  02032200  020322  -- Hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, with bone in  25%  02032900  020329  -- Other  25%  02042200  020422  -- Other cuts with bone in  25%  02042300  020423  -- Boneless  25%  02044200  020442  -- Other cuts with bone in  25%  02044300  020443  -- Boneless  25%  02045000  020450  - Meat of goats  25%  02061000  020610  - Of bovine animals, fresh or chilled  25%  02062200  020622  -- Livers  25%  02062900  020629  -- Other  25%  02069000  020690  - Other, frozen  25%  02071100  020711  -- Not cut in pieces, fresh or chilled  25%  02071200  020712  -- Not cut in pieces, frozen  25%  02101100  021011  -- Hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, with bone in  25%  02101200  021012  -- Bellies (streaky) and cuts thereof  25%  02101900  021019  -- Other  25%  02102000  021020  - Meat of bovine animals  25%  03023900  030239  -- Other  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  03043100  030431  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.)  25%  03043200  030432  -- Catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.)  25%  03043300  030433  -- Nile perch (Lates niloticus)  25%  03043900  030439  -- Other  25%   03044100   030441  -- Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou and Oncorhynchus rhodurus), Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and Danube salmon (Hucho hucho)    25%  03044200  030442  -- Trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)   25%  03044300  030443  -- Flat fish (Pleuronectidae, Bothidae, Cynoglossidae, Soleidae, Scophthalmidae and Citharidae)  25%  03044400  030444  -- Fish of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae and Muraenolepididae   25%  03044500  030445  -- Swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  25%  03044600  030446  -- Toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  25%  03044900  030449  -- Other  25%   03045100   030451  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.), catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.), carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), eels (Anguilla spp.), Nile perch (Lates niloticus) and snakeheads (Channa spp.)    25%  03045200  030452  -- Salmonidae  25%  03045300  030453  -- Fish of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae and Muraenolepididae   25%  03045400  030454  -- Swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  25%  03045500  030455  -- Toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  25%  03045900  030459  -- Other  25%  03046100  030461  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.)  25%  03046200  030462  -- Catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.)  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  03046300  030463  -- Nile perch (Lates niloticus)  25%  03046900  030469  -- Other  25%  03047100  030471  -- Cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus)  25%  03047200  030472  -- Haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus)  25%  03047300  030473  -- Coalfish (Pollachius virens)  25%  03047400  030474  -- Hake (Merluccius spp., Urophycis spp.)  25%  03047500  030475  -- Alaska pollack (Theragra chalcogramma)  25%  03047900  030479  -- Other  25%   03048100   030481  -- Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou and Oncorhynchus rhodurus), Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and Danube salmon (Hucho hucho)    25%  03048200  030482  -- Trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)   25%  03048300  030483  -- Flat fish (Pleuronectidae, Bothidae, Cynoglossidae, Soleidae, Scophthalmidae and Citharidae)  25%  03048400  030484  -- Swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  25%  03048500  030485  -- Toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  25%  03048600  030486  -- Herring (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii)  25%  03048700  030487  -- Tuna (of the genus Thunnus), skipjack or stripe-bellied bonito (Euthynnus (Katsuwonus) pelamis)  25%  03048900  030489  -- Other  25%  03049100  030491  -- Swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  25%  03049200  030492  -- Toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  25%   03049300   030493  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.), catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.), carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), eels (Anguilla spp.), Nile perch (Lates niloticus) and snakeheads (Channa spp.)    25%  03049400  030494  -- Alaska pollack (Theragra chalcogramma)  25%  03049500  030495  -- Fish of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae,  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty      Moridae and Muraenolepididae, other than Alaska pollack (Theragra chalcogramma)    03049900  030499  -- Other  25%  03051000  030510  - Flours, meals and pellets of fish, fit for human consumption  25%   03053100   030531  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.), catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.), carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), eels (Anguilla spp.), Nile perch (Lates niloticus) and snakeheads (Channa spp.)    25%  03053200  030532  -- Fish of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae and Muraenolepididae   25%  03053900  030539  -- Other  25%  03054300  030543  -- Trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)   25%   03054400   030544  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.), catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.), carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), eels (Anguilla spp.), Nile perch (Lates niloticus) and snakeheads (Channa spp.)    25%  03054900  030549  -- Other  25%  03055900  030559  -- Other  25%   03056400   030564  -- Tilapia (Oreochromis spp.), catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.), carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), eels (Anguilla spp.), Nile perch (Lates niloticus) and snakeheads (Channa spp.)    25%  03056900  030569  -- Other  25%  03057100  030571  -- Shark fins  25%  03057200  030572  -- Fish heads, tails and maws  25%  03057900  030579  -- Other  25%  04011000  040110  - Of a fat content, by weight, not exceeding 1 %  60%  04012000  040120  - Of a fat content, by weight, exceeding 1 % but not exceeding 6 %  60%  04014000  040140  - Of a fat content, by weight, exceeding 6 % but not exceeding 10 %  60%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  04015000  040150  - Of a fat content, by weight, exceeding 10 %  60%  04021000  040210  - In powder, granules or other solid forms, of a fat content, by weight, not exceeding 1,5 %  60%  04022100  040221  -- Not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  60%  04022900  040229  -- Other  60%  04029100  040291  -- Not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  60%  04029900  040299  -- Other  60%  04031000  040310  - Yogurt  25%  04039000  040390  - Other  25%  04041000  040410  - Whey and modified whey, whether or not concentrated or containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  25%  04049000  040490  - Other  25%  04051000  040510  - Butter  25%  04052000  040520  - Dairy spreads  25%  04059000  040590  - Other  25%  04061000  040610  - Fresh (unripened or uncured) cheese, including whey cheese, and curd  25%  04062000  040620  - Grated or powdered cheese, of all kinds  25%  04063000  040630  - Processed cheese, not grated or powdered  25%  04064000  040640  - Blue-veined cheese and other cheese containing veins produced by Penicillium roqueforti  25%  04069000  040690  - Other cheese  25%  04071100  040711  -- Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus  25%  04071900  040719  -- Other  25%  04072100  040721  -- Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus  25%  04072900  040729  -- Other  25%  04079000  040790  - Other  25%  04081900  040819  -- Other  25%  04089900  040899  -- Other  25%  04090000  040900  Natural honey  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  06031100  060311  -- Roses  25%  06031200  060312  -- Carnations  25%  06031300  060313  -- Orchids  25%  06031400  060314  -- Chrysanthemums  25%  06031500  060315  -- Lilies (Lilium spp.)  25%  06031900  060319  -- Other  25%  07019000  070190  - Other  25%  07020000  070200  Tomatoes, fresh or chilled  25%  07031000  070310  - Onions and shallots  25%  07032000  070320  - Garlic  25%  07039000  070390  - Leeks and other alliaceous vegetables  25%  07041000  070410  - Cauliflowers and headed broccoli  25%  07042000  070420  - Brussels sprouts  25%  07049000  070490  - Other  25%  07051100  070511  -- Cabbage lettuce (head lettuce)  25%  07051900  070519  -- Other  25%  07061000  070610  - Carrots and turnips  25%  07069000  070690  - Other  25%  07070000  070700  Cucumbers and gherkins, fresh or chilled  25%  07081000  070810  - Peas (Pisum sativum)  25%  07082000  070820  - Beans (Vigna spp., Phaseolus spp.)  25%  07089000  070890  - Other leguminous vegetables  25%  07092000  070920  - Asparagus  25%  07093000  070930  - Aubergines (eggplants)  25%  07094000  070940  - Celery other than celeriac  25%  07095100  070951  -- Mushrooms of the genus Agaricus  25%   HS  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  07095900  070959  -- Other  25%  07096000  070960  - Fruits of the genus Capsicum or of the genus Pimenta  25%  07097000  070970  - Spinach, New Zealand spinach and orache spinach (garden spinach)  25%  07099100  070991  -- Globe artichokes  25%  07099200  070992  -- Olives  25%  07099300  070993  -- Pumpkins, squash and gourds (Cucurbita spp.)  25%  07099900  070999  -- Other  25%  07101000  071010  - Potatoes  25%  07102100  071021  -- Peas (Pisum sativum)  25%  07102200  071022  -- Beans (Vigna spp., Phaseolus spp.)  25%  07102900  071029  -- Other  25%  07103000  071030  - Spinach, New Zealand spinach and orache spinach (garden spinach)  25%  07104000  071040  - Sweetcorn  25%  07108000  071080  - Other vegetables  25%  07109000  071090  - Mixtures of vegetables  25%  07112000  071120  - Olives  25%  07114000  071140  - Cucumbers and gherkins  25%  07115900  071159  -- Other  25%  07119000  071190  - Other vegetables; mixtures of vegetables  25%  07122000  071220  - Onions  25%  07129000  071290  - Other vegetables; mixtures of vegetables  25%  07131000  071310  - Peas (Pisum sativum)  25%  07132000  071320  - Chickpeas (garbanzos)  25%  07133100  071331  -- Beans of the species Vigna mungo (L.) Hepper or Vigna radiata (L.) Wilczek  25%  07133200  071332  -- Small red (Adzuki) beans (Phaseolus or Vigna angularis)  25%  07133300  071333  -- Kidney beans, including white pea beans (Phaseolus vulgaris)  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  07133400  071334  -- Bambara beans (Vigna subterranea or Voandzeia subterranea)  25%  07133500  071335  -- Cow peas (Vigna unguiculata)  25%  07133900  071339  -- Other  25%  07134000  071340  - Lentils  25%  07135000  071350  - Broad beans (Vicia faba var. major) and horse beans (Vicia faba var. equina, Vicia faba var. minor)  25%  07136000  071360  - Pigeon peas (Cajanus cajan)  25%  07139000  071390  - Other  25%  08013100  080131  -- In shell  25%  08013200  080132  -- Shelled  25%  08026100  080261  -- In shell  25%  08026200  080262  -- Shelled  25%  08027000  080270  - Kola nuts (Cola spp.)  25%  08028000  080280  - Areca nuts  25%  08029000  080290  - Other  25%  08031000  080310  - Plantains  25%  08039000  080390  - Other  25%  08043000  080430  - Pineapples  25%  08044000  080440  - Avocados  25%  08045000  080450  - Guavas, mangoes and mangosteens  25%  08051000  080510  - Oranges  25%  08052000  080520  - Mandarins (including tangerines and satsumas); clementines, wilkings and similar citrus hybrids  25%  08059000  080590  - Other  25%  08062000  080620  - Dried  25%  08071100  080711  -- Watermelons  25%  08071900  080719  -- Other  25%  08072000  080720  - Papaws (papayas)  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  08081000  080810  - Apples  25%  08083000  080830  - Pears  25%  08084000  080840  - Quinces  25%  08093000  080930  - Peaches, including nectarines  25%  08094000  080940  - Plums and sloes  25%  08107000  081070  - Persimmons  25%  08109000  081090  - Other  25%  08111000  081110  - Strawberries  25%  08119000  081190  - Other  25%  08134000  081340  - Other fruit  25%  08135000  081350  - Mixtures of nuts or dried fruits of this chapter  25%  08140000  081400  Peel of citrus fruit or melons (including watermelons), fresh, frozen, dried or provisionally preserved in brine, in sulphur water or in other preservative solutions   25%  09011100  090111  -- Not decaffeinated  25%  09011200  090112  -- Decaffeinated  25%  09012100  090121  -- Not decaffeinated  25%  09012200  090122  -- Decaffeinated  25%  09019000  090190  - Other  25%  09021000  090210  - Green tea (not fermented) in immediate packings of a content not exceeding 3 kg  25%  09022000  090220  - Other green tea (not fermented)  25%  09023000  090230  - Black tea (fermented) and partly fermented tea, in immediate packings of a content not exceeding 3 kg  25%  09024000  090240  - Other black tea (fermented) and other partly fermented tea  25%  09041100  090411  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09041200  090412  -- Crushed or ground  25%  09042100  090421  -- Dried, neither crushed nor ground  25%  09042200  090422  -- Crushed or ground  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  09051000  090510  - Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09052000  090520  - Crushed or ground  25%  09062000  090620  - Crushed or ground  25%  09071000  090710  - Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09072000  090720  - Crushed or ground  25%  09081100  090811  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09081200  090812  -- Crushed or ground  25%  09083100  090831  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09083200  090832  -- Crushed or ground  25%  09092100  090921  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09092200  090922  -- Crushed or ground  25%  09096100  090961  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09096200  090962  -- Crushed or ground  25%  09101100  091011  -- Neither crushed nor ground  25%  09101200  091012  -- Crushed or ground  25%  09102000  091020  - Saffron  25%  09103000  091030  - Turmeric (curcuma)  25%  09109100  091091  -- Mixtures referred to in note 1(b) to this chapter  25%  09109900  091099  -- Other  25%  10019910  100199  --- Hard Wheat  35%  10019990  100199  --- Other  35%  10051000  100510  - Seed  25%  10059000  100590  - Other  50%  10061000  100610  - Rice in the husk (paddy or rough)  25%  10062000  100620  - Husked (brown) rice  25%  10063000  100630  - Semi-milled or wholly milled rice, whether or not polished or glazed  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  10064000  100640  - Broken rice  25%  10081000  100810  - Buckwheat  25%  11010000  110100  Wheat or meslin flour  60%  11022000  110220  - Maize (corn) flour  50%  11029000  110290  - Other  25%  11031100  110311  -- Of wheat  25%  11031300  110313  -- Of maize (corn)  25%  11041200  110412  -- Of oats  25%  11041900  110419  -- Of other cereals  25%  11042900  110429  -- Of other cereals  25%  11051000  110510  - Flour, meal and powder  25%  11052000  110520  - Flakes, granules and pellets  25%  11071000  110710  - Not roasted  10%  11072000  110720  - Roasted  10%  14049000  140490  - Other  10%  15079000  150790  - Other  25%  15099000  150990  - Other  25%  15119010  151190  --- Palm olein, fractions  10%  15119020  151190  --- Palm stearin, fractions  10%  15119030  151190  --- Palm olein, RBD  25%  15119040  151190  --- Palm stearin, RBD  10%  15119090  151190  --- Other  25%  15121900  151219  -- Other  25%  15122900  151229  -- Other  25%  15131900  151319  -- Other  25%  15152100  151521  -- Crude oil  10%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  15152900  151529  -- Other  25%  15155000  151550  - Sesame oil and its fractions  25%  15162000  151620  - Vegetable fats and oils and their fractions  25%  15171000  151710  - Margarine, excluding liquid margarine  25%  15179000  151790  - Other  25%   15180000   151800  Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their fractions, boiled, oxidised, dehydrated, sulphurised, blown, polymerised by heat in vacuum or in inert gas or otherwise chemically modified, excluding those of heading 1516; inedible mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats or oils or of fractions of different fats or oils of this chapter, not elsewhere specified or included     25%  16010000  160100  Sausages and similar products, of meat, meat offal or blood; food preparations based on these products  25%  16021000  160210  - Homogenised preparations  25%  16022000  160220  - Of liver of any animal  25%  16023100  160231  -- Of turkeys  25%  16023200  160232  -- Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus  25%  16023900  160239  -- Other  25%  16024100  160241  -- Hams and cuts thereof  25%  16024200  160242  -- Shoulders and cuts thereof  25%  16024900  160249  -- Other, including mixtures  25%  16025000  160250  - Of bovine animals  25%  16029000  160290  - Other, including preparations of blood of any animal  25%  16041100  160411  -- Salmon  25%  16041200  160412  -- Herring  25%  16041300  160413  -- Sardines, sardinella and brisling or sprats  25%  16041400  160414  -- Tuna, skipjack and bonito (Sarda spp.)  25%  16041500  160415  -- Mackerel  25%  16041600  160416  -- Anchovies  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  16041700  160417  -- Eels  25%  16041900  160419  -- Other  25%  16042000  160420  - Other prepared or preserved fish  25%  16043100  160431  -- Caviar  25%  16043200  160432  -- Caviar substitutes  25%  17011210  170112  --- Jaggery  35%  17011290  170112  --- Other  100 %  17011310  170113  --- Jaggery  35%  17011390  170113  --- Other  35%  17011410  170114  --- Jaggery  100 %  17011490  170114  --- Other  100 %  17019100  170191  -- Containing added flavouring or colouring matter  100 %  17019910  170199  --- Sugar for industrial use  100 %  17019990  170199  --- Other  100 %  17021100  170211  -- Containing by weight 99 % or more lactose, expressed as anhydrous lactose, calculated on the dry matter  10%  17021900  170219  -- Other  10%  17022000  170220  - Maple sugar and maple syrup  10%  17023000  170230  - Glucose and glucose syrup, not containing fructose or containing in the dry state less than 20 % by weight of fructose   10%  17024000  170240  - Glucose and glucose syrup, containing in the dry state at least 20 % but less than 50 % by weight of fructose,  10%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty      excluding invert sugar    17025000  170250  - Chemically pure fructose  10%  17026000  170260  - Other fructose and fructose syrup, containing in the dry state more than 50 % by weight of fructose, excluding invert sugar   10%  17029000  170290  - Other, including invert sugar and other sugar and sugar syrup blends containing in the dry state 50 % by weight of fructose   10%  17041000  170410  - Chewing gum, whether or not sugar-coated  25%  17049000  170490  - Other  25%  18061000  180610  - Cocoa powder, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  25%  18062000  180620  - Other preparations in blocks, slabs or bars weighing more than 2 kg or in liquid, paste, powder, granular or other bulk form in containers or immediate packings, of a content exceeding 2 kg   25%  18063100  180631  -- Filled  25%  18063200  180632  -- Not filled  25%  18069000  180690  - Other  25%  19011000  190110  - Preparations for infant use, put up for retail sale  25%  19012010  190120  --- Biscuit Powder  10%  19012090  190120  --- Other  25%  19019010  190190  - - - Malt extract  10%  19019090  190190  - - - Other  25%  19021100  190211  -- Containing eggs  25%  19021900  190219  -- Other  25%  19022000  190220  - Stuffed pasta, whether or not cooked or otherwise prepared  25%  19023000  190230  - Other pasta  25%  19024000  190240  - Couscous  25%  19030000  190300  Tapioca and substitutes therefor prepared from starch, in the form of flakes, grains, pearls, siftings or similar forms   25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  19041000  190410  - Prepared foods obtained by the swelling or roasting of cereals or cereal products  25%  19042000  190420  - Prepared foods obtained from unroasted cereal flakes or from mixtures of unroasted cereal flakes and roasted cereal flakes or swelled cereals   25%  19049000  190490  - Other  25%  19051000  190510  - Crispbread  25%  19052000  190520  - Gingerbread and the like  25%  19053100  190531  -- Sweet biscuits  25%  19053290  190532  ---Other:  25%  19054000  190540  - Rusks, toasted bread and similar toasted products  25%  19059090  190590  --- Other  25%  20011000  200110  - Cucumbers and gherkins  25%  20019000  200190  - Other  25%  20021000  200210  - Tomatoes, whole or in pieces  25%  20029000  200290  - Other  25%  20031000  200310  - Mushrooms of the genus Agaricus  25%  20041000  200410  - Potatoes  25%  20049000  200490  - Other vegetables and mixtures of vegetables  25%  20051000  200510  - Homogenised vegetables  25%  20052000  200520  - Potatoes  25%  20054000  200540  - Peas (Pisum sativum)  25%  20055100  200551  -- Beans, shelled  25%  20055900  200559  -- Other  25%  20056000  200560  - Asparagus  25%  20057000  200570  - Olives  25%  20058000  200580  - Sweetcorn (Zea mays var. saccharata)  25%  20059100  200591  -- Bamboo shoots  25%   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty  20059900  200599  -- Other  25%  20060000  200600  Vegetables, fruit, nuts, fruit-peel and other parts of plants, preserved by sugar (drained, glacé or crystallised)  25%  20071000  200710  - Homogenised preparations  25%  20079100  200791  -- Citrus fruit  25%  20079900  200799  -- Other  25%  20081100  200811  -- Groundnuts  25%  20081900  200819  -- Other, including mixtures  25%  20082000  200820  - Pineapples  25%  20083000  200830  - Citrus fruit  25%  20084000  200840  - Pears  25%  20085000  200850  - Apricots  25%  20086000  200860  - Cherries  25%  20087000  200870  - Peaches, including nectarines  25%  20088000  200880  - Strawberries  25%  20089100  200891  -- Palm hearts  25%  20089300  200893  -- Cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon, Vaccinium oxycoccos, Vaccinium vitis-idaea)  25%  20089700  200897  -- Mixtures  25%  20089900  200899  -- Other  25%  20091100  200911  -- Frozen  25%  20091200  200912  -- Not frozen, of a Brix value not exceeding 20  25%  20091900  200919  -- Other  25%  20092100  200921  -- Of a Brix value not exceeding 20  25%  20092900  200929  -- Other  25%  20093100  200931  -- Of a Brix value not exceeding 20  25%  20093900  200939  -- Other  25%  20094100  200941  -- Of a Brix value not exceeding 20  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  20094900  200949  -- Other  25%  20095000  200950  - Tomato juice  25%  20096100  200961  -- Of a Brix value not exceeding 30  25%  20096900  200969  -- Other  25%  20097100  200971  -- Of a Brix value not exceeding 20  25%  20097900  200979  -- Other  25%  20098100  200981  -- Cranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpon, Vaccinium oxycoccos, Vaccinium vitis-idaea) juice  25%  20098900  200989  -- Other  25%  20099000  200990  - Mixtures of juices  25%  21011100  210111  -- Extracts, essences and concentrates  10%  21011200  210112  -- Preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates or with a basis of coffee  25%  21012000  210120  - Extracts, essences and concentrates, of tea or maté, and preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates, or with a basis of tea or maté   25%  21013000  210130  - Roasted chicory and other roasted coffee substitutes, and extracts, essences and concentrates thereof  25%  21021000  210210  - Active yeasts  25%  21022000  210220  - Inactive yeasts; other single-cell micro-organisms, dead  25%  21023000  210230  - Prepared baking powders  25%  21031000  210310  - Soya sauce  25%  21032000  210320  - Tomato ketchup and other tomato sauces  25%  21033000  210330  - Mustard flour and meal and prepared mustard  25%  21039000  210390  - Other  25%  21041000  210410  - Soups and broths and preparations therefor  25%  21042000  210420  - Homogenised composite food preparations  25%  21050000  210500  Ice cream and other edible ice, whether or not containing cocoa  25%  21061000  210610  - Protein concentrates and textured protein substances  10%  21069010  210690  ---- Specially prepared for infants  10%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  21069020  210690  --- Preparations of a kind used in manufacturing of beverages  10%  21069091  210690  ---- Food supplements  25%  21069092  210690  ---- Mineral premix used in fortification  25%  21069099  210690  ---- Other  25%  22011000  220110  - Mineral waters and aerated waters  25%  22019000  220190  - Other  25%  22021000  220210  - Waters, including mineral waters and aerated waters, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter or flavoured   25%  22029000  220290  - Other  25%  22030010  220300  --- Stout and porter  25%  22030090  220300  --- Other  25%  22041000  220410  - Sparkling wine  25%  22042100  220421  -- In containers holding 2 litres or less  25%  22042900  220429  -- Other  25%  22043000  220430  - Other grape must  10%  22051000  220510  - In containers holding 2 litres or less  25%  22059000  220590  - Other  25%  22060010  220600  --- Cider  25%  22060020  220600  --- Opaque beer ( e.g., Kibuku)  25%  22060090  220600  --- Other  25%  22071000  220710  - Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume of 80 % vol or higher  25%  22072000  220720  - Ethyl alcohol and other spirits, denatured, of any strength  25%  22082000  220820  - Spirits obtained by distilling grape wine or grape marc  25%  22083000  220830  - Whiskies  25%  22084000  220840  - Rum and other spirits obtained by distilling fermented sugar-cane products  25%  22085000  220850  - Gin and Geneva  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  22086000  220860  - Vodka  25%  22087000  220870  - Liqueurs and cordials  25%  22089010  220890  --- Distilled Spirits (e.g., Konyagi, Uganda Waragi)  25%  22089090  220890  --- Other  25%  22090000  220900  Vinegar and substitutes for vinegar obtained from acetic acid  25%  23023000  230230  - Of wheat  10%  23091000  230910  - Dog or cat food, put up for retail sale  10%  24011000  240110  - Tobacco, not stemmed/stripped  25%  24012000  240120  - Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed/stripped  25%  24013000  240130  - Tobacco refuse  25%  24021000  240210  - Cigars, cheroots and cigarillos, containing tobacco  25%  24022010  240220  ---Of length not exceeding 72 mm in length including the filter tip  35%  24022090  240220  --- Other  35%  24029000  240290  - Other  25%  24031100  240311  -- Water-pipe tobacco specified in subheading note 1 to this chapter  35%  24031900  240319  -- Other  35%  24039100  240391  --   25%  24039900  240399  -- Other  25%  25010000  250100  Salt (including table salt and denatured salt) and pure sodium chloride, whether or not in aqueous solution or containing added anti-caking or free-flowing agents; sea water   25%  25231000  252310  - Cement clinkers  10%  25232100  252321  -- White cement, whether or not artificially coloured  25%  25232900  252329  -- Other  55%  25239000  252390  - Other hydraulic cements  25%  27121000  271210  - Petroleum jelly  25%  28044000  280440  - Oxygen  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  28111900  281119  -- Other  10%  30069100  300691  -- Appliances identifiable for ostomy use  25%  32081000  320810  - Based on polyesters  25%  32082000  320820  - Based on acrylic or vinyl polymers  25%  32089000  320890  - Other  25%  32091000  320910  - Based on acrylic or vinyl polymers  25%  32099000  320990  - Other  25%  32141000  321410  - Glaziers' putty, grafting putty, resin cements, caulking compounds and other mastics; painters' fillings  25%  32149000  321490  - Other  25%  33030000  330300  Perfumes and toilet waters  25%  33041000  330410  - Lip make-up preparations  25%  33042000  330420  - Eye make-up preparations  25%  33043000  330430  - Manicure or pedicure preparations  25%  33049100  330491  -- Powders, whether or not compressed  25%  33049900  330499  -- Other  25%  33051000  330510  - Shampoos  25%  33052000  330520  - Preparations for permanent waving or straightening  25%  33053000  330530  - Hair lacquers  25%  33059000  330590  - Other  25%  33061000  330610  - Dentifrices  25%  33069000  330690  - Other  25%  33071000  330710  - Pre-shave, shaving or aftershave preparations  25%  33072000  330720  - Personal deodorants and antiperspirants  25%  33073000  330730  - Perfumed bath salts and other bath preparations  25%  33074100  330741  --   25%  33074900  330749  -- Other  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  33079000  330790  - Other  25%  34011100  340111  -- For toilet use (including medicated products)  25%  34011900  340119  -- Other  25%  34012010  340120  --- Noodles for manufacture of toilet soap  25%  34012090  340120  --- Other  25%  34013000  340130  - Organic surface-active products and preparations for washing the skin, in the form of liquid or cream and put up for retail sale, whether or not containing soap   25%  34021100  340211  -- Anionic  10%  34021200  340212  -- Cationic  10%  34021300  340213  -- Non-ionic  25%  34021900  340219  -- Other  25%  34022000  340220  - Preparations put up for retail sale  25%  34029000  340290  - Other  25%  34051000  340510  - Polishes, creams and similar preparations, for footwear or leather  25%  34052000  340520  - Polishes, creams and similar preparations, for the maintenance of wooden furniture, floors or other woodwork  25%  34053000  340530  - Polishes and similar preparations for coachwork, other than metal polishes  25%  34054000  340540  - Scouring pastes and powders and other scouring preparations  25%  34059000  340590  - Other  25%  34060000  340600  Candles, tapers and the like  25%  35052000  350520  - Glues  25%  35061000  350610  - Products suitable for use as glues or adhesives, put up for retail sale as glues or adhesives, not exceeding a net weight of 1 kg   25%  35069100  350691  -- Adhesives based on polymers of headings 3901 to 3913 or on rubber  25%  35069900  350699  -- Other  25%  36050000  360500  Matches, other than pyrotechnic articles of heading 3604  35%  36061000  360610  - Liquid or liquefied-gas fuels in containers of a kind used for filling or refilling cigarette or similar lighters and of a  25%   HS Code, 8  HS  Description  Duty      capacity not exceeding 300 cm.    39051200  390512  -- In aqueous dispersion  10%  39051900  390519  -- Other  10%  39052100  390521  -- In aqueous dispersion  10%  39052900  390529  -- Other  10%  39053000  390530  - Poly(vinyl alcohol), whether or not containing unhydrolysed acetate groups  10%  39059100  390591  -- Copolymers  10%  39059900  390599  -- Other  10%  39061000  390610  - Poly(methyl methacrylate)  10%  39075000  390750  - Alkyd resins  10%  39077000  390770  - Poly(lactic acid)  10%  39079100  390791  -- Unsaturated  10%  39079900  390799  -- Other  10%  39091000  390910  - Urea resins; thiourea resins  10%  39092000  390920  - Melamine resins  10%  39172100  391721  -- Of polymers of ethylene  25%  39172200  391722  -- Of polymers of propylene  25%  39172300  391723  -- Of polymers of vinyl chloride  25%  39172900  391729  -- Of other plastics  25%  39173100  391731  -- Flexible tubes, pipes and hoses, having a minimum burst pressure of 27,6 MPa  25%  39173200  391732  -- Other, not reinforced or otherwise combined with other materials, without fittings  25%  39173300  391733  -- Other, not reinforced or otherwise combined with other materials, with fittings  25%  39173900  391739  -- Other  25%  39174000  391740  - Fittings  25%  39181000  391810  - Of polymers of vinyl chloride  25%  39189000  391890  - Of other plastics  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  39191000  391910  - In rolls of a width not exceeding 20 cm  10%  39201010  392010  --- Unprinted  10%  39201090  392010  --- Other  10%  39202010  392020  --- Unprinted  25%  39202090  392020  --- Other  25%  39205110  392051  --- Unprinted  25%  39205190  392051  --- Other  25%  39205910  392059  --- Unprinted  10%  39205990  392059  --- Other  10%  39206110  392061  --- Unprinted  10%  39206190  392061  --- Other  10%  39206910  392069  --- Unprinted  25%  39206990  392069  --- Other  25%  39207110  392071  --- Unprinted  25%  39207190  392071  --- Other  25%  39207310  392073  --- Unprinted  10%  39207390  392073  --- Other  10%  39207910  392079  --- Unprinted  25%  39207990  392079  --- Other  25%  39209110  392091  --- Unprinted  25%  39209190  392091  --- Other  25%  39209210  392092  --- Unprinted  25%  39209290  392092  --- Other  25%  39209310  392093  --- Unprinted  10%  39209390  392093  --- Other  10%  39209410  392094  --- Unprinted  25%  HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  39209490  392094  --- Other  25%  39209910  392099  --- Unprinted  10%  39209990  392099  --- Other  10%  39211110  392111  --- Unprinted  10%  39211190  392111  --- Other  10%  39211210  392112  --- Unprinted  10%  39211290  392112  --- Other  25%  39211310  392113  --- Unprinted  10%  39211390  392113  --- Other  10%  39211410  392114  --- Unprinted  25%  39211490  392114  --- Other  25%  39211910  392119  --- Unprinted  25%  39211990  392119  --- Other  25%  39219000  392190  - Other  25%  39221000  392210  - Baths, shower-baths, sinks and washbasins  25%  39222000  392220  - Lavatory seats and covers  25%  39229000  392290  - Other  25%  39231000  392310  - Boxes, cases, crates and similar articles  25%  39232100  392321  -- Of polymers of ethylene  25%  39232900  392329  -- Of other plastics  25%  39233000  392330  - Carboys, bottles, flasks and similar articles  25%  39235010  392350  --- Inserts  10%  39235090  392350  --- Other  25%  39241000  392410  - Tableware and kitchenware  25%  39249000  392490  - Other  25%  39259000  392590  - Other  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  39261000  392610  - Office or school supplies  25%  39262000  392620  - Articles of apparel and clothing accessories (including gloves, mittens and mitts)  25%  39269010  392690  --- Floats for fishing nets  10%  39269090  392690  --- Other  10%  40081100  400811  -- Plates, sheets and strip  10%  40082900  400829  -- Other  10%  40111000  401110  - Of a kind used on motor cars (including station wagons and racing cars)  25%  40112010  401120  --- With a rim size below 17 inches  10%  40112020  401120  --- With a rim size of 17 inches and above  10%  40131000  401310  - Of a kind used on motor cars (including station wagons and racing cars), buses or lorries  25%  40139000  401390  - Other  25%  40169100  401691  -- Floor coverings and mats  25%  42021100  420211  -- With outer surface of leather or of composition leather  25%  42021200  420212  -- With outer surface of plastics or of textile materials  25%  42021900  420219  -- Other  25%  42022100  420221  -- With outer surface of leather or of composition leather  25%  42022200  420222  -- With outer surface of plastic sheeting or of textile materials  25%  42022900  420229  -- Other  25%  42023100  420231  -- With outer surface of leather or of composition leather  25%  42023200  420232  -- With outer surface of plastic sheeting or of textile materials  25%  42023900  420239  -- Other  25%  42029100  420291  -- With outer surface of leather or of composition leather  25%  42029200  420292  -- With outer surface of plastic sheeting or of textile materials  25%  42029900  420299  -- Other  25%  42031000  420310  - Articles of apparel  25%  42032100  420321  -- Specially designed for use in sports  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  42032900  420329  -- Other  25%  42033000  420330  - Belts and bandoliers  25%  42034000  420340  - Other clothing accessories  25%  42050000  420500  Other articles of leather or of composition leather  10%  44081000  440810  - Coniferous  25%  44083100  440831  -- Dark red meranti, light red meranti and meranti bakau  25%  44083900  440839  -- Other  25%  44089000  440890  - Other  25%  44091000  440910  - Coniferous  25%  44092100  440921  -- Of bamboo  25%  44092900  440929  -- Other  25%  44101100  441011  -- Particle board  25%  44101200  441012  -- Oriented strand board (OSB)  25%  44101900  441019  -- Other  25%  44109000  441090  - Other  25%  44111200  441112  -- Of a thickness not exceeding 5 mm  25%  44111300  441113  -- Of a thickness exceeding 5 mm but not exceeding 9 mm  25%  44111400  441114  -- Of a thickness exceeding 9 mm  25%  44119200  441192  -- Of a density exceeding 0,8 g/cm.  25%  44119300  441193  -- Of a density exceeding 0,5 g/cm. but not exceeding 0,8 g/cm.  25%  44119400  441194  -- Of a density not exceeding 0,5 g/cm.  25%  44121000  441210  - Of bamboo  25%  44123100  441231  -- With at least one outer ply of tropical wood specified in subheading note 2 to this chapter  25%  44123200  441232  -- Other, with at least one outer ply of non-coniferous wood  25%  44123900  441239  -- Other  25%  44129400  441294  -- Blockboard, laminboard and battenboard  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  44129900  441299  -- Other  25%  44130000  441300  Densified wood, in blocks, plates, strips or profile shapes  25%  44140000  441400  Wooden frames for paintings, photographs, mirrors or similar objects  25%  44152000  441520  - Pallets, box pallets and other load boards; pallet collars  25%  44160000  441600  Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and other coopers' products and parts thereof, of wood, including staves  25%  44170000  441700  Tools, tool bodies, tool handles, broom or brush bodies and handles, of wood; boot or shoe lasts and trees, of wood   25%  44181000  441810  - Windows, French windows and their frames  25%  44182000  441820  - Doors and their frames and thresholds  25%  44184000  441840  - Shuttering for concrete constructional work  25%  44185000  441850  - Shingles and shakes  25%  44186000  441860  - Posts and beams  25%  44187100  441871  -- For mosaic floors  25%  44187200  441872  -- Other, multilayer  25%  44187900  441879  -- Other  25%  44189000  441890  - Other  25%  44190000  441900  Tableware and kitchenware, of wood  25%  44201000  442010  - Statuettes and other ornaments, of wood  25%  44209000  442090  - Other  25%  44211000  442110  - Clothes hangers  25%  45031000  450310  - Corks and stoppers  10%  45039000  450390  - Other  10%  45049000  450490  - Other  10%  46029000  460290  - Other  25%  48025600  480256  -- Weighing 40 g/m. or more but not more than 150 g/m., in sheets with one side not exceeding 435 mm and the other side not exceeding 297 mm in the unfolded state   25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  48025700  480257  -- Other, weighing 40 g/m. or more but not more than 150 g/m.  25%  48025800  480258  -- Weighing more than 150 g/m.  25%  48026100  480261  -- In rolls  25%  48026200  480262  -- In sheets with one side not exceeding 435 mm and the other side not exceeding 297 mm in the unfolded state  25%  48026900  480269  -- Other  10%   48030000   480300  Toilet or facial tissue stock, towel or napkin stock and similar paper of a kind used for household or sanitary purposes, cellulose wadding and webs of cellulose fibres, whether or not creped, crinkled, embossed, perforated, surface-coloured, surface-decorated or printed, in rolls or sheets    10%  48041100  480411  -- Unbleached  25%  48042100  480421  -- Unbleached  25%  48042900  480429  -- Other  25%  48043100  480431  -- Unbleached  25%  48043900  480439  -- Other  25%  48044100  480441  -- Unbleached  25%  48044900  480449  -- Other  25%  48045100  480451  -- Unbleached  25%  48045200  480452  -- Bleached uniformly throughout the mass and of which more than 95 % by weight of the total fibre content consists of wood fibres obtained by a chemical process   25%  48045900  480459  -- Other  25%  48051100  480511  -- Semi-chemical fluting paper  25%  48051200  480512  -- Straw fluting paper  25%  48051900  480519  -- Other  25%  48052400  480524  -- Weighing 150 g/m. or less  25%  48052500  480525  -- Weighing more than 150 g/m.  25%  48053000  480530  - Sulphite wrapping paper  25%  48059100  480591  -- Weighing 150 g/m. or less  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  48059300  480593  -- Weighing 225 g/m. or more  25%  48061010  480610  --- Printed  10%  48061090  480610  --- Other  10%  48070000  480700  Composite paper and paperboard (made by sticking flat layers of paper or paperboard together with an adhesive), not surface-coated or impregnated, whether or not internally reinforced, in rolls or sheets   25%  48081000  480810  - Corrugated paper and paperboard, whether or not perforated  25%  48084000  480840  - Kraft paper, creped or crinkled, whether or not embossed or perforated  25%  48089000  480890  - Other  25%  48099000  480990  - Other  10%  48101400  481014  -- In sheets with one side not exceeding 435 mm and the other side not exceeding 297 mm in the unfolded state  25%  48101900  481019  -- Other  25%  48103100  481031  -- Bleached uniformly throughout the mass and of which more than 95 % by weight of the total fibre content consists of wood fibres obtained by a chemical process, and weighing 150 g/m. or less   10%  48103200  481032  -- Bleached uniformly throughout the mass and of which more than 95 % by weight of the total fibre content consists of wood fibres obtained by a chemical process, and weighing more than 150 g/m.   25%  48103900  481039  -- Other  25%  48109200  481092  -- Multi-ply  25%  48109900  481099  -- Other  25%  48114190  481141  --- Other  10%  48115100  481151  -- Bleached, weighing more than 150 g/m.  25%  48119000  481190  - Other paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding and webs of cellulose fibres  10%  48149000  481490  - Other  25%  48162000  481620  - Self-copy paper  25%  48169000  481690  - Other  25%  48171000  481710  - Envelopes  25%  48172000  481720  - Letter cards, plain postcards and correspondence cards  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  48173000  481730  - Boxes, pouches, wallets and writing compendiums, of paper or paperboard, containing an assortment of paper stationery   25%  48181000  481810  - Toilet paper  25%  48182000  481820  - Handkerchiefs, cleansing or facial tissues and towels  25%  48183000  481830  - Tablecloths and serviettes  25%  48185000  481850  - Articles of apparel and clothing accessories  25%  48189000  481890  - Other  25%  48191000  481910  - Cartons, boxes and cases, of corrugated paper or paperboard  25%  48193000  481930  - Sacks and bags, having a base of a width of 40 cm or more  25%  48194000  481940  - Other sacks and bags, including cones  25%  48195000  481950  - Other packing containers, including record sleeves  25%  48196000  481960  - Box files, letter trays, storage boxes and similar articles, of a kind used in offices, shops or the like  25%  48201000  482010  - Registers, account books, notebooks, order books, receipt books, letter pads, memorandum pads, diaries and similar articles   25%  48202000  482020  - Exercise books  25%  48203000  482030  - Binders (other than book covers), folders and file covers  25%  48204000  482040  - Manifold business forms and interleaved carbon sets  25%  48205000  482050  - Albums for samples or for collections  25%  48209000  482090  - Other  25%  48211010  482110  --- For labelling dry cell batteries  10%  48211090  482110  --- Other  25%  48219000  482190  - Other  10%  48221000  482210  - Of a kind used for winding textile yarn  10%  48229000  482290  - Other  10%  48232000  482320  - Filter paper and paperboard  25%  48236100  482361  -- Of bamboo  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  48236900  482369  -- Other  25%  48237000  482370  - Moulded or pressed articles of paper pulp  25%  48239010  482390  --- Straw wrappers  10%  48239090  482390  --- Other  10%  49090000  490900  Printed or illustrated postcards; printed cards bearing personal greetings, messages or announcements, whether or not illustrated, with or without envelopes or trimmings   25%  49100000  491000  Calendars of any kind, printed, including calendar blocks  25%  49111000  491110  - Trade advertising material, commercial catalogues and the like  25%  52041900  520419  -- Other  25%  52081100  520811  -- Plain weave, weighing not more than 100 g/m.  25%  52081200  520812  -- Plain weave, weighing more than 100 g/m.  25%  52081300  520813  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52081900  520819  -- Other fabrics  25%  52082100  520821  -- Plain weave, weighing not more than 100 g/m.  25%  52082200  520822  -- Plain weave, weighing more than 100 g/m.  25%  52082900  520829  -- Other fabrics  25%  52083100  520831  -- Plain weave, weighing not more than 100 g/m.  25%  52083200  520832  -- Plain weave, weighing more than 100 g/m.  25%  52083300  520833  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52083900  520839  -- Other fabrics  25%  52084100  520841  -- Plain weave, weighing not more than 100 g/m.  25%  52084200  520842  -- Plain weave, weighing more than 100 g/m.  25%  52084300  520843  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52084900  520849  -- Other fabrics  25%  52085110  520851  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  52085190  520851  --- Other  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  52085210  520852  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  52085290  520852  --- Other  25%  52085900  520859  -- Other fabrics  25%  52091100  520911  -- Plain weave  25%  52091200  520912  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52091900  520919  -- Other fabrics  25%  52092100  520921  -- Plain weave  25%  52092200  520922  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52092900  520929  -- Other fabrics  25%  52093100  520931  -- Plain weave  25%  52093200  520932  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52093900  520939  -- Other fabrics  25%  52094100  520941  -- Plain weave  25%  52094200  520942  -- Denim  25%  52094300  520943  -- Other fabrics of 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52094900  520949  -- Other fabrics  25%  52095110  520951  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  52095190  520951  --- Other  25%  52095200  520952  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52095900  520959  -- Other fabrics  25%  52101100  521011  -- Plain weave  25%  52101900  521019  -- Other fabrics  25%  52102100  521021  -- Plain weave  25%  52102900  521029  -- Other fabrics  25%  52103100  521031  -- Plain weave  25%  52103200  521032  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  52103900  521039  -- Other fabrics  25%  52104100  521041  -- Plain weave  25%  52104900  521049  -- Other fabrics  25%  52105110  521051  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  52105190  521051  --- Other  25%  52105900  521059  -- Other fabrics  25%  52111100  521111  -- Plain weave  25%  52111200  521112  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52111900  521119  -- Other fabrics  25%  52112000  521120  - Bleached  25%  52113100  521131  -- Plain weave  25%  52113200  521132  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52113900  521139  -- Other fabrics  25%  52114200  521142  -- Denim  25%  52114300  521143  -- Other fabrics of 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52114900  521149  -- Other fabrics  25%  52115110  521151  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  52115190  521151  --- Other  25%  52115200  521152  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill  25%  52115900  521159  -- Other fabrics  25%  52121200  521212  -- Bleached  25%  52121510  521215  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  52121590  521215  --- Other  25%  52122400  521224  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  52122510  521225  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  52122590  521225  --- Other  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  54071000  540710  - Woven fabrics obtained from high-tenacity yarn of nylon or other polyamides or of polyesters  25%  54072000  540720  - Woven fabrics obtained from strip or the like  25%  54073000  540730  - Fabrics specified in note 9 to Section XI  25%  54074100  540741  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  54074200  540742  -- Dyed  25%  54074300  540743  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  54074400  540744  -- Printed  25%  54075100  540751  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  54075200  540752  -- Dyed  25%  54075300  540753  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  54075400  540754  -- Printed  25%  54076100  540761  -- Containing 85 % or more by weight of non-textured polyester filaments  25%  54076900  540769  -- Other  25%  54077100  540771  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  54077200  540772  -- Dyed  25%  54077300  540773  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  54077400  540774  -- Printed  25%  54078100  540781  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  54078200  540782  -- Dyed  25%  54078300  540783  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  54078400  540784  -- Printed  25%  54079100  540791  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  54079200  540792  -- Dyed  25%  54079300  540793  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  54083400  540834  -- Printed  25%  55121100  551211  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  55121900  551219  -- Other  25%  55122100  551221  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  55122900  551229  -- Other  25%  55129100  551291  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  55129900  551299  -- Other  25%  55131100  551311  -- Of polyester staple fibres, plain weave  25%  55131200  551312  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, of polyester staple fibres  25%  55131300  551313  -- Other woven fabrics of polyester staple fibres  25%  55131900  551319  -- Other woven fabrics  25%  55132100  551321  -- Of polyester staple fibres, plain weave  25%  55132300  551323  -- Other woven fabrics of polyester staple fibres  25%  55132900  551329  -- Other woven fabrics  25%  55133100  551331  -- Of polyester staple fibres, plain weave  25%  55133900  551339  -- Other woven fabrics  25%  55134110  551341  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  55134190  551341  --- Other  25%  55134900  551349  -- Other woven fabrics  25%  55141100  551411  -- Of polyester staple fibres, plain weave  25%  55141200  551412  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, of polyester staple fibres  25%  55141900  551419  -- Other woven fabrics  25%  55142100  551421  -- Of polyester staple fibres, plain weave  25%  55142200  551422  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, of polyester staple fibres  25%  55142300  551423  -- Other woven fabrics of polyester staple fibres  25%  55142900  551429  -- Other woven fabrics  25%  55143000  551430  - Of yarns of different colours  25%  55144110  551441  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  55144190  551441  --- Other  25%  55144200  551442  -- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, of polyester staple fibres  25%  55144300  551443  -- Other woven fabrics of polyester staple fibres  25%  55144900  551449  -- Other woven fabrics  25%  55151100  551511  -- Mixed mainly or solely with viscose rayon staple fibres  25%  55151200  551512  -- Mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments  25%  55151300  551513  -- Mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair  25%  55151900  551519  -- Other  25%  55152100  551521  -- Mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments  25%  55152200  551522  -- Mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair  25%  55152900  551529  -- Other  25%  55159100  551591  -- Mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments  25%  55159900  551599  -- Other  25%  55161100  551611  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  55161200  551612  -- Dyed  25%  55161300  551613  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  55161400  551614  -- Printed  25%  55162100  551621  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  55162200  551622  -- Dyed  25%  55162300  551623  -- Of yarns of different colours  25%  55162400  551624  -- Printed  25%  55163100  551631  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  55163200  551632  -- Dyed  25%  55163400  551634  -- Printed  25%  55164100  551641  -- Unbleached or bleached  25%  55164200  551642  -- Dyed  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  55164400  551644  -- Printed  25%  55169400  551694  -- Printed  25%  56012100  560121  -- Of cotton  25%  56012200  560122  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  56012900  560129  -- Other  25%  56029000  560290  - Other  25%  56072100  560721  -- Binder or baler twine  25%  56072900  560729  -- Other  25%  56074900  560749  -- Other  25%  56075000  560750  - Of other synthetic fibres  10%  56079000  560790  - Other  25%  56081100  560811  -- Made-up fishing nets  10%  56081910  560819  --- Fruit tree and seedbed netting  10%  56081990  560819  --- Other  25%  56089000  560890  - Other  25%  56090000  560900  Articles of yarn, strip or the like of heading 5404 or 5405, twine, cordage, rope or cables, not elsewhere specified or included   25%  57011000  570110  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  57019000  570190  - Of other textile materials  25%  57024900  570249  -- Of other textile materials  25%  57025000  570250  - Other, not of pile construction, not made up  25%  57029100  570291  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  57029200  570292  -- Of man-made textile materials  25%  57029900  570299  -- Of other textile materials  25%  57031000  570310  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  57032000  570320  - Of nylon or other polyamides  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  57033000  570330  - Of other man-made textile materials  25%  57039000  570390  - Of other textile materials  25%  57049000  570490  - Other  25%  57050000  570500  Other carpets and other textile floor coverings, whether or not made up  25%  58012200  580122  -- Cut corduroy  25%  58012300  580123  -- Other weft pile fabrics  25%  58012600  580126  -- Chenille fabrics  25%  58012700  580127  -- Warp pile fabrics  25%  58013300  580133  -- Other weft pile fabrics  25%  58013600  580136  -- Chenille fabrics  25%  58013700  580137  -- Warp pile fabrics  25%  58019000  580190  - Of other textile materials  25%  58021100  580211  -- Unbleached  25%  58021900  580219  -- Other  25%  58022000  580220  - Terry towelling and similar woven terry fabrics, of other textile materials  25%  58030000  580300  Gauze, other than narrow fabrics of heading 5806  25%  58041000  580410  - Tulles and other net fabrics  25%  58042100  580421  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  58042900  580429  -- Of other textile materials  25%  58061000  580610  - Woven pile fabrics (including terry towelling and similar terry fabrics) and chenille fabrics  25%  58062000  580620  - Other woven fabrics, containing by weight 5 % or more of elastomeric yarn or rubber thread  25%  58063100  580631  -- Of cotton  25%  58063200  580632  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  58063900  580639  -- Of other textile materials  25%  58064000  580640  - Fabrics consisting of warp without weft assembled by means of an adhesive (bolducs)  25%  58071000  580710  - Woven  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  58079000  580790  - Other  25%  58089000  580890  - Other  25%  58110000  581100  Quilted textile products in the piece, composed of one or more layers of textile materials assembled with padding by stitching or otherwise, other than embroidery of heading 5810   25%  60012100  600121  -- Of cotton  25%  60019100  600191  -- Of cotton  25%  60019900  600199  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61012000  610120  - Of cotton  25%  61013000  610130  - Of man-made fibres  25%  61019000  610190  - Of other textile materials  25%  61021000  610210  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61022000  610220  - Of cotton  25%  61023000  610230  - Of man-made fibres  25%  61029000  610290  - Of other textile materials  25%  61031000  610310  - Suits  25%  61032200  610322  -- Of cotton  25%  61032300  610323  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61032900  610329  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61033100  610331  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61033200  610332  -- Of cotton  25%  61033300  610333  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61033900  610339  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61034100  610341  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61034200  610342  -- Of cotton  25%  61034300  610343  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61034900  610349  -- Of other textile materials  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  61041300  610413  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61041900  610419  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61042200  610422  -- Of cotton  25%  61042300  610423  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61042900  610429  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61043100  610431  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61043200  610432  -- Of cotton  25%  61043300  610433  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61043900  610439  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61044100  610441  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61044200  610442  -- Of cotton  25%  61044300  610443  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61044400  610444  -- Of artificial fibres  25%  61044900  610449  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61045100  610451  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61045200  610452  -- Of cotton  25%  61045300  610453  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61045900  610459  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61046100  610461  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61046200  610462  -- Of cotton  25%  61046300  610463  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61046900  610469  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61051000  610510  - Of cotton  25%  61052000  610520  - Of man-made fibres  25%  61059000  610590  - Of other textile materials  25%  61061000  610610  - Of cotton  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  61062000  610620  - Of man-made fibres  25%  61069000  610690  - Of other textile materials  25%  61071100  610711  -- Of cotton  25%  61071200  610712  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  61071900  610719  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61072100  610721  -- Of cotton  25%  61072200  610722  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  61072900  610729  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61079100  610791  -- Of cotton  25%  61079900  610799  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61081100  610811  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  61081900  610819  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61082100  610821  -- Of cotton  25%  61082200  610822  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  61082900  610829  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61083100  610831  -- Of cotton  25%  61083200  610832  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  61083900  610839  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61089100  610891  -- Of cotton  25%  61089200  610892  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  61089900  610899  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61091000  610910  - Of cotton  25%  61099000  610990  - Of other textile materials  25%  61102000  611020  - Of cotton  25%  61103000  611030  - Of man-made fibres  25%  61109000  611090  - Of other textile materials  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  61112000  611120  - Of cotton  25%  61113000  611130  - Of synthetic fibres  25%  61119000  611190  - Of other textile materials  25%  61121100  611211  -- Of cotton  25%  61121200  611212  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61121900  611219  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61122000  611220  - Ski suits  25%  61123100  611231  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61123900  611239  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61124100  611241  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61124900  611249  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61130000  611300  Garments, made up of knitted or crocheted fabrics of heading 5903, 5906 or 5907  25%  61142000  611420  - Of cotton  25%  61143000  611430  - Of man-made fibres  25%  61149000  611490  - Of other textile materials  25%  61151000  611510  - Graduated compression hosiery (for example, stockings for varicose veins)  25%  61152100  611521  -- Of synthetic fibres, measuring per single yarn less than 67 decitex  25%  61152200  611522  -- Of synthetic fibres, measuring per single yarn 67 decitex or more  25%  61152900  611529  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61153000  611530  - Other women's full-length or knee-length hosiery, measuring per single yarn less than 67 decitex  25%  61159400  611594  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  61159500  611595  -- Of cotton  25%  61159600  611596  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61159900  611599  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61161000  611610  - Impregnated, coated or covered with plastics or rubber  25%  61169100  611691  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  61169200  611692  -- Of cotton  25%  61169300  611693  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  61169900  611699  -- Of other textile materials  25%  61171000  611710  - Shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like  25%  61178000  611780  - Other accessories  25%  61179000  611790  - Parts  25%  62011100  620111  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62011200  620112  -- Of cotton  25%  62011300  620113  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62011900  620119  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62019100  620191  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62019200  620192  -- Of cotton  25%  62019300  620193  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62019900  620199  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62021100  620211  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62021200  620212  -- Of cotton  25%  62021300  620213  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62021900  620219  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62029100  620291  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62029200  620292  -- Of cotton  25%  62029300  620293  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62029900  620299  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62031100  620311  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62031200  620312  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62031900  620319  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62032200  620322  -- Of cotton  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  62032300  620323  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62032900  620329  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62033100  620331  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62033200  620332  -- Of cotton  25%  62033300  620333  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62033900  620339  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62034100  620341  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62034200  620342  -- Of cotton  25%  62034300  620343  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62034900  620349  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62041100  620411  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62041200  620412  -- Of cotton  25%  62041300  620413  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62041900  620419  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62042100  620421  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62042200  620422  -- Of cotton  25%  62042300  620423  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62042900  620429  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62043100  620431  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62043200  620432  -- Of cotton  25%  62043300  620433  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62043900  620439  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62044100  620441  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62044200  620442  -- Of cotton  25%  62044300  620443  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62044400  620444  -- Of artificial fibres  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  62044900  620449  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62045100  620451  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62045200  620452  -- Of cotton  25%  62045300  620453  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62045900  620459  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62046100  620461  -- Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62046200  620462  -- Of cotton  25%  62046300  620463  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  62046900  620469  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62052000  620520  - Of cotton  25%  62053000  620530  - Of man-made fibres  25%  62059000  620590  - Of other textile materials  25%  62061000  620610  - Of silk or silk waste  25%  62062000  620620  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62063000  620630  - Of cotton  25%  62064000  620640  - Of man-made fibres  25%  62069000  620690  - Of other textile materials  25%  62071100  620711  -- Of cotton  25%  62071900  620719  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62072100  620721  -- Of cotton  25%  62072200  620722  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62072900  620729  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62079100  620791  -- Of cotton  25%  62079900  620799  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62081100  620811  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62081900  620819  -- Of other textile materials  25%  HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  62082100  620821  -- Of cotton  25%  62082200  620822  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62082900  620829  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62089100  620891  -- Of cotton  25%  62089200  620892  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62089900  620899  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62092000  620920  - Of cotton  25%  62093000  620930  - Of synthetic fibres  25%  62099000  620990  - Of other textile materials  25%  62101000  621010  - Of fabrics of heading 5602 or 5603  25%  62102000  621020  - Other garments, of the type described in subheadings 620111 to 620119  25%  62103000  621030  - Other garments, of the type described in subheadings 620211 to 620219  25%  62104000  621040  - Other men's or boys' garments  25%  62105000  621050  - Other women's or girls' garments  25%  62111100  621111  -- Men's or boys'  25%  62111200  621112  -- Women's or girls'  25%  62112000  621120  - Ski suits  25%  62113200  621132  -- Of cotton  25%  62113300  621133  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  62113900  621139  -- Of other textile materials  25%  62114210  621142  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  62114290  621142  --- Other  25%  62114310  621143  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  62114390  621143  --- Other  25%  62114910  621149  --- Khanga, Kikoi and Kitenge  50%  62114990  621149  --- Other  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  62121000  621210  - Brassières  25%  62122000  621220  - Girdles and panty girdles  25%  62123000  621230  - Corselettes  25%  62129000  621290  - Other  25%  62132000  621320  - Of cotton  25%  62139000  621390  - Of other textile materials  25%  62141000  621410  - Of silk or silk waste  25%  62142000  621420  - Of wool or fine animal hair  25%  62143000  621430  - Of synthetic fibres  25%  62144000  621440  - Of artificial fibres  25%  62149000  621490  - Of other textile materials  25%  62151000  621510  - Of silk or silk waste  25%  62152000  621520  - Of man-made fibres  25%  62159000  621590  - Of other textile materials  25%  62160000  621600  Gloves, mittens and mitts  25%  62171000  621710  - Accessories  25%  62179000  621790  - Parts  25%  63011000  630110  - Electric blankets  25%  63012000  630120  - Blankets (other than electric blankets) and travelling rugs, of wool or of fine animal hair  25%  63013000  630130  - Blankets (other than electric blankets) and travelling rugs, of cotton  25%  63014000  630140  - Blankets (other than electric blankets) and travelling rugs, of synthetic fibres  25%  63019000  630190  - Other blankets and travelling rugs  25%  63021000  630210  - Bedlinen, knitted or crocheted  25%  63022100  630221  -- Of cotton  50%  63022200  630222  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  63022900  630229  -- Of other textile materials  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  63023100  630231  -- Of cotton  50%  63023200  630232  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  63023900  630239  -- Of other textile materials  25%  63024000  630240  - Table linen, knitted or crocheted  25%  63025100  630251  -- Of cotton  50%  63025300  630253  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  63025900  630259  -- Of other textile materials  25%  63026000  630260  - Toilet linen and kitchen linen, of terry towelling or similar terry fabrics, of cotton  25%  63029100  630291  -- Of cotton  50%  63029300  630293  -- Of man-made fibres  25%  63029900  630299  -- Of other textile materials  25%  63031200  630312  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  63031900  630319  -- Of other textile materials  25%  63039100  630391  -- Of cotton  25%  63039200  630392  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  63039900  630399  -- Of other textile materials  25%  63041100  630411  -- Knitted or crocheted  25%  63041900  630419  -- Other  25%  63049190  630491  --- Other  25%  63049200  630492  -- Not knitted or crocheted, of cotton  25%  63049300  630493  -- Not knitted or crocheted, of synthetic fibres  25%  63049900  630499  -- Not knitted or crocheted, of other textile materials  25%  63051000  630510  - Of jute or of other textile bast fibres of heading 5303  45%  63052000  630520  - Of cotton  25%  63053200  630532  -- Flexible intermediate bulk containers  25%  63053300  630533  -- Other, of polyethylene or polypropylene strip or the like  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  63053900  630539  -- Other  25%  63059000  630590  - Of other textile materials  25%  63061200  630612  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  63061900  630619  -- Of other textile materials  25%  63062200  630622  -- Of synthetic fibres  25%  63062900  630629  -- Of other textile materials  25%  63063000  630630  - Sails  25%  63064000  630640  - Pneumatic mattresses  25%  63069000  630690  - Other  25%  63071000  630710  - Floorcloths, dishcloths, dusters and similar cleaning cloths  25%  63079000  630790  - Other  25%  63080000  630800  Sets consisting of woven fabric and yarn, whether or not with accessories, for making up into rugs, tapestries, embroidered tablecloths or serviettes, or similar textile articles, put up in packings for retail sale   25%  63090000  630900  Worn clothing and other worn articles  45%  64011000  640110  - Footwear incorporating a protective metal toecap  25%  64019200  640192  -- Covering the ankle but not covering the knee  25%  64019900  640199  -- Other  25%  64021200  640212  -- Ski-boots, cross-country ski footwear and snowboard boots  25%  64021900  640219  -- Other  25%  64022000  640220  - Footwear with upper straps or thongs assembled to the sole by means of plugs  25%  64029100  640291  -- Covering the ankle  25%  64029900  640299  -- Other  25%  64031200  640312  -- Ski-boots, cross-country ski footwear and snowboard boots  25%  64031900  640319  -- Other  25%  64032000  640320  - Footwear with outer soles of leather, and uppers which consist of leather straps across the instep and around the big toe   25%   HS  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  64034000  640340  - Other footwear, incorporating a protective metal toecap  25%  64035100  640351  -- Covering the ankle  25%  64035900  640359  -- Other  25%  64039100  640391  -- Covering the ankle  25%  64039900  640399  -- Other  25%  64041100  640411  -- Sports footwear; tennis shoes, basketball shoes, gym shoes, training shoes and the like  25%  64041900  640419  -- Other  25%  64042000  640420  - Footwear with outer soles of leather or composition leather  25%  64051000  640510  - With uppers of leather or composition leather  25%  64052000  640520  - With uppers of textile materials  25%  64059000  640590  - Other  25%  66011000  660110  - Garden or similar umbrellas  25%   68021000   680210  - Tiles, cubes and similar articles, whether or not rectangular (including square), the largest surface area of which is capable of being enclosed in a square the side of which is less than 7 cm; artificially coloured granules, chippings and powder    25%  68042100  680421  -- Of agglomerated synthetic or natural diamond  25%  68042200  680422  -- Of other agglomerated abrasives or of ceramics  25%  68042300  680423  -- Of natural stone  25%  68052000  680520  - On a base of paper or paperboard only  25%  68069000  680690  - Other  25%  68071000  680710  - In rolls  25%  68079000  680790  - Other  25%  68080000  680800  Panels, boards, tiles, blocks and similar articles of vegetable fibre, of straw or of shavings, chips, particles, sawdust or other waste of wood, agglomerated with cement, plaster or other mineral binders   25%  68132000  681320  - Containing asbestos  10%  68138100  681381  -- Brake linings and pads  10%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  68159900  681599  -- Other  25%  69010000  690100  Bricks, blocks, tiles and other ceramic goods of siliceous fossil meals (for example, kieselguhr, tripolite or diatomite) or of similar siliceous earths   25%  69049000  690490  - Other  25%  69051000  690510  - Roofing tiles  25%  69059000  690590  - Other  25%  69060000  690600  Ceramic pipes, conduits, guttering and pipe fittings  25%  69071000  690710  - Tiles, cubes and similar articles, whether or not rectangular, the largest surface area of which is capable of being enclosed in a square the side of which is less than 7 cm   25%  69079000  690790  - Other  25%  69081000  690810  - Tiles, cubes and similar articles, whether or not rectangular, the largest surface area of which is capable of being enclosed in a square the side of which is less than 7 cm   25%  69089000  690890  - Other  25%  69101000  691010  - Of porcelain or china  25%  69109000  691090  - Other  25%  69111000  691110  - Tableware and kitchenware  25%  69119000  691190  - Other  25%  69120000  691200  Ceramic tableware, kitchenware, other household articles and toilet articles, other than of porcelain or china  25%  69141000  691410  - Of porcelain or china  25%  69149000  691490  - Other  25%  70042000  700420  - Glass, coloured throughout the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or having an absorbent, reflecting or non- reflecting layer   10%  70049000  700490  - Other glass  10%  70052100  700521  -- Coloured throughout the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or merely surface ground  10%  70052900  700529  -- Other  10%  70053000  700530  - Wired glass  10%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  70060000  700600  Glass of heading 7003, 7004 or 7005, bent, edge-worked, engraved, drilled, enamelled or otherwise worked, but not framed or fitted with other materials   25%  70071100  700711  -- Of size and shape suitable for incorporation in vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels  10%  70071900  700719  -- Other  10%  70072100  700721  -- Of size and shape suitable for incorporation in vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels  10%  70091000  700910  - Rear-view mirrors for vehicles  10%  70099100  700991  -- Unframed  25%  70099200  700992  -- Framed  25%  70101090  701010  --- Other  25%  70102000  701020  - Stoppers, lids and other closures  10%  70109000  701090  - Other  25%  70119000  701190  - Other  10%  70131000  701310  - Of glass ceramics  25%  70132200  701322  -- Of lead crystal  25%  70132800  701328  -- Other  25%  70133300  701333  -- Of lead crystal  25%  70133700  701337  -- Other  25%  70134100  701341  -- Of lead crystal  25%  70134200  701342  -- Of glass having a linear coefficient of expansion not exceeding 5 . 10 6 per Kelvin within a temperature range of 0 °C to 300 °C   25%  70134900  701349  -- Other  25%  70139100  701391  -- Of lead crystal  25%  70139900  701399  -- Other  25%  70140000  701400  Signalling glassware and optical elements of glass (other than those of heading 7015), not optically worked  10%  70159000  701590  - Other  10%  70161000  701610  - Glass cubes and other glass smallwares, whether or not on a backing, for mosaics or similar decorative purposes  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  70169000  701690  - Other  25%  70189000  701890  - Other  25%  70193900  701939  -- Other  10%  72101100  721011  -- Of a thickness of 0,5 mm or more  25%  72103000  721030  - Electrolytically plated or coated with zinc  25%  72104100  721041  -- Corrugated  25%  72104900  721049  -- Other  25%  72106100  721061  -- Plated or coated with aluminium-zinc alloys  25%  72107000  721070  - Painted, varnished or coated with plastics  25%  72109000  721090  - Other  25%  73049000  730490  - Other  10%  73069000  730690  - Other  25%  73071900  730719  -- Other  25%  73072200  730722  -- Threaded elbows, bends and sleeves  25%  73079200  730792  -- Threaded elbows, bends and sleeves  25%  73079900  730799  -- Other  25%  73083000  730830  - Doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors  25%  73089010  730890  --- Roofing tiles coated with acrylic paint and the weather side coated with natural sand granules  25%  73089091  730890  ---- Road guard rails  25%  73089099  730890  ---- Other  25%   73090000   730900  Reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, of a capacity exceeding 300 l, whether or not lined or heat-insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment    25%  73102100  731021  -- Cans which are to be closed by soldering or crimping  25%  73110000  731100  Containers for compressed or liquefied gas, of iron or steel  25%  73121000  731210  - Stranded wire, ropes and cables  10%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  73130000  731300  Barbed wire of iron or steel; twisted hoop or single flat wire, barbed or not, and loosely twisted double wire, of a kind used for fencing, of iron or steel   25%  73141900  731419  -- Other  25%  73144900  731449  -- Other  25%  73151200  731512  -- Other chain  10%  73170000  731700  Nails, tacks, drawing pins, corrugated nails, staples (other than those of heading 8305) and similar articles, of iron or steel, whether or not with heads of other material, but excluding such articles with heads of copper   25%  73181500  731815  -- Other screws and bolts, whether or not with their nuts or washers  10%  73181600  731816  -- Nuts  10%  73201000  732010  - Leaf-springs and leaves therefor  25%  73211200  732112  -- For liquid fuel  25%  73218100  732181  -- For gas fuel or for both gas and other fuels  25%  73218200  732182  -- For liquid fuel  25%  73218900  732189  -- Other, including appliances for solid fuel  25%  73239400  732394  -- Of iron (other than cast iron) or steel, enamelled  25%  73239900  732399  -- Other  25%  73269090  732690  --- Other  25%  76042900  760429  -- Other  25%  76069100  760691  -- Of aluminium, not alloyed  10%  76082000  760820  - Of aluminium alloys  25%  76090000  760900  Aluminium tube or pipe fittings (for example, couplings, elbows, sleeves)  25%  76101000  761010  - Doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors  25%   76110000   761100  Aluminium reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers, for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of a capacity exceeding 300 litres, whether or not lined or heat-insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment    25%  76151000  761510  - Table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof; pot scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves  25%   HS  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty      and the like    76169900  761699  -- Other  25%  82055100  820551  -- Household tools  10%  82121000  821210  - Razors  25%  82122000  821220  - Safety razor blades, including razor blade blanks in strips  10%  83011000  830110  - Padlocks  25%  83016000  830160  - Parts  10%  83023000  830230  - Other mountings, fittings and similar articles suitable for motor vehicles  10%  83052000  830520  - Staples in strips  10%  83059000  830590  - Other, including parts  10%  83091000  830910  - Crown corks  40%  83099010  830990  --- Easy opening ends in the form of incised flap and a ring pull or other easy opening mechanism made of base metal used for drink or food cans   25%  83099090  830990  --- Other  25%  83100000  831000  Sign-plates, nameplates, address-plates and similar plates, numbers, letters and other symbols, of base metal, excluding those of heading 9405   25%  83111000  831110  - Coated electrodes of base metal, for electric arc-welding  10%  83113000  831130  - Coated rods and cored wire, of base metal, for soldering, brazing or welding by flame  10%  85061000  850610  - Manganese dioxide  35%  85063000  850630  - Mercuric oxide  35%  85064000  850640  - Silver oxide  35%  85065000  850650  - Lithium  35%  85066000  850660  - Air-zinc  35%  85068000  850680  - Other primary cells and primary batteries  35%  85071000  850710  - Lead-acid, of a kind used for starting piston engines  25%  85444200  854442  -- Fitted with connectors  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  85444900  854449  -- Other  25%  85489000  854890  - Other  25%  87021019  870210  ---- Other  25%  87021022  870210  ---- For the transport of not more than 15 persons  25%  87021029  870210  ---- Other  25%  87021099  870210  ---- Other  25%  87029019  870290  ---- Other  25%  87029029  870290  ---- Other  25%  87029099  870290  ---- Other  25%  87032190  870321  --- Other  25%  87032290  870322  --- Other  25%  87032390  870323  --- Other  25%  87032490  870324  --- Other  25%  87033190  870331  --- Other  25%  87033290  870332  --- Other  25%  87033390  870333  --- Other  25%  87042190  870421  --- Other  25%  87042290  870422  --- Other  25%  87042390  870423  --- Other  25%  87043190  870431  --- Other  25%  87043290  870432  --- Other  25%  87060000  870600  Chassis fitted with engines, for the motor vehicles of headings 8701 to 8705  25%  87079000  870790  - Other  25%  87089100  870891  -- Radiators and parts thereof  10%  87089200  870892  -- Silencers (mufflers) and exhaust pipes; parts thereof  10%  87111010  871110  - - - Motorcycle ambulances  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  87111090  871110  - - - Other  25%  87112010  871120  - - - Motorcycle ambulances  25%  87112090  871120  - - - Other  25%  87113010  871130  - - - Motorcycle ambulances  25%  87113090  871130  - - - Other  25%  87114010  871140  - - - Motorcycle ambulance  25%  87114090  871140  - - - Other  25%  87115010  871150  - - - Motorcycles ambulances  25%  87115090  871150  - - - Other  25%  87119000  871190  - Other  25%  87120000  871200  Bicycles and other cycles (including delivery tricycles), not motorised  10%  87168000  871680  - Other vehicles  10%  90065200  900652  -- Other, for roll film of a width less than 35 mm  25%  90065300  900653  -- Other, for roll film of a width of 35 mm  25%  90065900  900659  -- Other  25%  94012000  940120  - Seats of a kind used for motor vehicles  25%  94013000  940130  - Swivel seats with variable height adjustment  25%  94014000  940140  - Seats other than garden seats or camping equipment, convertible into beds  25%  94016100  940161  -- Upholstered  25%  94016900  940169  -- Other  25%  94017100  940171  -- Upholstered  25%  94017900  940179  -- Other  25%  94018000  940180  - Other seats  25%  94019000  940190  - Parts  25%  94031000  940310  - Metal furniture of a kind used in offices  25%  94032000  940320  - Other metal furniture  25%   HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  94033000  940330  - Wooden furniture of a kind used in offices  25%  94034000  940340  - Wooden furniture of a kind used in the kitchen  25%  94035000  940350  - Wooden furniture of a kind used in the bedroom  25%  94036000  940360  - Other wooden furniture  25%  94037000  940370  - Furniture of plastics  25%  94039000  940390  - Parts  25%  94041000  940410  - Mattress supports  25%  94042100  940421  -- Of cellular rubber or plastics, whether or not covered  25%  94042900  940429  -- Of other materials  25%  94043000  940430  - Sleeping bags  25%  94051000  940510  - Chandeliers and other electric ceiling or wall lighting fittings, excluding those of a kind used for lighting public open spaces or thoroughfares   25%  94052000  940520  - Electric table, desk, bedside or floor-standing lamps  25%  94053000  940530  - Lighting sets of a kind used for Christmas trees  25%  94054000  940540  - Other electric lamps and lighting fittings  25%  94055000  940550  - Non-electrical lamps and lighting fittings  25%  94056000  940560  - Illuminated signs, illuminated nameplates and the like  25%  94059110  940591  ---For bulbs and flurescent tubes  10%  94059190  940591  ---Other  25%  94059200  940592  -- Of plastics  25%  94059910  940599  ---For bulbs and flurescent tubes  10%  94059990  940599  ---Other  25%  96032100  960321  -- Toothbrushes, including dental-plate brushes  25%  96039000  960390  - Other  25%  96081000  960810  - Ballpoint pens  25%  96082000  960820  - Felt-tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers  25%  HS Code, 8  HS Code, 6  Description  Duty  96100000  961000  Slates and boards, with writing or drawing surfaces, whether or not framed  25%   96110000   961100  Date, sealing or numbering stamps, and the like (including devices for printing or embossing labels), designed for operating in the hand; hand-operated composing sticks and hand printing sets incorporating such composing sticks    25%  96170000  961700  Vacuum flasks and other vacuum vessels, complete with cases; parts thereof other than glass inners  25%  96190090  961900  --- Other  25%     ANNEX III JOINT STATEMENT OF THE PARTIES ON THE OBJECTIVES AND ESSENTIAL AND FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS OF THIS AGREEMENT 1.Advancing economic development is an essential part of how the UK ishelping make the global economy work for all. The UK is focused on trade as anengine for poverty reduction and development and is committed to building thepotential for developing countries to trade more with the UK and the rest of theworld.2.In light of this, the Parties agree that the following principles and proceduresshall apply to this Agreement.Objectives and Essential and Fundamental Elements of this Agreement 3.The UK will continue to promote the economic and social development of itsEPA partners. This Agreement shall be centred on the objective of reducing andeventually eradicating poverty in a way that is consistent with the objectives ofsustainable development.4.Respect for human rights, democratic principles and the rule of law, and fullcompliance with and national implementation of existing obligations underinternational disarmament and non-proliferation treaties, shall underpin the domesticand international policies of the UK and of the EAC Partner State(s), and constitutethe essential elements of this Agreement. Good governance shall also underpin thedomestic and international policies of the UK and the EAC Partner State(s) andconstitutes a fundamental element of this Agreement.Development Cooperation 1.The UK and the EAC Partner State(s) place great importance on the successfulimplementation of this Agreement, and on the continuing trade and developmentrelationship between them. The UK already holds a productive relationship with itsEPA partners, and looks forward to developing further these relationships under thisAgreement.2.UK development cooperation in support of this Agreement shall continue tobe primarily guided by the principles of the internationally agreed aid effectivenessagenda and the UK Partnership Principles, and aims to reduce poverty and achievethe Sustainable Development Goals.Oinformation contained therein is accurate (*) OPROTOCOL 1 CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS" AND METHODS OF ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION Index TITLE I: General Provisions ARTICLE 1.DefinitionsTITLE II: Definition of the Concept of "Originating Products" ARTICLES 2.General Requirements3.Working or Processing of Materials whose import into the UK is MFN DutyFree and Quota Free4.Cumulation in the EAC Partner State(s)5.Cumulation in the UK6.Cumulation with other Countries benefiting from Duty-Free and Quota-FreeAccess to the market of the UK7.Wholly Obtained Products8.Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products9.Insufficient Working or Processing Operations10.Unit of Qualification11.Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools12.Sets13.Neutral ElementsTITLE III: Territorial Requirements ARTICLES 14.Principle of Territoriality15.Non alteration16.ExhibitionsTITLE IV: Proof of Origin ARTICLES 17.General Requirements18.Procedure for the issue of a Movement Certificate EUR 119.Movement Certificates EUR 1 issued retrospectively20.Issue of a Duplicate Movement Certificate EUR 121.Issue of Movement Certificates EUR 1 on the basis of a Proof of Origin issuedor made out previously22.Conditions for making out an Origin Declaration23.Approved Exporter24.Validity of Proof of Origin25.Submission of Proof of Origin26.Importation by Instalments27. Exemptions from Proof of Origin 28. Information procedure for Cumulation Purposes 29. Supporting Documents 30. Preservation of Proof of Origin and Supporting Documents 31. Discrepancies and Formal Errors 32. Amounts expressed in Euro  TITLE V: Arrangements for Administrative Cooperation  ARTICLES 33. Administrative Conditions for Products to benefit from this Agreement 34. Notification of Customs Authorities 35. Methods of Administrative Cooperation 36. Verification of Proof of Origin 37. Verification of Suppliers’ Declarations 38. Dispute Settlement 39. Penalties 40. Derogations  TITLE VI: Ceuta and Melilla  ARTICLE 41. Special Conditions   TITLE VII: Final Provisions  ARTICLES 42. Revision and Application of Rules of Origin 43. Amendment of the Protocol 44. Annexes 45. Implementation of the Protocol  ANNEXES ANNEX I TO PROTOCOL 1: INTRODUCTORY NOTES TO THE LIST IN ANNEX II ANNEX II TO PROTOCOL 1: LIST OF WORKING OR PROCESSING REQUIRED TO BE CARRIED OUT ON NON-ORIGINATING MATERIALS IN ORDER THAT THE PRODUCT MANUFACTURED CAN OBTAIN ORIGINATING STATUS ANNEX III TO PROTOCOL 1: FORM FOR MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE ANNEX IV TO PROTOCOL 1: ORIGIN DECLARATION  ANNEX V (A) TO PROTOCOL SUPPLIER DECLARATION FOR 1: PRODUCTS ANNEX V (B) TO PROTOCOL SUPPLIER DECLARATION FOR 1: PRODUCTS NOT HAVINGPREFERENTIAL ORIGIN STATUS ANNEX V (C) TO PROTOCOL LONG-TERM SUPPLIER’S 1: DECLARATION FOR PRODUCTS HAVING PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN STATUS TO BE USED EXCLUSIVELY FOR CUMULATION AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 28 (6) ANNEX V (D) TO PROTOCOL LONG-TERM SUPPLIER’S 1: DECLARATION FOR PRODUCTS NOT HAVING PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN STATUS TO BE USED EXCLUSIVELY FOR CUMULATION AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 28 (6) ANNEX VI TO PROTOCOL 1: INFORMATION CERTIFICATE ANNEX VII TO PROTOCOL 1: FORM FOR APPLICATION FOR A DEROGATION  ANNEX VIII TO PROTOCOL OVERSEAS COUNTRIES AND 1: TERRITORIES ANNEX IX TO PROTOCOL 1: PRODUCTS FOR WHICH THE CUMULATION PROVISIONS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 APPLY  ANNEX X TO PROTOCOL 1: TEMPLATE ON ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING THE PRINCIPALITY OF ANDORRA  JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING THE REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO    TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Protocol: (a)“ACP State” means a State that has acceded to the GeorgetownAgreement;(b)“chapters” and “headings” mean the chapters and the four-digit headingsused in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonized CommodityDescription and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as “theHarmonized System” or “HS”;(c)“classified” refers to the classification of a product or material under aparticular heading;(d)“UK” means the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland;(e)“consignment” means products which are either sent simultaneouslyfrom one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transportdocument covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or,in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;(f)“customs value” means the value as determined in accordance with the1994 Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the GeneralAgreement on Tariffs and Trade (WTO Agreement on customsvaluation);(g)“ex-works” price means the price paid for the product ex-works to themanufacturer in the UK or in an EAC Partner State in whose undertakingthe last working or processing is carried out, provided that the priceincludes the value of all the materials used and all other costs related toits production, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be repaidwhen the product obtained is exported.Where the actual price paid does not reflect all costs related to themanufacturing of the product which are actually incurred in thebeneficiary country, the ex-works price means the sum of those costs,minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the productobtained is exported.For the purpose of the previous paragraphs, where the last working or processing has been subcontracted to a manufacturer, the term “manufacturer” refers to the enterprise that has employed the sub-contractor.  (h) “exporter” means any natural or legal person who exports goods to the territory of an EAC Partner State or of the UK, who is able to prove the origin of the good, whether or not he is the manufacturer and whether or not he himself carries out the export formalities;  (i) “goods” means both materials and products;  (j) “manufacture” means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;  (k) “material” means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the manufacture of the product;  (l) “non-originating materials” means materials that do not qualify as originating under this Protocol;  (m) “product” means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;  (n) “producer” includes among others: mining, manufacturing or agricultural enterprise or any individual grower or craftsman;  (o) “value of materials” means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the UK or in the EAC Partner State(s);  (p) “value added” shall be taken to be the ex-works price of a finished product minus the customs value of all the materials imported from third countries or where the customs value of the imported material is not known or cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the UK or in an EAC Partner State shall prevail;  (q) “territories” includes territorial waters;  (r) “OCTs” means the Overseas Countries and Territories as defined in Annex VIII;  (s) “conventional duties” are the most favoured nation tariffs applied on goods imported from third countries; these conventional duties exclude the autonomous tariff suspensions of duty and WTO tariff quotas;  (t) “origin declaration” is a statement given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified; the text of the origin declaration appears in Annex IV;  (u) “other ACP States” means all the ACP States with the exception of the EAC Partner State(s);  (v) “this Agreement” means the Economic Partnership Agreement between the Republic of Kenya, a Member of the East African Community, of the one part, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, of the other part;  (w) “EU” means the European Union;  (x) “EU OCTs” means the Overseas Countries and Territories listed in paragraphs 1 to 3 of Annex VIII;  (y) “UK OCTs” means the Overseas Countries and Territories listed in paragraph 4 of Annex VIII.    TITLE II  DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF “ORIGINATING PRODUCTS”   ARTICLE 2  General Requirements  1. For the purpose of this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in the UK:  (a) products wholly obtained in the UK within the meaning of Article 7 of this Protocol;   (b) products obtained in the UK incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in the UK within the meaning of Article 8.  2. For the purpose of this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in an EAC Partner State:  (a) products wholly obtained in an EAC Partner State within the meaning of Article 7 of this Protocol;  (b)products obtained in an EAC Partner State incorporating materials whichhave not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials haveundergone sufficient working or processing in that EAC Partner Statewithin the meaning of Article 8.ARTICLE 3 Working or Processing of Materials Whose Import into the UK is MFN Duty Free and Quota Free 1.Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2), non-originating materialswhich at importation to the UK are free of customs duties by means of applicationof conventional duties of the most-favoured nation tariff in accordance with theTariff of the United Kingdom shall be considered as materials originating in an EACPartner State when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not benecessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing,provided they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred toin Article 9(1).2.Movement certificates EUR 1 (in Box/Field 7) or origin declarations issued byapplication of paragraph 1 shall bear the following entry: .Application of Article 3.1of Protocol 1 to the EPA between the Republic of Kenya, a Member of the EAC, andthe UK’.3.The UK shall notify yearly to the Special Committee on Customs and TradeFacilitation referred to in Article 29 of this Agreement and hereinafter referred to as“the Committee” the list of materials to which the provisions of this Article shallapply.4.The cumulation provided for in this Article shall not apply to materials:(a)which at importation to the UK are subject to antidumping orcountervailing duties when originating from the country which is subjectto these antidumping or countervailing duties1;1 For the purpose of the implementation of this specific exclusion, non preferential rules of origin applicable at the UK border should apply. (b)classified in subheadings of the Harmonized system which include alsoother tariff lines at 8 digits which are not free of customs duties by meansof application of conventional rates of the most- favoured nation tariff inaccordance with the Tariff of the United Kingdom.ARTICLE 4  Cumulation in the EAC Partner State(s)  1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2), products shall be considered as originating in an EAC Partner State if they are produced there, incorporating materials originating in the UK or in the EU, materials originating in another ACP State which are entitled to duty free quota free treatment upon importation in the UK, materials originating in the OCTs or in the other EAC Partner State(s), provided the working or processing carried out in that EAC Partner State goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 9(1). It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing.  2. Where the working or processing carried out in the EAC Partner State(s) does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 9(1), the product obtained shall be considered as originating in that EAC Partner State only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used originating in any of the other countries or territories. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country or territory which accounts for the highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture of the final product.  The origin of the materials originating in other ACP States and in the UK OCTs shall be determined according to the rules of origin applicable in the framework of the UK.s preferential arrangements with these countries and territories and in accordance with Article 28.  The origin of materials originating in the EU and in the EU OCTs shall be determined in accordance with the rules of origin of this Agreement.   3. For materials as defined in paragraph 1 and notwithstanding Article 2(2)(b), working or processing carried out in the UK, in the EU, in the other EAC Partner State(s), in the other ACP States or in the OCTs shall be considered as having been carried out in an EAC Partner State when the products produced undergo subsequent working or processing in this EAC Partner State.  Where the working or processing carried out in an EAC Partner State does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 9(1), the product obtained shall be considered as originating in that EAC Partner State only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used in any one of the other countries or territories. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country or territory which accounts for the highest value of materials used in the manufacture.  The origin of the final product shall be determined according to the rules of origin of this Protocol and in accordance with Article 28.  4. The UK shall notify to the Committee the list of materials for which cumulation provided for in paragraphs 1 and 3 shall not apply. After the notification, each Party shall make the list public, according to its internal procedures.  5. For the purpose of implementing cumulation between the EAC Partner State(s), the EU, other ACP States with which the UK applies a preferential trade agreement and the OCTs, as provided for in the other trade agreements and in the UK’s preferential arrangements with these countries and territories, the UK and the EAC Partner State(s) supplying the materials shall provide administrative cooperation to the other countries or territories referred to in this Article according to the terms set out in Title V of this Protocol.  6. The cumulation provided for in this Article in respect of the EU and the EU OCTs may only be applied provided that:  (a) all the countries and territories involved in the acquisition of the originating status and the country of destination have concluded an arrangement or agreement on administrative co-operation which ensures a correct implementation of this Article; and  (b) such arrangement or agreement has been notified to the UK by the EAC Partner State(s) or a competent body representing the relevant countries or territories.   7. Except as provided for in paragraph 6, the cumulation provided in this Article may only be applied provided that all the countries and territories involved in the acquisition of the originating status have entered into an undertaking with each other, using the template in Annex X, which ensures the correct implementation of this Article and includes a reference to the use of appropriate proofs of origin:  (a) to comply and ensure compliance with this Article;  (b) to provide the administrative cooperation necessary to ensure the correct implementation of this Article and its provisions on cumulation both with regard to the UK and between themselves;  (c) the undertakings have been notified to the UK by the EAC Partner State(s) or a competent body representing the countries or territories signatory of the undertaking.  8. The cumulation provided for in this Article may only be applied for the products listed in Annex IX when the materials used in the manufacture of such products are originating, or the working or processing is carried out in another ACP State.  9. The cumulation provided for in this Article shall not apply to materials:  (a) of Harmonized System headings 1604 and 1605 originating in the Pacific States that have concluded an EPA by use of Article 6.6 of Protocol II to the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement between the UK, of the one part, and the Pacific States, of the other part;  (b) of Harmonized System headings 1604 and 1605 originating in the Pacific States that have concluded an EPA by use of any future provision of a comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between the UK and Pacific States.   ARTICLE 5  Cumulation in the UK  1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(1), products shall be considered as originating in the UK if they are produced there, incorporating materials originating in an EAC Partner State or in the EU, in the other ACP States with which the UK applies a preferential trade agreement or in the OCTs, provided the working or processing carried out in the UK goes beyond that the operations referred to in Article 9(1). It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing.  Where the working or processing carried out in the UK does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 9(1), the product produced shall be considered as originating in the UK only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used originating in any one of the other countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country or territory which accounts for the highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in the UK.  The origin of the materials originating in the other ACP States with which the UK applies a preferential trade agreement or in the UK OCTs shall be determined according to the rules of origin applicable in the framework of the UK.s preferential arrangements with these countries and territories and in accordance with Article 28.  The origin of materials originating in the EU or in the EU OCTs shall be determined in accordance with the rules of origin of this Agreement.  2. Without prejudice to the provisions to Article 2(1)(b), working or processing carried out in an EAC Partner State, the EU, in the other ACP States with which the UK applies a preferential trade agreement or in the OCTs shall be considered as having been carried out in the UK when the products obtained there have undergone subsequent working or processing.   3. Where the working or processing carried out in the UK does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 9(1), the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the UK only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used in any one of the other countries or territories. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country or territory which accounts for the highest value of materials used in the manufacture.  4. The origin of the final product shall be determined according to the rules of origin of this Protocol and in accordance with Article 28. The cumulation provided in this Article may only be applied provided that:  (a) all the countries and territories involved in the acquisition of the originating status and the country of destination have concluded an arrangement or agreement on administrative co-operation which ensures a correct implementation of this Article;  (b) the UK shall provide the EAC Partner State(s) details of agreements on administrative co-operation with the other countries or territories referred to in this Article. The UK shall publish according to its own procedures, and the EAC Partner State(s) shall publish according to their own procedures, the date on which the cumulation provided for in this Article may be applied with those countries or territories listed in this Article which have fulfilled the necessary requirements.  5. The cumulation provided for in this Article shall not apply to materials:  (a) of Harmonized System headings 1604 and 1605 originating in the EPA Pacific States by use of Article 6.6 of Protocol II to the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement between the UK, on the one part, and the Pacific States, on the other part;  (b) of Harmonized Systems headings 1604 and 1605 originating in the Pacific States by use of any future provision of a comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between the UK and Pacific ACP States.   ARTICLE 6  Cumulation with other Countries Benefiting from Duty-Free Quota-Free Access to the UK Market  1.1 Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2) of this Protocol, materials shall be considered as materials originating in an EAC Partner State when incorporated into a product obtained there, provided:   (a) they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred to in Article 9(1) of this Protocol; and  (b) they meet the requirements of paragraph 1.2.  1.2 Subject to paragraph 1.3, the requirements to be satisfied for the purposes of paragraph 1.1(b) are as follows:  (a) the materials originate in countries or territories that benefit from duty free, quota free import duty arrangements granted by the UK;   (b) those import duty arrangements are granted under a UK generalised scheme of preferences for developing countries that is notified to the Committee (“the GSP”);   (c) those import duty arrangements are not granted pursuant to an enhanced framework2 under the GSP; and  2 An enhanced framework is one provided for in GSP, where a country or territory is granted more preferential import duty arrangements, than it would otherwise receive under the scheme, provided it meets specified conditions relating to the ratification and implementation of certain international agreements.  (d) the materials originate in countries or territories that:  (i) benefitted from the “Special arrangement for least development countries” of the EU’s generalised system of preferences;   (ii) benefitted from duty-free quota-free access to the EU market under the general provisions of the EU’s generalised system of preferences, on the date such arrangement and system ceased to be applicable to the UK.   1.3 The requirements in sub-paragraphs 1.2 (c) or (d) may be modified, from such date as the UK may notify in writing to the Committee, as follows:  (a) the UK may specify materials to which sub-paragraph 1.2(c) does not apply, or may dis-apply that sub-paragraph in whole or in part;  (b) the UK may specify products as exceptions to sub-paragraph 1.2(d).   1.4 The origin of the materials of the countries or territories concerned shall be determined according to the rules of origin applicable in the framework of the UK.s preferential arrangements with those countries and territories and in accordance with Article 28.  1.5 The cumulation provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to:  (a)materials which at importation to the UK are subject to antidumping orcountervailing duties when originating from the country which is subjectto these antidumping or countervailing duties;33 For the purpose of the implementation of this specific exclusion, non preferential rules of origin applicable at the UK border should apply. 4 For the purpose of the implementation of this specific exclusion, non preferential rules of origin applicable at the UK border should apply. (b)materials classified in tariff subheadings of the Harmonized Systemwhich include also other tariff lines at 8 digits which are not free ofcustoms duties by means of application of the arrangements of paragraph1;(c)tuna products classified under HS Chapter 3 for which the duties aresuspended in accordance with general arrangements of the GSP;(d)products for which the tariff preferences are removed as a result ofgraduation, a temporary withdrawal or of safeguard clauses inaccordance with general arrangements of the GSP.2.At the request of an EAC Partner State, without prejudice to the provisions ofArticle 2 and provided that the conditions of Paragraphs 2.1, 2.2 and 5 are met,materials originating in countries and territories which benefit from agreements orarrangements that provide for duty-free quota-free access to the market of the UKshall be considered as materials originating in an EAC Partner State. The requestshall be submitted by the EAC Partner State to the UK which shall grant the requestin accordance with its internal procedures. The cumulation will remain in place aslong as the aforementioned conditions are fulfilled.It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred to in Article 9(1). 2.1 The origin of the materials of the countries or territories concerned shall be determined according to the rules of origin applicable in the framework of the UK.s preferential agreements or arrangements with those countries and territories and in accordance with Article 28. 2.2 The cumulation provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to materials: (a)falling within Harmonized System Chapters 1 to 24 and the productslisted in the Annex 1 - paragraph 1.(ii) of the WTO Agreement onAgriculture;(b)which at importation to the UK are subject to antidumping orcountervailing duties when originating from the country which is subjectto these antidumping or countervailing duties;4(c) classified in tariff subheadings of the Harmonized System which include also other tariff lines at 8 digits which are not free of customs duties by means of application of agreements or arrangements referred to in paragraph 2;  (d) which under any concluded free trade agreement between the UK and a third country are subject to trade remedies and safeguards or any other measure that deny such products duty free quota free market access into the UK.  3. The UK shall notify yearly to the Committee the list of materials and countries to which paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply. The EAC Partner State(s) shall notify the UK, on a quarterly basis, the materials to which cumulation under paragraphs 1 and 2 has been applied.5 5 The UK will provide for a form to be used by ACP States for the purposes of the notification. The form will at least cover the following elements: the description of materials used for cumulation and the origin of materials.  4. Movement certificates EUR 1 or origin declarations issued by application of paragraph 1 and 2 shall bear the following entry (in Box/Field 7): .Application of Article 6.1 or 6.2 of Protocol 1 to the EPA between the Republic of Kenya, a Member of the EAC, and the UK’.  5. The cumulation provided for in paragraph 1 and 2 of this Article may only be applied provided that:  (a) all the countries and territories involved in the acquisition of the originating status have entered into an arrangement or agreement on administrative cooperation with each other using the template in Annex X, which ensures a correct implementation of this Article and includes a reference to the use of appropriate proofs of origin;  (b) the EAC Partner State or States will provide the UK, with details of arrangements or agreements on administrative cooperation with the other countries or territories referred to in this Article. The UK shall publish, according to its own procedures, the date on which the cumulation provided for in this Article may be applied with those countries and territories listed in this Article which have fulfilled the necessary requirements.   ARTICLE 7  Wholly Obtained Products  1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in an EAC Partner State or in the UK:  (a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed;  (b) plants and vegetable products grown, harvested or gathered there;  (c) live animals born and raised there;  (d) products from live animals raised there;  (e) products from slaughtered animals born and raised there;  (f) (i) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;  (ii) products of aquaculture, including mariculture, where the fish are born and raised there;  (g) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside any territorial sea of the EAC Partner State(s) or of the UK by their vessels;  (h) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in (f);  (i) used articles collected there provided that such goods are fit only for the recovery of raw materials;  (j) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;  (k) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside their territorial waters provided that they have sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;  (l) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in (a) to (j).  2. The terms “their vessels” and “their factory ships” in paragraph 1(g) and (h) shall apply only to vessels and factory ships:  (a) which are registered in the UK, in an EAC Partner State or in a UK OCT;  (b) which sail under the flag of the UK, of an EAC Partner State or of a UK OCT;  (c) which meet one of the following conditions:  (i) they are at least 50 percent owned by nationals of the UK, of an EU Member State, of an EAC Partner State or of an OCT; or  (ii) they are owned by companies  – which have their office and their main place of business in the UK, in an EU Member State, in an EAC Partner State or in an OCT; and  – which are at least 50 percent owned by the UK, by an EU Member State, by an EAC Partner State or by an OCT, public entities or nationals of that State.  3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, the UK shall recognise, upon request of an EAC Partner State, that vessels chartered or leased by the EAC Partner State be treated as “their vessels” to undertake fisheries activities under the following conditions:  (a) they operate under the flag of the EAC Partner State; and  (b) the EAC Partner State offered the UK the opportunity to negotiate a fishery agreement and the UK did not accept this offer; and  (c) at least 50% of crew, master and officers included are nationals of States party to the Agreement, or of the EU, or of an OCT; and  (d) the fish is landed and processed in the EAC Partner State; and  (e) the activities undertaken under this paragraph target a surplus identified by means of scientific advice made available in the context of the IOTC by relevant international, regional or national authorities; and  (f) the charter or lease contract has been accepted by the Committee as providing adequate opportunities for developing the capacity of the EAC Partner State to fish in its own account and in particular as conferring on the EAC Partner State the responsibility for the nautical and commercial management of the vessel placed at its disposal for a significant period of time.  4. The conditions of paragraph 2 may each be fulfilled in the UK, in different EAC Partner State(s), in the EU, in the OCTs or ACP States belonging to other preferential trade agreements insofar as the countries involved benefit from cumulation in accordance with Articles 4 and 5. In this case, the products shall be deemed to have the origin of the country under which flag the vessel or factory ship sails in accordance with paragraph 2(b).  These conditions shall only apply with regard to the EU, the OCTs and ACP States belonging to other preferential trade agreements provided that the provisions of Article 4(3) have been fulfilled.   ARTICLE 8  Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products  1. For the purposes of Article 2, products which are not wholly obtained are considered to be sufficiently worked or processed, when the conditions set out in Annex II are fulfilled.  2. The conditions referred to in paragraph 1 above indicate, for all products covered by this Agreement, the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. Accordingly, it follows that if a product which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in Annex II is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.  3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in Annex II, should not be used in the manufacture of a given product may nevertheless be used, provided that their total value or net weight assessed for the product does not exceed:  (a) 15% of the weight of the product for products falling within Chapters 2 and 4 to 24 of the Harmonized System, other than processed fishery products of Chapter 16;  (b) 15% of the ex-works price of the product for other products, except for products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, for which the tolerances mentioned in Notes 6 and 7 of Part I of Annex II shall apply.  4. Paragraph 3 shall not allow exceeding any of the percentages for the maximum content of non- originating materials as specified in the rules laid down in the list in Annex II.  5. Paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products wholly obtained within the meaning of Article 7. However, without prejudice to Article 9 and 10(1), the tolerance provided for in those paragraphs shall nevertheless apply to the sum of all the materials which are used in the manufacture of a product and for which the rule laid down in the list in Annex II for that product requires that such materials be wholly obtained.   ARTICLE 9  Insufficient Working or Processing  1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 8 are satisfied:  (a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during transport and storage;  (b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;  (c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;  (d) ironing or pressing of textiles;  (e) simple painting and polishing operations;  (f) husking, partial or total milling of rice, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;  (g) operations to colour and flavour sugar or form sugar lumps; partial or total milling of crystal sugar;  (h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;  (i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;  (j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching (including the making-up of sets of articles);  (k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards and all other simple packaging operations;  (l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;  (m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; mixing of sugar with any material;  (n) simple addition of water or dilution or dehydration or denaturation of products;  (o) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of products into parts;  (p) a combination of two or more operations specified in (a) to (o);  (q) slaughter of animals.  2. All operations carried out either in the UK or in the EAC Partner State(s) on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.   ARTICLE 10  Unit of Qualification  1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonized System. Accordingly, it follows that:  (a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonized System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification;  (b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonized System, each product must be taken individually when applying the provisions of this Protocol.  2. Where, under General Rule 5 for the interpretation of the Harmonized System, packaging is included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.   ARTICLE 11  Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools  Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.     ARTICLE 12  Sets  Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 for the interpretation of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded as originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15 per cent of the ex-works price of the set.   ARTICLE 13  Neutral Elements  In order to determine whether a product is originating, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:  (a) energy and fuel;  (b) plant and equipment;  (c) machines and tools;  (d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product.   TITLE III  TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS   ARTICLE 14  Principle of Territoriality  1. Except as provided for in Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Title II must be fulfilled without interruption in the EAC Partner State(s) or in the UK.  2. Except as provided for in Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6, where originating goods exported from an EAC Partner State or from the UK to another country return, they must be considered as non- originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:  (a) the returning goods are the same goods as those exported; and  (b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.   ARTICLE 15  Non-alteration  1. The products declared for home use in a Party shall be the same products as exported from the other Party in which they are considered to originate. They shall not have been altered, transformed in any way or subjected to operations other than to preserve them in good condition or other than adding or affixing marks, labels, seals or any documentation to ensure compliance with specific domestic requirements of the importing Party, prior to being declared for home use.  2. Storage of products or consignments may take place provided they remain under customs supervision in the country(ies) of transit.  3. Without prejudice to the provisions of Title IV, the splitting of consignments may take place where carried out by the exporter or under his responsibility, provided they remain under customs supervision in the country(ies) of splitting.  4. Compliance with paragraphs 1 to 3 shall be considered as satisfied unless the customs authorities have reason to believe the contrary. In such cases, the customs authorities may request the declarant to provide evidence of compliance, which may be given by any means, including contractual transport documents such as bills of lading or factual or concrete evidence based on marking or numbering of packages or any evidence related to the goods themselves.   ARTICLE 16  Exhibitions  1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in a country or territory other than those referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6 with which cumulation is applicable and sold after the exhibition for importation in the UK or in an EAC Partner State shall benefit on importation from the provisions of this Agreement provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:  (a) an exporter has consigned these products from an EAC Partner State or from the UK to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;  (b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in an EAC Partner State or in the UK;  (c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and  (d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.  2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title IV and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.  3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs control.   TITLE IV  PROOF OF ORIGIN   ARTICLE 17  General Requirements  1. Products originating in an EAC Partner State, on importation into the UK and products originating in the UK, on importation into an EAC Partner State shall benefit from the provisions of this Agreement upon submission of either:  (a) a movement certificate EUR 1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III; or  (b) in the cases specified in Article 22 (1), a declaration, subsequently referred to as the "origin declaration", given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified. The text of the origin declaration appears in Annex IV.  2. Upon notification in the Committee from the UK to the EAC Partner State(s), products originating in the UK shall on importation into an EAC Partner State benefit from preferential tariff treatment of this Agreement upon submission of an origin declaration made out as provided for in Article 22 by an exporter registered in accordance with the relevant legislation of the UK. Such notification may stipulate that paragraph 1(a) and (b) shall cease to apply to the UK.  3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 27, benefit from this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above.  4. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this Title, the exporters shall endeavour to use a language common to both the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK.   ARTICLE 18  Procedure for the Issue of a Movement Certificate EUR 1  1. A movement certificate EUR 1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting country on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorised representative.  2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out both the movement certificate EUR 1 and the application form, specimens of which appear in Annex III. These forms shall be completed in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.  3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR 1 shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country where the movement certificate EUR 1 is issued, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  4. A movement certificate EUR 1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the UK or of an EAC Partner State if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the UK or in an EAC Partner State or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  5. The issuing customs authorities shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter.s accounts or any other check considered appropriate. The issuing customs authorities shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.  6. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR 1 shall be indicated in Box 11 of the certificate.  7. A movement certificate EUR 1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.   ARTICLE 19  Movement Certificates EUR 1 Issued Retrospectively  1. Notwithstanding Article 18(7), a movement certificate EUR 1 may exceptionally be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:  (a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or  (b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate EUR 1 was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.  2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR 1 relates, and state the reasons for his request.  3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR 1 retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter.s application agrees with that in the corresponding file.  4. Movement certificates EUR 1 issued retrospectively must be endorsed with the following phrase in English:  “ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY”  5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the “Remarks” box of the movement certificate EUR 1.   ARTICLE 20  Issue of a Duplicate Movement Certificate EUR 1  1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR 1, the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.   2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with the following word in English:   “DUPLICATE”  3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the “Remarks” box of the duplicate movement certificate EUR 1.  4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate EUR 1, shall take effect as from that date.   ARTICLE 21  Issue of Movement Certificates EUR 1 on the Basis of a Proof of Origin Issued or Made Out Previously  When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in an EAC Partner State or in the UK, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates EUR 1 for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere within the EAC Partner State(s) or within the UK. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR 1 shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed and endorsed by the customs authority under whose control the products are placed.   ARTICLE 22  Conditions for Making Out an Origin Declaration  1. An origin declaration as referred to in Article 17(1)(b) may be made out:  (a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23; or  (b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products whose total value does not exceed EUR 6 000.  2. An origin declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in an EAC Partner State or in the UK or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  3. The exporter making out an origin declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  4. An origin declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV to this Protocol, and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed characters.  5. Origin declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23 shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of the exporting country a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any origin declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.  6. An origin declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing country no longer than two years after the importation of the products to which it relates.   ARTICLE 23  Approved Exporter  1. The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorise any exporter who makes frequent shipments of products under the trade cooperation provisions of this Agreement to make out origin declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation must offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.  3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation number which shall appear on the origin declaration.  4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved exporter.  5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, does not fulfil the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorisation.     ARTICLE 24  Validity of Proof of Origin  1. A proof of origin shall be valid for ten (10) months from the date of issue in the exporting country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing country.  2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.  3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing country may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the said final date.   ARTICLE 25  Submission of Proof of Origin  Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the implementation of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 26  Importation by Instalments  Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of the importing country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a) for the interpretation of the Harmonized System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or heading 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonized System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.     ARTICLE 27  Exemptions from Proof of Origin  1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of travellers. personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, this declaration can be made on customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.  2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.  3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the case of small packages or EUR 1 200 in the case of products forming part of travellers. personal luggage.   ARTICLE 28  Information Procedure for Cumulation Purposes  1. When Articles 4(1) and 5(1) are applied, the evidence of originating status within the meaning of this Protocol of the materials coming from an EAC Partner State, from the UK, from the EU, from another ACP State or from an OCT shall be given by a movement certificate EUR 1 or by the supplier.s declaration, a specimen of which appears in Annex V (A) to this Protocol, given by the exporter in the State, OCT, EU or in the UK from which the materials came.  2. When Articles 4(2) and 5(2) are applied, the evidence of the working or processing carried out in an EAC Partner State, in the UK, in the EU, in another ACP State or in an OCT shall be given by the supplier.s declaration a specimen of which appears in Annex V (B) to this Protocol, given by the exporter in the State, OCT, EU or in the UK from which the materials came.  3. When Article 6(1) is applied, the documentary proofs of origin applicable shall be determined in accordance with the rules which apply to GSP countries, which are provided for in UK legislation.  4. When Article 6(2) is applied, the documentary proofs of origin applicable shall be determined in accordance with the rules laid down in the relevant arrangements or agreements.  5. A separate supplier.s declaration shall be made up by the supplier for each consignment of goods on the commercial invoice related to that shipment or in an annex to that invoice, or on a delivery note or other commercial document related to that shipment which describes the materials concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified.  6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 5 and when Article 4 is applied, when an EAC Partner State supplier regularly supplies a particular EAC Partner State customer with goods whose status in respect of the rules of preferential origin is expected to remain constant for considerable periods of time, he may provide a singe declaration to cover subsequent shipments of those goods, hereinafter referred to as a “Long Term Supplier’s Declaration”. A Long Term Supplier’s Declaration may be issued for a period of up to one (1) year from the date of issue of the Declaration. The supplier shall inform the buyer immediately when the long-term supplier’s declaration is no longer valid in relation to the goods supplied.  7. When paragraph 6 is applied the evidence of originating status within the meaning of this Protocol of the materials coming from an EAC Partner State shall be given by the Long Term Supplier.s Declaration, a specimen of which appears in Annex V (C). The evidence of the working or processing carried in an EAC Partner State shall be given by the Long Term Supplier.s Declaration, a specimen of which appears in Annex V(D).  8. The supplier.s declaration or the Long Term Supplier’s Declaration as referred to in paragraph 6 may be made out on a pre-printed form.  9. The supplier.s declarations or the Long Term Supplier’s Declaration as referred to in paragraph 6 shall bear the original signature of the supplier in manuscript. However, where the origin and the supplier.s declaration are established using electronic data-processing methods, the supplier.s declaration need not be signed in manuscript provided the responsible official in the supplying company is identified to the satisfaction of the customs authorities in the State where the supplier.s declarations are established. The said customs authorities may lay down conditions for the implementation of this paragraph.  10. The supplier.s declarations or the Long Term Supplier’s Declaration as referred to in paragraph 6 shall be submitted to the customs authorities in the exporting country requested to issue the movement certificate EUR 1.  11. The supplier or long term supplier making out a declaration must be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the country where the declaration is made out, all appropriate documents proving that the information given on this declaration is correct.     ARTICLE 29  Supporting Documents  The documents referred to in Articles 18(3) and 22(3) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a movement certificate EUR 1 or an origin declaration can be considered as products originating in an EAC Partner State, in the UK or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6(2) and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol may consist, inter alia, of the following:  (a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;  (b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in an EAC Partner State, in the UK or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6(2) where these documents are used in accordance with national law;  (c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in an EAC Partner State, in the UK or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5, issued or made out in an EAC Partner State, in the UK or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5 where these documents are used in accordance with national law;  (d) movement certificates EUR 1 or origin declarations proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in an EAC Partner State, in the UK or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6(2) and in accordance with this Protocol.   ARTICLE 30  Preservation of Proof of Origin and Supporting Documents  1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR 1 shall keep the documents referred to in Article 18(3), for five (5) years in the EAC Partner State(s) and at least three (3) years in the UK.  2. The exporter making out an origin declaration shall keep for at least three (3) years a copy of this origin declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 22(3).  3. The supplier making out a supplier.s declaration shall keep copies of the declaration and of the invoice, delivery notes or other commercial document to which this declaration is annexed as well as the documents referred to in Article 29 for five (5) years in the EAC Partner State(s) and at least three (3) years in the UK.  4. The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement certificate EUR 1 shall keep the application form referred to in Article 18(2) for five (5) years in the EAC Partner State(s) and at least three (3) years in the UK.  5. The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep the movement certificates EUR 1 and the origin declarations submitted to them for five (5) years in the EAC Partner State(s) and at least three (3) years in the UK.   ARTICLE 31  Discrepancies and Formal Errors  1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products submitted.  2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.   ARTICLE 32  Amounts Expressed in Euro for Goods Referred to in Articles 22(1)(b) and Article 27(3)  1. For the application of the provisions of Article 22(1)(b) and Article 27(3) in cases where products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the national currencies of an EAC Partner State, of the UK and of the other countries or territories referred to in Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6 equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro shall be exchange rates fixed annually according to paragraphs 2 to 4. The fixed exchange rate shall not be applicable for tax purposes.  2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 22(1)(b) or Article 27(3) by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the country concerned.  3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that currency of the amounts expressed in euro as at the first working day of October. The amounts shall be communicated to the UK by 15 October and shall apply from 1 January the following year. The Parties shall notify each other of the relevant amounts.   4. A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its national currency of an amount expressed in euro. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5 per cent. A country may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, prior to any rounding-off, results in an increase of less than 15 per cent in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a decrease in that equivalent value.  5. The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the Committee at the request of the UK or of the EAC Partner State(s). When carrying out this review, the Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in euro.   TITLE V  ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION   ARTICLE 33  Administrative Conditions for Products to Benefit from this Agreement  1. Products originating within the meaning of this Protocol in the EAC Partner State(s) or in the UK shall benefit, at the time of the customs import declaration, from the preferences resulting from this Agreement only on condition that they were exported on or after the date on which the exporting country complies with the provisions laid down in paragraph 2.  2. The Parties shall undertake to put in place:  (a) the necessary national and regional arrangements required for the implementation and enforcement of the rules and procedures laid down in this Protocol, including where appropriate the arrangements necessary for the application of Articles 4, 5 and 6;  (b) the administrative structures and systems necessary for an appropriate management and control of the origin of products and compliance with the other conditions laid down in this Protocol.  3. The Parties shall make the notifications referred to in Article 34.     ARTICLE 34  Notification of Customs Authorities  1. The EAC Partner State(s) and the UK shall provide each other with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for issuing and verifying of movement certificates EUR 1 and origin declarations or supplier.s declarations, and with specimen impressions of the stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of these certificates.  Movement certificates EUR 1 and origin declarations or supplier.s declarations shall be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment from the date the information is received by the EAC Partner State(s) and the UK.  2. The EAC Partner State(s) and the UK shall inform each other immediately whenever there are any changes to the information referred to in paragraph 1.  3. The authorities referred to in paragraph 1 shall act under the authority of the government of the country concerned. The authorities in charge of control and verification shall be part of the governmental authorities of the country concerned.   ARTICLE 35  Methods of Administrative Cooperation  1. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the UK, the EAC Partner State(s) and the other countries and territories referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6 shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR 1, the origin declarations or the supplier.s declarations and the correctness of the information given in these documents.  2. The authorities consulted shall furnish the relevant information concerning the conditions under which the product has been made, indicating especially the conditions in which the rules of origin have been respected in the various EAC Partner State(s), in the UK and the other countries and territories referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6 concerned.     ARTICLE 36  Verification of Proofs of Origin  1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out based on risk analysis and at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs authorities of the importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR 1 and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the origin declaration, or a copy of these documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the request for verification. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.  3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting country. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter.s or manufacturer.s accounts or any other check considered appropriate.  4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.  5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in an EAC Partner State, in the UK or in one of the other countries and territories referred to in Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten (10) months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.  7. The parties will refer to Article 7 of Protocol II on Mutual Administrative Assistance in customs matters for joint enquiries related to proofs of origin.     ARTICLE 37  Verification of Suppliers. Declarations  1. Verification of suppliers. declarations shall be carried out based on risk analysis and at random or whenever the customs authorities of the country where such declarations have been taken into account to issue a movement certificate EUR 1 or to make out an origin declaration, have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of the document or the correctness of the information given in this document.  2. The customs authorities to which a supplier.s declaration is submitted may request the customs authorities of the State where the declaration was made to issue an information certificate, a specimen of which appears in Annex VI to this Protocol. Alternatively, the certifying authorities to which a supplier.s declaration is submitted may request the exporter to produce an information certificate issued by the customs authorities of the State where the declaration was made.  A copy of the information certificate shall be preserved by the office which has issued it for five (5) years in the case of the EAC Partner State(s) and at least three (3) years in the case of UK.  3. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results thereof within ten (10) months. The results must indicate clearly whether the information given in the supplier.s declaration is correct and make it possible for them to determine whether and to what extent this supplier.s declaration could be taken into account for issuing a movement certificate EUR 1 or for making out an origin declaration.  4. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the country where the supplier's declaration was made out. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence or to carry out any inspection of the supplier.s account or any other check which they consider appropriate in order to verify the correctness of any supplier.s declaration.  5. Any movement certificate EUR 1 or origin declaration issued or made out on the basis of an incorrect supplier.s declaration shall be considered null and void.   ARTICLE 38  Dispute Settlement  Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Articles 36 and 37 which cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification or where they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Committee.  In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the importing country shall take place under the legislation of that country.   ARTICLE 39  Penalties  Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for products.   ARTICLE 40  Derogations  1. Derogations from this Protocol may be adopted by the Committee, where the development of existing industries or the creation of new industries in the EAC Partner State(s) justify them.  An EAC Partner State or States concerned shall, either before or when submitting the matter to the Committee, notify the UK of its request for derogation together with the reasons for the request in accordance with paragraph 2.  The UK shall respond positively to all the EAC Partner State(s). requests which are duly justified in conformity with this Article and which cannot cause serious injury to an established UK industry.  2. In order to facilitate the examination by the Committee of request for derogation, the EAC Partner State or States making the request shall, by means of the form given in Annex VII to this Protocol, furnish in support of its request the fullest possible information covering in particular the points listed below:  (a) description of the finished product;  (b) nature and quantity of materials originating in a third country;  (c) nature and quantity of materials originating in the EAC Partner State(s) or the countries or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5 or the materials which have been processed there;  (d) manufacturing processes;  (e) value added;  (f) number of employees in the enterprise concerned;  (g) anticipated volume of exports to the UK;  (h) other possible sources of supply for raw materials;  (i) reasons for the duration requested in the light of efforts made to find new sources of supply;  (j) other observations.  The same rules shall apply to any requests for extension. The Committee may modify the form.  3. The examination of requests shall in particular take into account:  (a) the level of development or the geographical situation of the EAC Partner State or States concerned;  (b) cases where the application of the existing rules of origin would significantly affect the ability of an existing industry in an EAC Partner State to continue its exports to the UK, with particular reference to cases where this could lead to cessation of its activities;  (c) specific cases where it can be clearly demonstrated that significant investment in an industry could be deterred by the rules of origin and where a derogation favouring the realisation of the investment programme would enable these rules to be satisfied by stages.  4. In every case an examination shall be made to ascertain whether the rules relating to cumulation of origin do not provide a solution to the problem.  5. In the examination of requests, special account shall be taken, case by case, of the possibility of conferring originating status on products which include in their composition materials originating in neighbouring developing countries, least-developed countries or developing countries with which one or more EAC Partner State(s) have special relations, provided that satisfactory administrative cooperation can be established.  6. Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 to 5, the derogation shall be granted provided that the derogation is not such as to cause serious injury to an economic sector of the UK.  7. Without prejudice to and in addition to paragraphs 1 to 6, derogations concerning tuna loins of heading 1604 made from non-originating tuna of headings 0302 or 0303 shall be granted within an annual quota of 681 tonnes. Applications for such derogations shall be submitted by the EAC Partner State(s) in accordance with the abovementioned quota to the Committee, which shall grant them automatically and put them into force by means of a decision. The Parties agree to review this quota as appropriate through the Committee and in light of the development of existing industries or the creation of new industries in the EAC Partner State(s).  8. The Committee shall take steps necessary to ensure that a decision is reached as soon as possible and in any case not later than seventy-five (75) working days after the request is received by the UK Co-chairman of the Committee. If the UK does not inform an EAC Partner State of its position on the request within this period, the request shall be deemed to have been accepted.  9. (a) The derogation shall be valid for a period, generally of five (5) years, to be determined by the Committee.  (b) The derogation decision may provide for renewals without a new decision of the Committee being necessary, provided that the EAC Partner State concerned submits, three (3) months before the end of each period, proof that it is still unable to meet the conditions of this Protocol which have been derogated from.  If any objection is made to the extension, the Committee shall examine it as soon as possible and decide whether to prolong the derogation. The Committee shall proceed as provided for in paragraph 8. All necessary measures shall be taken to avoid interruptions in the application of the derogation.  (c) In the periods referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b), the Committee may review the terms for implementing the derogation should a significant change be found to have taken place in the substantive factors governing the decision to grant the derogation. On conclusion of its review the Committee may decide to amend the terms of its decision as regards the scope of derogation or any other condition previously laid down.   TITLE VI  CEUTA AND MELILLA   ARTICLE 41  Special Conditions  1. The term “EU” used in this Protocol does not cover Ceuta and Melilla. The term “products originating in the EU” does not cover products originating in Ceuta and Melilla.     TITLE VII  FINAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 42  Revision and Application of Rules of Origin  1. In accordance with Articles 9 and 142 of this Agreement, this Protocol including its Annexes shall be reviewed every five (5) years after entry into force of this Agreement, or whenever the EAC Partner State(s) or the UK so request, with a view to making any necessary amendments or adaptations, in particular having regard to the principle that wherever possible and upon agreement by both Parties, for each product specific rule of Annex II the same rule of origin applies to the exports of both Parties. In such review, the Parties shall also take into account the development needs of the EAC Partner State(s) such as development of technologies, production processes and all other factors.  The decisions taken shall be implemented as soon as possible.  2. In accordance with Article 29 of this Agreement, the Committee shall, inter alia:  (a) take decisions on cumulation under the conditions laid down in Article 6;  (b) take decisions on derogations from this Protocol, under the conditions laid down in Article 40;  (c) recommend amendments of this Protocol to the EPA Council.   ARTICLE 43  Amendment of the Protocol  The EPA Council may decide to amend the provisions of this Protocol.   ARTICLE 44  Annexes  The Annexes to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.     ARTICLE 45  Implementation of the Protocol  The UK and the EAC Partner State(s) shall each take the steps necessary to implement this Protocol.   ANNEX I  Protocol 1  Introductory notes to the list in Annex II  Note 1:  The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or processed within the meaning of Article 8 of the Protocol.  Note 2:  1. The first two columns in the list describe the product obtained. The first column gives the heading number or chapter number used in the Harmonized System and the second column gives the description of goods used in that system for that heading or chapter. For each entry in the first two columns a rule is specified in columns 3 or 4 and 5 or 6. Where, in some cases, the entry in the first column is preceded by an "ex", this signifies that the rules in columns 3 or 4 and 5 or 6 apply only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.  2. Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 1 or a chapter number is given and the description of products in column 2 is therefore given in general terms, the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4 and 5 or 6 apply to all products which, under the Harmonized System, are classified in headings of the chapter or in any of the headings grouped together in column 1.  3. Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within a heading, each indent contains the description of that part of the heading covered by the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4 and 5 or 6.  4. Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both columns 3 or 4 and 5 or 6, the exporter may opt, as an alternative, to apply either the rule set out in column 3 or that set out in column 4 or the rule set out in column 5 or that set out in column 6. If no origin rule is given in column 4 or 6, the rule set out in column 3 or 5 has to be applied.  Note 3:  1. The provisions of Article 8 of the Protocol concerning products having acquired originating status which are used in the manufacture of other products apply regardless of whether this status has been acquired inside the factory where these products are used or in another factory in the UK or in the EAC Partner State(s).    Example:  An engine of heading No 8407, for which the rule states that the value of the non-originating materials which may be incorporated may not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works price, is made from "other alloy steel roughly shaped by forging" of heading No ex 7224.  If this forging has been forged in the UK from a non-originating ingot, it has already acquired originating status by virtue of the rule for heading No ex 7224 in the list. The forging can then count as originating in the value calculation for the engine regardless of whether it was produced in the same factory or in another factory in the UK. The value of the non-originating ingot is thus not taken into account when adding up the value of the non-originating materials used.  2. The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or processing required and the carrying out of more working or processing also confers originating status; conversely, the carrying out of less working or processing cannot confer originating status. Therefore, if a  rule provides that non-originating material at a certain level of manufacture may be used, the use of such material at an earlier stage of manufacture is allowed and the use of such material at a later stage is not.  3. Without prejudice to Note 3.2 where a rule states that "materials of any heading" may be  used, materials of the same heading as the product may also be used, subject, however, to any specific limitations which may also be contained in the rule. However, the expression "manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No …" means that only materials classified in the same heading as the product of a different description than that of the product as given in column 2 of the list may be used.  4. When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufactured from more than one material, this means that any one or more materials may be used. It does not require that all be used.  Example:  The rule for fabrics of heading Nos 5208 to 5212 provides that natural fibres may be used and that chemical materials, among other materials, may also be used. This does not mean that both have to be used; it is possible to use one or the other or both.  5. Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a particular material, the condition obviously does not prevent the use of other materials which, because of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See also Note 6.3 below in relation to textiles).    Example:  The rule for prepared foods of heading No 1904 which specifically excludes the use of cereals and their derivatives does not prevent the use of mineral salts, chemicals and other additives which are not products from cereals.  However, this does not apply to products which, although they cannot be manufactured from the particular materials specified in the list, can be produced from a material of the same nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.  Example:  In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made from non-woven materials, if the use of only non-originating yarn is allowed for this class of article, it is not possible to start from non-woven cloth – even if non-woven cloths cannot normally be made from yarn. In such cases, the starting material would normally be at the stage before yarn – that is the fibre stage.  6. Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the maximum value of non-originating materials that can be used, then these percentages may not be added together. In other words, the maximum value of all the non-originating materials used may never exceed the highest of the percentages given. Furthermore, the individual percentages must not be exceeded in relation to the particular materials they apply to.  Note 4:  1. The term "natural fibres" is used in the list to refer to fibres other than artificial or synthetic fibres. It is restricted to the stages before spinning takes place, including waste, and, unless otherwise specified, includes fibres that have been carded, combed or otherwise processed but not spun.  2. The term "natural fibres" includes horsehair of heading No 0503, silk of heading Nos 5002 and 5003 as well as the wool fibres, fine or coarse animal hair of heading Nos 5101 to 5105, the cotton fibres of heading Nos 5201 to 5203 and the other vegetable fibres of heading  Nos 5301 to 5305.  3. The terms "textile pulp", "chemical materials" and "paper-making materials" are used in the list to describe the materials not classified in Chapters 50 to 63, which can be used to manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or yarns.  4. The term "man-made staple fibres" is used in the list to refer to synthetic or artificial filament tow, staple fibres or waste, of heading Nos 5501 to 5507.    Note 5:  1. Where for a given product in the list a reference is made to this note, the conditions set out in column 3 shall not be applied to any basic textile materials, used in the manufacture of this product, which, taken together, represent 10 per cent or less of the total weight of all the basic textile materials used. (See also Notes 5.3 and 5.4 below).  2. However, the tolerance mentioned in Note 5.1 may only be applied to mixed products which have been made from two or more basic textile materials.  The following are the basic textile materials:  – silk,  – wool,  – coarse animal hair,  – fine animal hair,  – horsehair,  – cotton,  – paper-making materials and paper,  – flax,  – true hemp,  – jute and other textile bast fibres,  – sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave,  – coconut, abaca, ramie and other vegetable textile fibres,  – synthetic man-made filaments,  – artificial man-made filaments,  – current conducting filaments,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polypropylene,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyamide,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyacrylonitrile,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyimide,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polytetrafluoroethylene,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyphenylene sulphide,  – synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyvinyl chloride,  – other synthetic man-made staple fibres,  – artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose,  – other artificial man-made staple fibres,  – yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped,  – yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyester whether or not gimped,  – products of heading No 5605 (metallized yarn) incorporating strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film,  – other products of heading No 5605.  Example:  A yarn of heading No 5205 made from cotton fibres of heading No 5203 and synthetic staple fibres of heading No 5506 is a mixed yarn. Therefore, non-originating synthetic staple fibres that do not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) may be used up to a weight of 10 per cent of the yarn.    Example:  A woollen fabric of heading No 5112 made from woollen yarn of heading No 5107 and synthetic yarn of staple fibres of heading No 5509 is a mixed fabric. Therefore synthetic yarn which does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) or woollen yarn that does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from natural fibres, not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning) or a combination of the two may be used provided their total weight does not exceed 10 per cent of the weight of the fabric.  Example:  Tufted textile fabric of heading No 5802 made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and cotton fabric of heading No 5210 is only a mixed product if the cotton fabric is itself a mixed fabric being made from yarns classified in two separate headings or if the cotton yarns used are themselves mixtures.  Example:  If the tufted textile fabric concerned had been made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and synthetic fabric of heading No 5407, then, obviously, the yarns used are two separate basic textile materials and the tufted textile fabric is accordingly a mixed product.  3. In the case of products incorporating "yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped" this tolerance is 20 per cent in respect of this yarn.  4. In the case of products incorporating "strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of an adhesive between two layers of plastic film", this tolerance is 30 per cent in respect of this strip.  Note 6:  1. In the case of those textile products, which are marked in the list by a footnote referring to this Introductory Note, textile trimmings and accessories which do not satisfy the rule set out in the list in column 3 for the made up products concerned may be used provided that their weight does not exceed 10% of the total weight of all the textile materials incorporated.  Textile trimmings and accessories are those classified in Chapters 50 to 63. Linings and interlinings are not be regarded as trimmings or accessories.  2. Any non-textile trimmings and accessories or other materials used which contain textiles do not have to satisfy the conditions set out in column 3 even though they fall outside the scope of Note 3.5.  3. In accordance with Note 3.5, any non-originating non-textile trimmings and accessories or other product, which do not contain any textiles, may, anyway, be used freely where they cannot be made from the materials listed in column 3.  For example1, if a rule in the list says that for a particular textile item, such as a blouse, yarn must be used, this does not prevent the use of metal items, such as buttons, because they cannot be made from textile materials. 1 This example is given for the purpose of explanation only. It is not legally binding. 1 See Introductory Note 7.4.  4. Where a percentage rule applies, the value of trimmings and accessories must be taken into account when calculating the value of the non-originating materials incorporated.  Note 7:  1. For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, the "specific processes" are the following:  (a) vacuum distillation;  (b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process2;   (c) cracking;  (d) reforming;  (e) extraction by means of selective solvents;  (f) the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;  (g) polymerisation;  (h) alkylation;  (i) isomerisation.  2. For the purposes of heading Nos 2710, 2711 and 2712, the "specific processes" are the following:  (a) vacuum distillation;  (b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process1;  (c) cracking;  (d) reforming  (e) extraction by means of selective solvents;  (f) the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;  (g) polymerisation;  (h) alkylation;  (i) isomerisation;  (j) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, desulphurisation with hydrogen resulting in a reduction of at least 85 per cent of the sulphur content of the products processed (ASTM D 1266-59 T method);  (k) in respect of products falling within heading No 2710 only, deparaffining by a process other than filtering;  (l) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, treatment with hydrogen at a pressure of more than 20 bar and a temperature of more than 250°C with the use of a catalyst, other than to effect desulphurisation, when the hydrogen constitutes an active element in a chemical reaction. The further treatment with hydrogen of lubricating oils of heading No ex 2710 (e.g. hydrofinishing or decolourisation) in order, more especially, to improve colour or stability shall not, however, be deemed to be a specific process;  (m) in respect of fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, atmospheric distillation, on condition that less than 30 per cent of these products distils, by volume, including losses, at 300°C by the ASTM D 86 method;  (n) in respect of heavy oils other than gas oils and  fuel oils  falling  within  heading  No ex 2710 only, treatment by means of a high-frequency electrical brush-discharge.  3. For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, simple operations such as cleaning, decanting, desalting, water separation, filtering, colouring, marking, obtaining a sulphur content as a result of mixing products with different sulphur contents, any combination of these operations or like operations do not confer origin.   4. Redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process means distillation (other than topping) by a continuous or batch process employed in industrial installations using distillates of subheadings 2710 12 11 to 2710 19 48, 2711 11 00, 2711 12 91 to 2711 19 00 , 2711 21 00 and 2711 29 00 (other than propane of a purity of 99% or more) to obtain:  (a) isolated high-purity hydrocarbons (90% or more in the case of olefins, and 95% or more in the case of other hydrocarbons), mixtures of isomers having the same organic composition being regarded as isolated hydrocarbons.  Only those processes by means of which at least three different products are obtained are admissible, but this restriction does not apply in any instance where the process consists in the separation of isomers. In so far as this concerns xylenes, ethylbenzene is included with xylene isomers;  (b) products of subheadings 2707 10 00 to 2707 30 00, 2707 50 00 and 2710 12 11 to 2710 19 48:  i. with no overlapping of the final boiling point of one fraction and the initial boiling point of the succeeding fraction and a difference of not more than 60 °C between the temperatures at which 5 and 90% by volume (including losses) distil by the EN ISO 3405 method (equivalent to the ASTM D 86 method);  ii. with an overlapping of the final boiling point of one fraction and the initial boiling point of the succeeding fraction and a difference of not more than 30 °C between the temperatures at which 5 and 90% by volume (including losses) distil by the EN ISO 3405 method (equivalent to the ASTM D 86 method).  Note 8  General Provisions concerning certain agricultural goods  1. All agricultural goods falling within Chapters 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and heading 2401 which are grown or harvested in the territory of the beneficiary country shall be treated as originating in the territory of that country, even if grown from seeds, bulbs, rootstock, cuttings, grafts, shoots, buds, or other live parts of plants imported from another country.  2. In cases where the content of non-originating sugar in a given product is subject to limitations, the weight of sugars of headings 1701 (sucrose) and 1702 (e.g., fructose, glucose, lactose, maltose, isoglucose or invert sugar) used in the manufacture of the final product and used in the manufacture of the non–originating products incorporated in the final product is taken into account for calculation of such limitations.   ANNEX II  LIST OF WORKING OR PROCESSING REQUIRED TO BE CARRIED OUT ON NON-ORIGINATING MATERIALS IN ORDER THAT THE PRODUCT MANUFACTURED CAN OBTAIN ORIGINATING STATUS  The products mentioned in the list may not all be covered by this Agreement. It is therefore necessary to consult the other parts of this Agreement.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  Or    (5)  Or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Live animals  All the animals    All the animals    01    of Chapter 1  of Chapter 1      used must be  used must be      wholly obtained  wholly        obtained  Chapter  Meat and edible meat  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    02  offal  which all the  which all the      meat and edible  meat and edible      meat offal in the  meat offal in      products of this  the products of      chapter is  this chapter is      wholly obtained  wholly        obtained  ex  Fish and crustaceans,  All fish and    All fish and    Chapter  molluscs and other  crustaceans,  crustaceans,  03  aquatic invertebrates;  molluscs and  molluscs and    except for:  other aquatic  other aquatic      invertebrates  invertebrates      are wholly  are wholly      obtained  obtained  0304  Fish fillets and other  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      fish meat (whether or  which all the  which the value    not minced), fresh,  materials of  of any    chilled or frozen  chapter 3 used  materials of      are wholly  Chapter 3 used      obtained  does not exceed        15% of the ex-        works price of        the product.   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  0305  Fish, dried, salted or    Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 3 used must be wholly obtained    Manufacture in      in brine; smoked  which the value    fish, whether or not  of any    cooked before or  materials of    during the smoking  Chapter 3 used    process; flours,  does not exceed    meals and pellets of  15% of the ex-    fish, fit for human  works price of    consumption  the product.  ex 0306  Crustaceans, whether    Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 3 used must be wholly obtained    Manufacture in      in shell or not, dried,  which the value    salted or in brine;  of any    crustaceans, in shell,  materials of    cooked by steaming  Chapter 3 used    or by boiling in  does not exceed    water, whether or not  15% of the ex-    chilled, frozen, dried,  works price of    salted or in brine;  the product    flours, meals and      pellets of      crustaceans, fit for      human consumption       Smoked crustaceans, whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process  Manufacture:  -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat offal of    Manufacture:  -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat    Chapter 2, and  offal of Chapter 2, and    -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained  -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 0307  Molluscs, whether in  Manufacture in which all the materials of chapter 3 used must be wholly obtained    Manufacture in      shell or not, dried,  which the value    salted or in brine;  of any    flours, meals and  materials of    pellets of  Chapter 3 used    crustaceans, fit for  does not exceed    human consumption  15% of the ex-      works price of      the product.    Smoked molluscs, whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process  Manufacture:  -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat offal of Chapter 2, and    Manufacture:  -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat offal of Chapter 2, and      -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained  -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 0308  Aquatic invertebrates other than crustaceans and molluscs, dried, salted or in brine; flours, meals and pellets of aquatic invertebrates other than crustaceans and molluscs, fit for human consumption  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 3 used must be wholly obtained    Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 15% of the ex-works price of the product      Smoked aquatic invertebrates other than crustaceans and molluscs, whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process  Manufacture: -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat offal of Chapter 2, and  Manufacture:  -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat offal of Chapter 2, and      -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained   -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter 04  Dairy produce; birds' eggs; natural honey; edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture in which:  -all the materials of Chapter 4 are wholly obtained; and    Manufacture in which:  -all the materials of Chapter 4 are wholly obtained; and        -the weight of sugar used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product  -the weight of sugar used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product  Chapter  Products of animal  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    05  origin, not elsewhere  which all the  which all the    specified or included  materials of  materials of      Chapter 5 used  Chapter 5 used      must be wholly  must be wholly      obtained  obtained   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Live trees and other  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    06  plants; bulbs, roots  which all the  which all the    and the like; cut  materials of  materials of    flowers and  Chapter 6 used  Chapter 6 used    ornamental foliage  must be wholly  must be wholly      obtained  obtained  Chapter  Edible vegetables  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    07  and certain roots and  which all the  which all the    tubers  materials of  materials of      Chapter 7 used  Chapter 7 used      must be wholly  must be wholly      obtained  obtained  Chapter  Edible fruit and nuts;  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    08  peel of citrus fruits or  which all the  which all the    melons  edible fruit, nuts  Edible fruit,      and peels of  nuts and peels      citrus fruits or  of citrus fruits      melons of  or melons of      Chapter 8 used  Chapter 8 used      must be wholly  must be wholly      obtained, and  obtained, and      -the weight of  - the weight of  sugar used does  sugar used does  not exceed 40%  not exceed 40%  of the weight of  of the weight of  the final  the final  product  product  Chapter  Coffee, tea, maté and  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    09  spices; except for:  which all the  which all the      materials of  materials of      Chapter 9 used  Chapter 9 used      must be wholly obtained  must be wholly  obtained  Chapter  Cereals  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    10    which all the  which all the      materials of  materials of      Chapter 10 used  Chapter 10      must be wholly  used must be      obtained  wholly        obtained   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Products of the  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    Chapter  milling industry;  which all the  which all the  11  malt; starches; inulin;  materials of  materials of    wheat gluten; except  Chapters 10 and  Chapters 10 and    for:  11, headings  11, headings      0701 and 2303,  0701 and 2303,      and subheading  and subheading      0710 10 are  0710 10 are      wholly obtained  wholly        obtained  1101  Wheat or meslin  Manufacture    Manufacture      flour  from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  Chapter  Oil seeds and  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    12  oleaginous fruits;  which all the  which all the    miscellaneous grains,  materials of  materials of    seeds and fruit;  Chapter 12 used  Chapter 12    industrial or  must be wholly  used must be    medicinal plants;  obtained  wholly    straw and fodder    obtained  Chapter  Lac; gums, resins  Manufacture      Manufacture from materials of any heading, in which the weight of sugar used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product  13  and other vegetable  from materials    saps and extracts  of any heading,      in which the      weight of sugar      used does not      exceed 40% of      the weight of      the final      product  Chapter  Vegetable plaiting  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    14  materials; vegetable  which all the  which all the    products not  materials of  materials of    elsewhere specified  Chapter 14 used  Chapter 14    or included  must be wholly  used must be      obtained  wholly        obtained      .     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Animal or vegetable  Manufacture in    Manufacture    Chapter  fats and oils and their  which all the  from materials  15  cleavage products;  animal or  of any    prepared edible fats;  vegetable  subheading,    animals or vegetable  materials used  except that of    waxes; except for:  must be wholly  the product      obtained     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  1501 to  Fats from pig,  Manufacture in    Manufacture    1504  poultry, bovine,  which all the  from materials    sheep or goat, fish,  materials of  of any heading;    etc  Chapters 2 or 3  except that of      used must be  the product      wholly obtained    1505,  Wool grease and  Manufacture in    Manufacture    1506 and  fatty substances  which all the  from materials  1520  derived thereof  materials of  of any heading      Chapter 15 used        must be wholly        obtained    1509 and  Olive oil and its  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    1510  fractions  which all the  which all the      vegetable  vegetable      materials used  materials used      are wholly  are wholly      obtained  obtained     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  1516 and 1517  Animals or vegetable fats and oils and their fractions, partly or wholly hydrogenated, inter-esterified, re-esterified or elaidinised, whether or not refined, but not further prepared  Margarine; edible mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats or oils or of fractions of different fats or oils of this Chapter, other than edible fats or oils or their fractions of heading 1516  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which the weight of all the materials of chapter 4 used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which the weight of all the materials of chapter 4 used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product    Chapter 16  Preparations of meat, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates  Manufacture:  -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat offal of Chapter 2, and  -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained    Manufacture:  -from materials of any heading, except meat end edible meat offal of Chapter 2 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from meat and edible meat offal of Chapter 2, and  -in which all the materials of Chapter 3 and materials of Chapter 16 obtained from fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates of Chapter 3 used are wholly obtained     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Sugars and sugar  Manufacture in    Manufacture    Chapter  confectionery; except  which all the  from materials  17  for:  vegetable  of any heading,      materials used  except that of      are wholly  the product      obtained    1702  Other sugars,  Manufacture    Manufacture      including chemically  from materials  from materials    pure lactose, maltose,  of any heading,  of any heading,    glucose and fructose,  except that of  except that of    in solid form; sugar  the product in  the product in    syrups not containing  which the  which the    added flavouring or  weight of the  weight of the    colouring matter;  materials of  materials of    artificial honey,  heading 1101 to  heading 1101    whether or not mixed  1108, 1701 and  to 1108, 1701    with natural honey;  1703 does not  and 1703 does    caramel  exceed 30% of  not exceed 30%      the weight of  of the weight of      the final  the final      product  product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  1704  Sugar confectionery (including white chocolate), not containing cocoa  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which: - the individual weight of sugar and materials of Chapter 4 does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product, and  - the total combined weight of sugar and the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 60% of the weight of the final product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which:  -the individual weight of sugar and of the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product, and  - the total combined weight of sugar and the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 60% of the weight of the final product    Ex  Cocoa and cocoa  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  preparations  from materials  from materials  18    of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of the product  except that of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  1806  Chocolate and other  Manufacture    Manufacture      food preparations  from materials  from materials    containing cocoa  of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product, in  the product, in      which:  which:      -the individual  -the individual  weight of sugar  weight of sugar  and of the  and of the  materials of  materials of  Chapter 4 used  Chapter 4 used  does not exceed  does not exceed  40% of the  40% of the  weight of the  weight of the  final product,  final product,  and  and      - the total  - the total  combined  combined  weight of sugar  weight of sugar  and the  and the  materials of  materials of  Chapter 4 used  Chapter 4 used  does not exceed  does not exceed  60% of the  60% of the  weight of the  weight of the  final product  final product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)   (4)  (3)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter 19  Preparations of cereals, flour, starch or milk; pastrycooks products  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which: - the weight of the materials of Chapters 2, 3 and 16 used does not exceed 20% of the weight of the final product, and - the weight of the materials of headings 1006 and 1101 to 1108 used does not exceed 20% of the weight of the final product, and -the individual weight of sugar and of the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product,    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which: - the weight of the materials of Chapters 2, 3 and 16 used does not exceed 20% of the weight of the final product, and - the weight of the materials of headings 1006 and 1101 to 1108 used does not exceed 20% of the weight of the final product, and -the individual weight of sugar and of the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product, and        - the total combined weight of sugar and the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 60% of the weight of the final product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Preparations of  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  vegetables, fruit, nuts  from materials  from materials  20  or other parts of  of any heading,  of any heading,    plants; except for:  except that of  except that of      the product, in  the product, in      which the  which the      weight of sugar  weight of sugar      does not exceed  does not exceed      40% of the  40% of the      weight of the  weight of the      final product  final product  2002 and  Tomatoes,  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    2003  mushrooms and  which all the  which all the    truffles prepared or  materials of  materials of    preserved otherwise  chapter 7 used  chapter 7 used    than by vinegar of  are wholly  are wholly    acetic acid  obtained  obtained  ex 2001  Yams, sweet  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      potatoes and similar  which all the  which all the    edible parts of plants  materials used  materials used    containing 5 % or  are wholly  are wholly    more by weight of  obtained  obtained    starch, prepared or        preserved by vinegar        or acetic acid      ex 2004  Potatoes in the form  Manufacture in    Manufacture    and  of flour, meal or  which all the  from materials  ex 2005  flakes, prepared or  vegetable  of any heading,    preserved otherwise  materials used  except that of    than by vinegar or  are wholly  the product, in    acetic acid  obtained  which the        weight of sugar        does not exceed        40% of the        weight of the        final product  ex 2008  Nuts, not containing  Manufacture in    Manufacture      added sugar or spirit  which all the  from materials      materials of  of any heading,      Chapter 8 used  except that of      are wholly  the product, in      obtained  which the        weight of sugar        does not exceed        40% of the        weight of the        final product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Miscellaneous edible  Manufacture    Manufacture    21  preparations  from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product, in  the product, in      which: -the individual weight of sugar and of the materials of Chapter 4 used  which: -the individual weight of sugar and of the materials of Chapter 4 used      does not exceed  does not exceed  40% of the  40% of the  weight of the  weight of the  final product,  final product,  and  and      - the total  - the total  combined  combined  weight of sugar  weight of sugar  and the  and the  materials of  materials of  Chapter 4 used  Chapter 4 used  does not exceed  does not exceed  60% of the  60% of the  weight of the  weight of the  final product  final product  Chapter  Beverages, spirits  Manufacture    Manufacture    22  and vinegar  from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product and  the product and      headings 2004,  headings 2004,      2207 and 2208,  2207 and 2208,      in which:  in which:      -all the  -all the  materials of  materials of  subheadings  subheadings  0806 10, 2009  0806 10, 2009  61 and 2009 69  61 and 2009 69  used are wholly  used are wholly  obtained  obtained   HS  Description of product  Working or processing  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  2202  Waters, including  Manufacture    Manufacture      mineral waters and  from materials  from materials    aerated waters,  of any heading  of any heading    containing added  except that of  except that of    sugar or other  the product, in  the product, in    sweetening matter or  which:  which:    flavoured, and other  -the individual  -the individual    non-alcoholic  weight  weight    beverages, not  of sugar and of  of sugar and of    including fruit or  the materials of  the materials of    vegetable juices of  Chapter 4 used  Chapter 4 used    heading No 2009  does not exceed  does not exceed      40% of the  40% of the      weight of the  weight of the      final product,  final product,      and  and      - the total  - the total  combined  combined  weight of sugar  weight of sugar  and the  and the  materials of  materials of  Chapter 4 used  Chapter 4 used  does not exceed  does not exceed  60% of the  60% of the  weight of the  weight of the  final product  final product  ex  Residues and waste  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  from the food  from materials  from materials  23  industries; prepared  of any heading,  of any heading,    animal fodder;  except that of  except that of    except for:  the product  the product  2302 and  Bran, sharps and  Manufacture    Manufacture    ex 2303  other residues  from materials  from materials    derived from the  of any heading,  of any heading,    sifting, milling or  except that of  except that of    other working of  the product, in  the product, in    cereals or of  which the  which the    leguminous plants.  weight of  weight of    Residues of starch  materials of  materials of    manufacture  Chapter 10 used  Chapter 10      does not exceed  used does not      20% of the  exceed 20% of      weight of the  the weight of      final product  the final        product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  2309  Preparations of a kind used in animal feeding  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which:    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product, in which:        -all the materials of Chapter 2 and 3 used are wholly obtained, and   -all the materials of Chapter 2 and 3 used are wholly obtained, and      -the weight of materials of Chapter 10 and 11 and headings 2302 and 2303 used does not exceed 20% of the weight of the final product, and   -the weight of materials of Chapter 10 and 11 and headings 2302 and 2303 used does not exceed 20% of the  weight  of the final product, and      -the individual weight of sugar and of the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product, and - the total combined weight of sugar and  -the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 60% of the weight of the final product   -the individual weight of sugar and       of       the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product, and  - the total combined weight of sugar and the materials of Chapter 4 used does not exceed 60% of the weight of the final product  ex  Tobacco and  Manufacture in    Manufacture    Chapter  manufactured  which all the  from materials  24  tobacco substitutes;  materials of  of any heading    except for:  Chapter 24 used  in which the      are wholly  weight of      obtained  materials of        Chapter 24        used does not        exceed 30% of        the total weight        of materials of        Chapter 24        used    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  2401  Unmanufactured  All    All      tobacco; tobacco  unmanufactured  unmanufacture    refuse  tobacco and  d tobacco and      tobacco refuse  tobacco refuse      of Chapter 24 is  of Chapter 24 is      wholly obtained  wholly        obtained  2402  Cigars, cheroots, cigarillos and cigarettes, of tobacco or of tobacco substitutes  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of smoking tobacco of sub- heading 2403 10 in which:    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of smoking tobacco of sub- heading 2403 10 in which:        -at least 10% by weight of the unmanufactured tobacco or tobacco refuse of heading 2401 used is wholly obtained, and  -at least 10% by weight of all materials of Chapter 24 used is wholly obtained  -at least 10% by weight of the unmanufacture d tobacco or tobacco refuse of heading 2401 used is wholly obtained, and  -at least 10% by weight of all materials of Chapter 24 used is wholly obtained  ex  Salt; sulphur; earths  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Chapter  and stone; plastering  which the  which the value  25  materials, lime and  value of all the  of all the    cement; except for:  materials used does not exceed 50% of  materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product       HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 2519  Crushed natural  Manufacture    Manufacture      magnesium  from materials  from materials    carbonate  of any heading,  of any heading,    (magnesite), in  except that of  except that of    hermetically-sealed  the product.  the product.    containers, and  However,  However,    magnesium oxide,  natural  natural    whether or not pure,  magnesium  magnesium    other than fused  carbonate  carbonate    magnesia or  (magnesite)  (magnesite)    dead-burned  may be used  may be used    (sintered) magnesia      Chapter  Ores, slag and ash  Manufacture    Manufacture    26    from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  ex  Mineral fuels,  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Chapter  mineral oils and  which the  which the value  27  products of their  value of all the  of all the    distillation;  materials used  materials used    bituminous  does not  does not exceed    substances; mineral  exceed 70% of  70% of the ex-    waxes; except for:  the ex-works  works price of      price of the  the product      product    ex 2707  Oils in which the  Operations of  Other  Operations of  Other    weight of the  refining and/or  operations in  refining and/or  operations in    aromatic constituents  one or more  which all the  one or more  which all the    exceeds that of the non-aromatic  specific process(es)1  materials used are classified  specific process(es)1  materials used are classified    constituents, being    within a    within a    oils similar to    heading other    heading other    mineral oils obtained    than that of the    than that of the    by distillation of high    product.    product.    temperature coal tar,    However,    However,    of which more than    materials of    materials of the    65% by volume    the same    same heading    distils at a    heading as the    as the product    temperature of up to    product may    may be used,    250°C (including    be used,    provided that    mixtures of    provided that    their total value    petroleum spirit and    their total    does not exceed    benzole), for use as    value does not    50% of the ex-    power or heating    exceed 50% of    works price of    fuels    the ex-works    the product        price of the            product      1 For the special conditions relating to "specific processes" see Introductory Note 7.1 and 7.3. 1 For the special conditions relating to "specific processes" see Introductory Note 7.1 and 7.3. 2 For the special conditions relating to "specific processes" see Introductory Note 7.2. 3 For the special conditions relating to "specific processes" see Introductory Note 7.2.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  2710  Petroleum oils and  Operations of  Other  Operations of  Other    oils obtained from  refining and/or  operations in  refining and/or  operations in    bituminous materials,  one or more  which all the  one or more  which all the    other than crude; preparations not  specific process(es)2  materials used are classified  specific process(es)3  materials used are classified    elsewhere specified    within a    within a    or included,    heading other    heading other    containing by weight    than that of the    than that of the    70% or more of    product.    product.    petroleum oils or of    However,    However,    oils obtained from    materials of    materials of the    bituminous materials,    the same    same heading    these oils being the    heading as the    as the product    basic constituents of    product may    may be used,    the preparations    be used,    provided that        provided that    their total value        their total    does not exceed        value does not    50% of the ex-        exceed 50% of    works price of        the ex-works    the product        price of the            product      2711  Petroleum gases and  Operations of  Other  Operations of  Other    other gaseous  refining and/or  operations in  refining and/or  operations in    hydrocarbons  one or more  which all the  one or more  which all the      specific process(es)4  materials used are classified  specific process(es)5  materials used are classified        within a    within a        heading other    heading other        than that of the    than that of the        product.    product.        However,    However,        materials of    materials of the        the same    same heading        heading as the    as the product        product may    may be used,        be used,    provided that        provided that    their total value        their total    does not exceed        value does not    50% of the ex-        exceed 50% of    works price of        the ex-works    the product        price of the            product      4 For the special conditions relating to "specific processes" see Introductory Note 7.2. 5 For the special conditions relating to "specific processes" see Introductory Note 7.2.    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  2712  Petroleum jelly;  Operations of  Other  Operations of  Other    paraffin wax,  refining and/or  operations in  refining and/or  operations in    microcrystalline  one or more  which all the  one or more  which all the    petroleum wax, slack wax, ozokerite,  specific process(es) 1  materials used are classified  specific process(es)2  materials used are classified    lignite wax, peat    within a    within a    wax, other mineral    heading other    heading other    waxes and similar    than that of the    than that of the    products obtained by    product.    product.    synthesis or by other    However,    However,    processes, whether or    materials of    materials of the    not coloured    the same    same heading        heading as the    as the product        product may    may be used,        be used,    provided that        provided that    their total value        their total    does not exceed        value does not    50% of the ex-        exceed 50% of    works price of        the ex-works    the product        price of the            product        HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  2713  Petroleum coke,  Operations of  Other  Operations of  Other    petroleum bitumen  refining and/or  operations in  refining and/or  operations in    and other residues of  one or more  which all the  one or more  which all the    petroleum oils or of oils obtained from  specific process(es)1  materials used are classified  specific process(es)2  materials used are classified    bituminous materials    within a    within a        heading other    heading other        than that of the    than that of the        product.    product.        However,    However,        materials of    materials of the        the same    same heading        heading as the    as the product        product may    may be used,        be used,    provided that        provided that    their total value        their total    does not exceed        value does not    50% of the ex-        exceed 50% of    works price of        the ex-works    the product        price of the            product      1 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 7.2. 2 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 7.2.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Inorganic chemicals;  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value  Manufacture in  Chapter  organic or inorganic  which the  which the value  28  compounds of  value of all the  of all the    precious metals, of  materials used  materials used    rare-earth metals, of  does not  does not exceed    radioactive elements  exceed 50% of  60% of the ex-    or of isotopes; except  the ex-works  works price of    for:  price of the  the product      product        be used,          provided that          their total value          does not exceed          20% of the ex-          works price of      does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product      the product      ex 2811  Sulphur trioxide  Manufacture from sulphur dioxide  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used  Manufacture from sulphur dioxide  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used        does not    does not exceed        exceed 70% of    70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product      ex 2840  Sodium perborate  Manufacture from disodium tetraborate pentahydrate  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not  Manufacture from disodium tetraborate pentahydrate  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed        exceed 70% of    70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product                .   HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 2842  Non-chemically  Manufacture from materials of any heading,  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  10  defined    aluminosilicates      except that of      the product.      However,      materials of the      same heading as      the product may      be used,      provided that      their total value  20% of the ex- works price of the product      does not exceed      20% of the ex-      works price of      the product  2843  Colloidal precious  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 2843    Manufacture      metals; inorganic or  from materials    organic compounds  of any heading,    of precious metals,  including other    whether or not  materials of    chemically defined;  heading 2843    amalgams of      precious metals    ex 2852  -Mercury compounds of internal ethers and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of    Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of        heading 2909  heading 2909      used shall not  used shall not      exceed 20% of  exceed 20% of      the ex-works  the ex-works      price of the  price of the      product  product      or  or      Manufacture in  Manufacture in  which the value  which the value  of all the  of all the  materials used  materials used  does not exceed  does not exceed  70% of the ex-  70% of the ex-  works price of  works price of  the product  the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Mercury compounds of other heterocyclic compounds with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only:  -- Internal ethers and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives      Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of heading 2909 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex-works price of the product      Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product      Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of heading 2909 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex-works price of the product      Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product   -- Cyclic acetals and internal hemiacetals and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives    Manufacture from materials of any heading   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product     Manufacture from materials of any heading  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    - Mercury  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 2843    Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 2843    compounds of other  inorganic or organic  compounds of  precious metals,  whether or not  chemically defined;  amalgams of  precious metals     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Caseinates and other casein derivatives, containing mercury compounds; casein glues, containing mercury compounds  - Other albumines, albuminates and other albumin derivatives, containing mercury compounds  - Peptones and their derivatives, containing mercury compounds; other protein substances and their derivatives, not elsewhere specified or included, containing mercury compounds; hide powder, whether or not chromed, containing mercury compounds  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    -Mercury compounds of nucleic acids and their salts, whether or not chemically defined; other heterocyclic compounds  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2852, 2932, 2933 and 2934 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product or    Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2852, 2932, 2933 and 2934 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex-works price of the product      Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    - Diagnostic or  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  laboratory reagents  from materials  on a backing,  of any heading,  prepared diagnostic  except that of  or laboratory  the product.  reagents, containing  However,  mercury compounds,  materials of the  whether or not on a  same heading as  backing, other than  the product may  those of heading  be used,  3002 or 3006;  provided that  certified reference  their total value  materials, containing  does not exceed  mercury compounds  20% of the ex-    works price of  price of the product    the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Other chemical  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  products and  from materials  preparations of the  of any heading,  chemical or allied  except that of  industries (including  the product.  those consisting of  However,  mixtures of natural  materials of the  products), not  same heading as  elsewhere specified  the product may  or included,  be used,  containing mercury  provided that  compounds  their total value    does not exceed    20% of the ex-    works price of    the product  ex Chapter 29  Organic chemicals; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading,    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product      except that of      the product.      However,      materials of the      same heading as      the product may      be used,      provided that      their total value      does not exceed      20% of the ex-      works price of      the product      or          Manufacture in      which the value  of all the  materials used  does not exceed  50% of the ex-  works price of  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 2905  Metal alcoholates of  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    alcohols of this    heading and of    ethanol      materials of  materials of      heading 2905.  heading 2905.      However, metal  However, metal      alcoholates of  alcoholates of      this heading  this heading      may be used,  may be used,      provided that  provided that      their total value  their total value      does not exceed  does not exceed      20% of the ex-  20% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  2905 43,  Mannitol; D-glucitol  Manufacture from materials of any sub- heading, except  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used  Manufacture from materials of any sub- heading, except  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used  2905 44,  (sorbitol); Glycerol  and    2905 45        that of the  does not  that of the  does not exceed      product.  exceed 70% of  product.  70% of the ex-      However,  the ex-works  However,  works price of      materials of the  price of the  materials of the  the product      same sub-  product  same sub-        heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex-works    heading as the product may be    used, provided  that their total  value does not  exceed 20% of the ex-works      price of the  price of the        product    product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  2915  Saturated acyclic  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2915 and 2916 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2915 and 2916 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in    monocarboxylic  which the  which the value    acids and their  value of all the  of all the    anhydrides, halides,  materials used  materials used    peroxides and  does not  does not exceed    peroxyacids; their  exceed 50% of  70% of the ex-    halogenated,  the ex-works  works price of    sulphonated, nitrated  price of the  the product    or nitrosated  product      derivatives       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 2932  - Internal ethers and  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    their halogenated,    sulphonated, nitrated    or nitrosated    derivatives      materials of  materials of      heading 2909  heading 2909      used shall not  used shall not  ex-works price of the product      exceed 20% of  exceed 20% of      the ex-works  the ex-works      price of the  price of the      product  product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK      Manufacture from materials of any heading  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading  Manufacture in  - Cyclic acetals and  which the  which the value  internal hemiacetals  value of all the  of all the  and their  materials used  materials used  halogenated,  does not  does not exceed  sulphonated, nitrated  exceed 50% of  60% of the ex-  or nitrosated  the ex-works  works price of  derivatives  price of the  the product    product    2933  Heterocyclic  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    compounds with    nitrogen    hetero-atom(s) only      value of all the  value of all the      materials of  materials of      headings 2932  headings 2932      and 2933 used  and 2933 used      shall not exceed  shall not      20% of the ex-  exceed 20% of      works price of  the ex-works      the product  price of the        product  2934  Nucleic acids and  Manufacture from materials of any heading.  Manufacture in which the value of all the  Manufacture from materials of any heading.  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used    their salts; other    heterocyclic compounds  However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932,  materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932, 2933 and 2934  does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product          2933 and 2934      used shall not  used shall not      exceed 20% of  exceed 20% of      the ex-works  the ex-works      price of the  price of the      product  product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 2937  Hormones, prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes, natural or reproduced by synthesis; derivatives and structural analogues thereof, including chain modified polypeptides, used primarily as hormones:            -Other heterocyclic compounds with nitrogen hetero- atom(s) only  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932 and 2933 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932 and 2933 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    -Other nucleic acids and their salts; other heterocyclic compounds  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932, 2933 and 2934 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932, 2933 and 2934 used shall not exceed 20% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex-works price of the product  ex 2939 11  Concentrates of poppy straw containing not less than 50% by weight of alkaloids  Manufacture from materials of any heading, in which the weight of sugar used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, in which the weight of sugar used does not exceed 40% of the weight of the final product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Pharmaceutical  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  products  from materials  from materials  30    of any heading  from any        heading  ex 3002  - Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that  Manufacture in    carboxyimide-  which the  which the value    function compounds  value of all the  of all the    (including saccharin  materials used  materials used    and its salts) and  does not  does not exceed    imine-function  exceed 50% of  60% of the ex-    compounds, in the  the ex-works  works price of    form of peptides and  price of the  the product    proteins which are  product      directly involved in        the regulation of        immunological      their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product    processes        - Other heterocyclic  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product  compounds with  from materials  from materials  nitrogen hetero-  of any heading.  of any heading.  atom(s) only,  However, the  However, the  containing an  value f all the  value of all the  unfused imidazole  materials of  materials of  ring (whether or not  headings 2932  headings 2932  hydrogenated) in the  and 2933 used  and 2933 used  structure, in the form  shall not exceed  shall not  of peptides and  20% of the ex-  exceed 20% of  proteins which are  works price of  the ex-works  directly involved in  the product  price of the  the regulation of    product  immunological      processes       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Other nucleic acids  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product  and their salts,  from materials  from materials  whether or not  of any heading.  of any heading.  chemically defined,  However, the  However, the  in the form of  value of all the  value of all the  peptides and proteins  materials of  materials of  which are directly  headings 2932,  headings 2932,  involved in the  2933 and 2934  2933 and 2934  regulation of  used shall not  used shall not  immunological  exceed 20% of  exceed 20% of  processes; other  the ex-works  the ex-works  heterocyclic  price of the  price of the  compounds, in the  product  product  form of peptides and      proteins which are      directly involved in      the regulation of      immunological      processes        - Other hormones,  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture  Manufacture in  prostaglandins,  which the  from materials  which the value  thromboxanes and  value of all the  of any heading,  of all the  leukotrienes, natural  materials used  except that of  materials used  or reproduced by  does not  the product.  does not exceed  synthesis, in the form  exceed 50% of  However,  60% of the ex-  of peptides and  the ex-works  materials of the  works price of  proteins (other than  price of the  same heading  the product  goods of heading  product  as the product    2937) which are    may be used,    directly involved in    provided that    the regulation of    their total value    immunological    does not exceed    processes;    20% of the ex-    derivatives and    works price of    structural analogues    the product    thereof, including        chain modified        polypeptides, used        primarily as        hormones, in the        form of peptides and        proteins (other than        goods of heading        2937) which are        directly involved in        the regulation of        immunological        processes         HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Other polyethers, in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the  Manufacture in  primary forms, in the  which the  which the value  form of peptides and  value of all the  of all the  proteins which are  materials used  materials used  directly involved in  does not  does not exceed  the regulation of  exceed 50% of  70% of the ex-  immunological  the ex-works  works price of  same heading as the product may  same heading as the product  processes  price of the  the product    product      be used,    may be used,      provided that    provided that      their total value    their total value      does not exceed    does not exceed      50% of the ex-    50% of the ex-      works price of    works price of      the product1    the product2    ex 3006  - Appliances  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product.  Manufacture in  Manufacture  Manufacture in    identifiable for  which the  from materials  which the value    ostomy use made of  value of all the  of any heading,  of all the    plastic  materials used  except that of  materials used      does not  the product.  does not exceed      exceed 50% of    70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product      1 In the case of the products composed of materials classified within both headings 3901 to 3906, on the one hand, and within headings 3907 to 3911, on the other hand, this restriction only applies to that group of materials which predominates by weight in the product. 2 In the case of the products composed of materials classified within both headings 3901 to 3906, on the one hand, and within headings 3907 to 3911, on the other hand, this restriction only applies to that group of materials which predominates by weight in the product.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Sterile absorbable surgical or dental yarn and sterile surgical or dental adhesion barriers, whether or not absorbable:                    Manufacture from a thermoplastic partial salt which is a copolymer of ethylene and metacrylic acid partly neutralised with metal ions, mainly zinc and sodium  Manufacture from highly- transparent polyester-foils with a thickness of less than 23 micron1   Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture from a thermoplastic partial salt which is a copolymer of ethylene and metacrylic acid partly neutralised with metal ions, mainly zinc and sodium  Manufacture from highly transparent polyester foils with a thickness of less than 23 micron2  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  --Made of plastic:  --- Ionomer sheet or film  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    --- Foils of plastic, metallised    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product  --- Other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  1 The following foils shall be considered as highly transparent: foils, the optical dimming of which, measured according to ASTM-D 1003-16 by Gardner Hazemeter (i.e. Hazefactor), is less than 2 percent. 2 The following foils shall be considered as highly transparent: foils, the optical dimming of which – measured according to ASTM-D 1003-16 by Gardner Hazemeter (i.e. Hazefactor) – is less than 2 percent.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  Or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    --Made of fabrics  Spinning of  Twisting or texturing accompanied by knitting provided that  Spinning of  Twisting or texturing accompanied by knitting provided that    natural and/or  natural and/or    man-made  man-made    staple fibres or  staple fibres or  the value of the non- twisted/non- textured yarns used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  the value of the non- twisted/non- textured yarns used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    extrusion of  extrusion of    man-made  man-made    filament yarn,  filament yarn,    in each case  in each case    accompanied by  accompanied    knitting  by knitting    or  or    Knitting  Knitting  accompanied by  accompanied  dyeing or by  by dyeing or by  flocking or by  flocking or by  coating  coating    or  or    Flocking  Flocking  accompanied by  accompanied  dyeing or by  by dyeing or by  printing  printing    or  or    Dyeing of yarn  Dyeing of yarn  of natural fibres  of natural fibres  accompanied by  accompanied  knitting  by knitting  3006 70  Gel preparations  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture  Manufacture in    designed to be used  which the  from materials  which the value    in human or  value of all the  of any heading,  of all the    veterinary medicine  materials used  except that of  materials used    as a lubricant for  does not  the product.  does not exceed    parts of the body for  exceed 50% of  However,  70% of the ex-    surgical operations or  the ex-works  materials of the  works price of    physical  price of the  same heading  the product    examinations or as a  product  as the product      coupling agent    may be used,      between the body    provided that      and medical    their total value      instruments    does not exceed          20% of the ex-          works price of          the product       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 3006 92  Waste pharmaceuticals:  Other chemical products and preparations of the chemical or allied industries (including those consisting of mixtures of natural products), not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  Chapter 31  Fertilisers  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- work price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter 32  Tanning or dyeing extracts; tannins and their derivatives;  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may  Manufacture in which the value of all the  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the      dyes, pigments and  materials used  materials used    other colouring  does not  does not exceed    matter; paints and  exceed 50% of  60% of the ex-    varnishes; putty and  the ex-works  works price of    other mastics; inks  price of the  the product      product        be used,    may be used,        provided that    provided that        their total value    their total value        does not exceed    does not exceed        20% of the ex-    20% of the ex-        works price of    works price of        the product    the product    Chapter  Essential oils and  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product  33  resinoids; perfumery,    cosmetic or toilet    preparations      the product.  the product.      However,  However,      materials of the  materials of the      same heading as  same heading      the product may  as the product      be used,  may be used,      provided that  provided that      their total value  their total value      does not exceed  does not exceed      20% of the ex-  20% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex Chapter 34  Soap, organic  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the  surface-active agents, washing  which the value of all the    preparations,  materials used  materials used    lubricating  does not  does not exceed    preparations,  exceed 50% of  60% of the ex-    artificial waxes,  the ex-works  work price of    prepared waxes,  price of the  the product    polishing or scouring  product      Preparations, candles        and similar articles,        modelling pastes,        "dental waxes" and        dental preparations        with a basis of        plaster; except for:      3404  Artificial waxes and prepared waxes:  - With a basis of paraffin, petroleum waxes, waxes obtained from bituminous minerals, slack wax or scale wax  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Manufacture from materials from any heading    Chapter  Albuminoidal  Manufacture    Manufacture    35  substances; modified  from materials  from materials    starches; glues;  of any heading,  of any heading,    enzymes  except that of  except that of      the product in  the product in      which the value  which the value      of all the  of all the      materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Explosives;  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in  36  pyrotechnic  which the value    products; matches;  of all the    pyrophoric alloys;  materials used    certain combustible  does not exceed    preparations  70% of the ex-      work price of      the product      the product may        be used,        provided that        their total value        does not exceed        20% of the ex-        works price of        the product    Chapter 37  Photographic or cinematographic goods  Manufacture from materials of any heading,  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading,  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product      except that of  except that of      the product.  the product.      However,  However,      materials of the  materials of the      same heading as  same heading      the product may  as the product      be used,  may be used,      provided that  provided that      their total value  their total value      does not exceed  does not exceed      20% of the ex-  20% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)    (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Miscellaneous  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 20% of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product  Chapter  chemical products;  38  except for:  ex 3803  Refined tall oil  Refining of crude tall oil  Manufacture in which the value of all the  Refining of crude oil  Manufacture in which the value of all the        materials used    materials used        does not    does not exceed        exceed 70% of    70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product      ex 3805  Spirits of sulphate turpentine, purified  Purification by distillation or  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product  Purification by distillation or refining of raw spirits of sulphate turpentine  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product      refining of raw      spirits of      sulphate      turpentine  3806 30  Ester gums  Manufacture from resin acids  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from resin acids  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product                   HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 3807  Wood pitch (wood tar pitch)  Distillation of wood tar  Manufacture in which the value of all the  Distillation of wood tar  Manufacture in which the value of all the        materials used    materials used        does not    does not exceed        exceed 70% of    70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product      3809 10  Finishing agents, dye  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      carriers to accelerate  which the value  which the value    the dyeing or fixing  of all the  of all the    of dyestuffs and  materials used  materials used    other products and  does not exceed  does not exceed    preparations (for  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    example, dressings  works price of  work price of    and mordants), of a  the product  the product    kind used in the        textile, paper, leather        or like industries, not        elsewhere specified        or included; with a        basis of amylaceous        substances      3823  Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids; acid oils from refining; industrial fatty alcohols.  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other    Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other    materials of heading 3823  materials of heading 3823      or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  or  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  ex 3825  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; municipal waste; sewage sludge; other wastes specified in note 6 to this chapter:           HS  Description of product  Working or processing  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    -Wadding, gauze, bandages and similar articles (for example, dressings, adhesive plasters, poultices), impregnated or coated with pharmaceutical substances or put up in forms or packings for retail sale for medical, surgical, dental or veterinary purposes  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Manufacture from materials from any heading      -Clinical waste: surgical gloves, mittens and mitts  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    -Syringes, needles, catheters, cannulae and the like  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)      (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  3824 60  Sorbitol other than  Manufacture  Manufacture in  Manufacture  Manufacture in    that of heading No  from materials  which the  from materials  which the value    2905  of any sub-  value of all the  of any sub-  of all the      heading, except  materials used  heading, except  materials used      that of the  does not  that of the  does not exceed      product and  exceed 50% of  product and  60% of the ex-      except materials  the ex-works  except  works price of      of sub-  price of the  materials of  the product      heading 2905  product  sub-heading        44. However,    2905 44.        materials of the    However,        same sub-    materials of the        heading as the    same sub-        product may be    heading as the        used, provided    product may be        that their total    used, provided        value does not    that their total        exceed 20% of    value does not        the ex-works    exceed 20% of        price of the    the ex-works        product    price of the            product    ex Chapter 39  Plastics and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product        or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  or  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 3907  Copolymer, made from polycarbonate and acrylonitrile-butadien e-styrene copolymer (ABS)  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However,    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, materials of the same heading as the product may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 50% of the ex- works        materials of the      same heading as      the product may      be used,      provided that      their total value      does not exceed      50% of the ex-      works price of      the product1  price of the product2      or  or      Manufacture in  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  which the value  of all the  materials used  does not exceed  50% of the ex-  works price of  the product  1 In the case of the products composed of materials classified within both headings 3901 to 3906, on the one hand, and within headings 3907 to 3911, on the other hand, this restriction only applies to that group of materials which predominates by weight in the product. 2 In the case of the products composed of materials classified within both headings 3901 to 3906, on the one hand, and within headings 3907 to 3911, on the other hand, this restriction only applies to that group of materials which predominates by weight in the product.   HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    Polyester  Manufacture    Manufacture  Manufacture from polycarbonate of tetrabromo- (bisphenol A)    from materials  from materials    of any heading,  of any heading,    except that of  except that of    the product  the product    or  or      Manufacture  Manufacture    from  from  polycarbonate  polycarbonate  of tetrabromo-  of tetrabromo-  (bisphenol A)  (bisphenol A)    or  or      Manufacture in  Manufacture in    which the value  which the value  of all the  of all the  materials used  materials used  does not exceed  does not exceed  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-  works price of  works price of  the product  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 3920  - Ionomer sheet or film  Manufacture from a  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from a thermoplastic partial salt which is a copolymer of ethylene and metacrylic acid partly neutralised with metal ions, mainly zinc and sodium  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product      thermoplastic      partial salt      which is a      copolymer of      ethylene and      metacrylic acid      partly      neutralised with      metal ions,      mainly zinc and      sodium  ex 3921  Foils of plastic, metallised  Manufacture from highly-  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from highly transparent polyester foils with a thickness of less than 23 micron2  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product      transparent      polyester-foils      with a thickness      of less than 23      micron1  ex Chapter 40  Rubber and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product      1 The following foils shall be considered as highly transparent: foils, the optical dimming of which, measured according to ASTM-D 1003-16 by Gardner Hazemeter (i.e. Hazefactor), is less than 2 percent. 2 The following foils shall be considered as highly transparent: foils, the optical dimming of which, measured according to ASTM-D 1003-16 by Gardner Hazemeter (i.e. Hazefactor), is less than 2 percent.  HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  4012  Retreaded or used pneumatic tyres of rubber; solid or cushion tyres, tyre treads and tyre flaps, of rubber:            - Retreaded pneumatic, solid or cushion tyres, of rubber  Retreading of used tyres    Retreading of used tyres      - Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except those of headings 4011 and 4012  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except those of headings 4011 and 4012  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  4101 to  Raw hides and skins  Manufacture    Manufacture    4103  of bovine (including  from materials  from materials    buffalo) or equine  of any heading  of any heading    animals (fresh, or        salted, dried, limed,        pickled or otherwise        preserved, but not        tanned, parchment        dressed or further        prepared), whether or        not dehaired or split;        :raw skins of sheep        or lambs (fresh, or        salted, dried, limed,        pickled or otherwise        preserved, but not        tanned, parchment        dressed or further        prepared), whether or        not with wool on or        split, other than those        excluded by note        1(c) to Chapter 41;        other raw hides and        skins (fresh, or        salted, dried, limed,        pickled or otherwise        preserved, but not        tanned, parchment        dressed or further        prepared), whether or        not dehaired or split,        other than those        excluded by note        1(b) or 1(c) to        Chapter 41      4104 to  Tanned or crust hides  Re-tanning of tanned or pre- tanned hides and skins of  Manufacture  Re-tanning of tanned or pre- tanned hides and skins of  Manufacture  4106  and skins, without  from materials  from materials    wool or hair on,  of any heading,  of any heading,    whether or not split,  except that of  except that of    but not further  the product  the product  sub-headings 4104 11, 4104 19, 4105 10, 4106 21, 4106 31 or 4106 91  sub-headings 4104 11, 4104 19, 4105 10, 4106 21, 4106 31 or 4106 91    prepared       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  4107 ,  Leather further  Manufacture    Manufacture    4112 and  prepared after  from materials  from materials  4113  tanning or crusting  of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product.  the product.      However,  However,      materials of  materials of      sub-headings  sub-headings      4104 41, 4104  4104 41, 4104      49, 4105 30,  49, 4105 30,      4106 22, 4106  4106 22, 4106      32 and 4106 92  32 and 4106 92      may be used  may be used      only if a re-  only if a re-      tanning  tanning      operation of the  operation of the      tanned or crust  tanned or crust      hides and skins  hides and skins      in the dry state  in the dry state      takes place  takes place  4114 and  Chamois (including  Manufacture    Manufacture    4115  combination  from materials  from materials    chamois) leather;  of any heading,  of any heading,    patent leather and  except that of  except that of    patent laminated  the product  the product    leather; metallised        leather; composition        leather with a basis        of leather or leather        fibre, in slabs, sheets        or        strip, whether or not        in rolls; parings and        other waste of leather        or of composition        leather, not suitable        for the manufacture        of leather articles;        leather dust, powder        and flour       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  Or  (5)  Or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  ForUK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Articles of leather;  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  42  saddlery and harness;  which the  which the value    travel goods,  value of all the  of all the    handbags and similar  materials used  materials used    containers; articles of  does not  does not exceed    animal gut (other  exceed 50% of  60% of the ex-    than silk worm gut)  the ex-works  works price of      price of the  the product      product    ex  Furskins and  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Chapter  artificial fur;  which the  which the value  43  manufactures  value of all the  of all the    thereof; except for:  materials used  materials used      does not  does not exceed      exceed 70% of  70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product         HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  4301  Raw furskins  Manufacture    Manufacture      (including heads,  from materials  from materials    tails, paws and other  of any heading  of any heading    pieces or cuttings,        suitable for furrier’s        use), other than raw        hides and skins of        heading 4101, 4102        or 4103       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 4302  Tanned or dressed furskins, assembled:            - Plates, crosses and  Bleaching or    Bleaching or    similar forms  dyeing, in  dyeing, in    addition to  addition to    cutting and  cutting and    assembly of  assembly of    non-assembled  non-assembled    tanned or  tanned or    dressed furskins  dressed      furskins    - Other  Manufacture    Manufacture      from non-  from    assembled,  non-assembled,    tanned or  tanned or    dressed furskins  dressed      furskins  4303  Articles of apparel,  Manufacture    Manufacture      clothing accessories  from non-  from    and other articles of  assembled  non-assembled    furskin  tanned or  tanned or      dressed furskins  dressed      of heading 4302  furskins of        heading No        4302  ex Chapter 44  Wood and articles of wood; wood charcoal; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-        the ex-works    works price of        price of the    the product        product      ex 4407  Wood sawn or  Planing,    Planing,      chipped lengthwise,  sanding or end-  sanding or end-    sliced or peeled, of a  jointing  jointing    thickness exceeding        6 mm, planed,        sanded or end-jointed         HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 4408  Veneer sheets and  Splicing,    Splicing,      sheets for plywood,  planing,  planing,    of a thickness not  sanding or  sanding or    exceeding 6 mm,  endjointing  endjointing    spliced, and other        wood sawn        lengthwise, sliced or        peeled of a thickness        not exceeding 6 mm,        planed, sanded or        end–jointed       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 4410 to ex 4413  Beadings and mouldings, including moulded skirting and other moulded boards  Beading or moulding    Beading or moulding    ex 4415  Packing cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar packings, of wood  Manufacture from boards not cut to size    Manufacture from boards not cut to size    ex 4418  Builders' joinery and carpentry of wood  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, cellular wood panels, shingles and shakes may be used    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, cellular wood panels, shingles and shakes may be used      Beadings and mouldings  Beading or moulding    Beading or moulding    ex 4421  Match splints; wooden pegs or pins for footwear  Manufacture from wood of any heading, except drawn wood of heading 4409    Manufacture from wood of any heading except drawn wood of heading No 4409    Chapter 45  Cork and articles of cork  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Manufactures of  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  46  straw, of esparto or  which the  which the value    of other plaiting  value of all the  of all the    materials;  materials used  materials used    basketware and  does not  does not exceed    wickerwork  exceed 50% of  70% of the ex-      the ex-works  works price of      price of the  the product      product    Chapter  Pulp of wood or of  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  47  other fibrous  which the  which the value    cellulosic material;  value of all the  of all the    recovered (waste and  materials used  materials used    scrap) paper or  does not  does not exceed    paperboard  exceed 70% of  70% of the ex-      the ex-works  works price of      price of the  the product      product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Paper and  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  48  paperboard; articles  which the  which the value    of paper pulp, of  value of all the  of all the    paper or of  materials used  materials used    paperboard  does not  does not exceed      exceed 70% of  70% of the ex-      the ex-works  works price of      price of the  the product      product    Chapter  Printed books,  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  49  newspapers, pictures  which the  which the value    and other products of  value of all the  of all the    the printing industry;  materials used  materials used    manuscripts,  does not  does not exceed    typescripts and plans  exceed 70% of  70% of the ex-      the ex-works  works price of      price of the  the product      product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Silk; except for:  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter    from materials  from materials  50    of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  ex 5003  Silk waste (including  Carding or    Carding or      cocoons unsuitable  combing of silk  combing of silk    for reeling, yarn  waste  waste    waste and garnetted        stock), carded or        combed      5004 to  Silk yarn and yarn  Spinning of    Spinning of    ex 5006  spun from silk waste  natural fibres or  natural fibres or      extrusion of  extrusion of      man-made  man-made      fibres  fibres      accompanied by  accompanied      spinning or  by spinning or      twisting(1)  twisting(2)  1 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 6. 2 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5007  Woven fabrics of silk or of silk waste  Weaving (1) or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Weaving (2)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  1 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 6. 2 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Wool, fine or coarse  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  animal hair;  from materials  from materials  51  horsehair yarn and  of any heading,  of any heading,    woven fabric; except  except that of  except that of    for:  the product  the product  5106 to  Yarn of wool, of fine  Spinning of    Spinning of    5110  or coarse animal hair  natural fibres or  natural fibres or    or of horsehair  extrusion of  extrusion of      man-made  man-made      fibres  fibres      accompanied by  accompanied      spinning(1)  by spinning(2)  1 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 6. 2 For the special conditions relating to “specific processes” see Introductory Note 6.   5111 to  Woven fabrics of  Weaving (1)    Weaving (2)  Printing  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Cotton; except for:  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter    from materials  from materials  52    of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5204 to  Yarn and thread of  Spinning of    Spinning of    5207  cotton  natural fibres or  natural fibres or      extrusion of  extrusion of      man-made  man-made      fibres  fibres      accompanied by  accompanied      spinning(1)  by spinning(2)  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 5208 to 5212  Woven fabrics of cotton  Weaving (3) or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Weaving (4)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  ex  Other vegetable  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  textile fibres; paper  from materials  from materials  53  yarn and woven  of any heading,  of any heading,    fabrics of paper yarn;  except that of  except that of    except for:  the product  the product  3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5306 to  Yarn of other  Spinning of    Spinning of    5308  vegetable textile  natural fibres or  natural fibres or    fibres; paper yarn  extrusion of  extrusion of      man-made  man-made      fibres  fibres      accompanied by spinning(1)  accompanied by spinning(2)  5309 to 5311  Woven fabrics of other vegetable textile fibres; woven fabrics of paper yarn  Weaving(3) or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Weaving(4)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5401 to  Yarn, monofilament  Extrusion of    Extrusion of    5406  and thread of  man-made  man-made    man-made filaments  fibres  fibres      accompanied by  accompanied      spinning or  by spinning or      spinning of  spinning of      natural fibres(1)  natural fibres(2)  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6    HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5407 and 5408  Woven fabrics of man-made filament yarn  Weaving (1) or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Weaving (2)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  5501 to 5507  Man-made staple fibres  Extrusion of man-made fibres    Extrusion of man-made fibres    5508 to 5511  Yarn and sewing thread of man-made staple fibres  Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by    Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied    1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. spinning(3)  by spinning(4)  3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5512 to 5516  Woven fabrics of man-made staple fibres  Weaving (1) or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Weaving (2)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Wadding, felt and  Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning or spinning of natural fibres    Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning or spinning of natural fibres  Flocking  Chapter  non-wovens; special  accompanied  56  yarns; twine, cordage, ropes and  by dyeing or printing (2)    cables and articles      thereof; except for:        or          Flocking      accompanied by  dyeing or  printing (1)  5602  Felt, whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated:          1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    -Needleloom felt  Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by fabric formation, However:  Fabric formation alone in the case of felt made from natural fibres (1)  Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by fabric formation, However:  Fabric formation alone in the case of felt made from natural fibres (2)    - polypropylene filament of heading 5402,    - polypropylene filament of heading 5402,      - polypropylene fibres of heading 5503 or 5506, or    - polypropylene fibres of heading 5503 or 5506, or      - polypropylene filament tow of heading 5501,    - polypropylene filament tow of heading 5501,      of which the denomination in all cases of a single filament or fibre is less than 9 decitex,    of which the denomination in all cases of a single filament or fibre is less than 9 decitex,      may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 40% of the ex- works price of the product    may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 40% of the ex- works price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    -Other  Extrusion of    Extrusion of      man-made  man-made    fibres  fibres    accompanied by  accompanied    fabric  by fabric    formation,  formation,    or  or    Fabric  Fabric  formation alone  formation alone  in the case of  in the case of  other felt made  other felt made  from natural  from natural  fibres(1)  fibres(2)  5603  Nonwovens, whether  Any non-woven process    Any non-      or not impregnated,  woven process    coated, covered or  including    laminated  needle  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. including needle punching      punching  5604  Rubber thread and cord, textile covered; textile yarn, and strip and the like of heading No 5404 or 5405, impregnated, coated, covered or sheathed with rubber or plastics:            -Rubber thread and  Manufacture    Manufacture    cord, textile covered  from rubber  from rubber    thread or cord,  thread or cord,    not textile  not textile    covered  covered    -Other  Extrusion of    Extrusion of      man-made  man-made    fibres  fibres    accompanied by  accompanied    spinning or  by spinning or    spinning of natural fibres (3)  spinning of natural fibres (4)  3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5605  Metallised yarn,  Extrusion of    Extrusion of      whether or not  man-made  man-made    gimped, being textile  fibres  fibres    yarn, or strip or the  accompanied by  accompanied    like of heading No  spinning or  by spinning or    5404 or 5405,  spinning of  spinning of    combined with metal  natural and/or  natural and/or    in the form of thread, strip or powder or  man-made staple fibres (1)  man-made staple fibres (2)    covered with metal      5606  Gimped yarn, and strip and the like of heading No 5404 or 5405, gimped (other than those of heading No 5605 and gimped horsehair yarn); chenille yarn (including flock chenille yarn; loop wale-yarn  Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning or spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or Spinning accompanied with flocking    Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning or spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or Spinning accompanied with flocking        or  or      Flocking accompanied by dyeing(3)  Flocking accompanied by dyeing(4)  3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter 57  Carpets and other textile floor coverings:  Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving    Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving or Manufacture from coir yarn or sisal yarn or jute yarn or Flocking accompanied by dyeing or by printing or Tufting accompanied by dyeing or by printing Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by non-woven techniques including needle punching2 However: - polypropylene filament of heading 5402, - polypropylene fibres of        or      Manufacture from coir yarn or sisal yarn or jute yarn      or      Flocking accompanied by dyeing or by printing      or      Tufting accompanied by dyeing or by printing      Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by non-woven techniques including needle punching1      However:      - polypropylene filament of heading 5402,      - polypropylene fibres of heading 5503 or 5506, or      - polypropylene filament tow  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  heading 5503 or 5506, or - polypropylene filament tow of heading 5501, of which the denomination in all cases of a single filament or fibre is less than 9 decitex, may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 40% of the ex- works price of the product Jute fabric may be used as a backing  of heading 5501,      of which the denomination in all cases of a single filament or fibre is less than 9 decitex, may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 40% of the ex-works price of the product      Jute fabric may be used as a backing     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out  (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex Chapter 58  Special woven fabrics; tufted textile fabrics; lace; tapestries; trimmings; embroidery; except for:  Weaving (1) or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Weaving (2)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  5805  Hand-woven  Manufacture    Manufacture      tapestries of the  from materials  from materials    types gobelins,  of any heading,  of any heading,    flanders, aubusson,  except that of  except that of    beauvais and the like,  the product  the product    and needle-worked        tapestries (for        example, petit point,        cross stitch), whether        or not made up      1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5810  Embroidery in the piece, in strips or in motifs  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    5901  Textile fabrics coated with gum or amylaceous substances, of a kind used for the outer covers of books or the like; tracing cloth; prepared painting canvas; buckram and similar stiffened textile fabrics of a kind used for hat foundations  Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by flocking or by coating or Flocking accompanied by dyeing or by printing    Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by flocking or by coating  Flocking accompanied by dyeing or by printing  5902  Tyre cord fabric of high tenacity yarn of nylon or other polyamides, polyesters or viscose rayon:            - Containing not more than 90% by weight of textile materials  Weaving    Weaving      -Other  Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by weaving    Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by weaving       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5903  Textile fabrics impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with plastics, other than those of heading 5902  Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by coating or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by coating  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, rasing, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- work price of the product  5904  LinolUKm, whether  Weaving    Weaving      or not cut to shape;  accompanied by  accompanied    floor coverings consisting of a  dyeing or by coating (1)  by dyeing or by coating (2)    coating or covering        applied on a textile        backing, whether or      1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.   not cut to shape      5905  Textile wall coverings: - Impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with rubber or other materials  Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by coating    Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by coating     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Other  Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving or Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by coating or Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5% of the ex-works price of the product (1):    Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving                        or    Weaving accompanied by dyeing or by coating          or    Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing,  permanent finishing,  decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5% of the ex-works price of the product (2):                                                1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5906  Rubberised textile fabrics, other than those of heading 5902:            - Knitted or crocheted fabrics  Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made filament yarn, in each case accompanied by knitting    Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made filament yarn, in each case accompanied by knitting      or  or    Knitting accompanied by dyeing or by coating  Knitting accompanied by dyeing or by coating    or  or    Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompanied by knitting (3)  Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompanied by knitting (4)    - Other fabrics made  Extrusion of    Extrusion of    of synthetic filament  man-made  man-made  yarn, containing  fibres  fibres  more than 90% by  accompanied by  accompanied  weight of textile  weaving  by weaving  materials        - Other  Weaving    Weaving      accompanied by  accompanied    dyeing or by  by dyeing or by    coating  coating    or  or    Dyeing of yarn  Dyeing of yarn  of natural fibres  of natural fibres  accompanied by  accompanied  weaving  by weaving  3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5907  Textile fabrics otherwise impregnated, coated or covered; painted canvas being theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths or the like  Weaving accompa nied by dyeing or by flocking or by coating    Weaving accompa nied by dyeing or by flocking or by coating  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, rasing, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- work price of the product      or  or      Flocking accompa nied by dyeing or by printing  Flocking accompa nied by dyeing or by printing      or        Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5908  Textile wicks, woven, plaited or knitted, for lamps, stoves, lighters, candles or the like; incandescent gas mantles and tubular knitted gas mantle fabric therefor, whether or not impregnated:            - Incandescent gas mantles, impregnated  Manufacture from tubular knitted gas- mantle fabric    Manufacture from tubular knitted gas mantle fabric      - Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)    (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  5909 to 5911  Textile articles of a kind suitable for industrial use:              Weaving  Weaving    -Polishing discs or rings other than of felt of heading No 5911     Weaving(1)      Weaving(3)  1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.   -Woven fabrics, of a kind commonly used in papermaking or other technical uses, felted or not, whether or not impregnated or coated, tubular or endless with single or multiple warp and/or weft, or flat woven with multiple warp and/or weft of heading No 5911         Extrusion of man- made filament yarn or spinning of natural or man- made staple fibres, accompa nied by weaving (2)         Extrusion of man- made filament yarn or spinning of natural or man- made staple fibres, accompa nied by weaving (4)  - Other      or  or      Weaving accompa nied by dyeing or by coating  Weaving accompa nied by dyeing or by coating  2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter 60  Knitted or crocheted fabrics  Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man- made filament yarn, in each case accompani ed by knitting    Spinning of natural and/or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man- made filament yarn, in each case accompanied by knitting or Knitting accompanied by dyeing or by flocking or by coating or Flocking accompanied by dyeing or by printing or Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompanied by knitting or Twisting or texturing accompanied by knitting provided that the value of the non-twisted/non- textured yarns used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product        or      Knitting accompani ed by dyeing or by flocking or by coating      or      Flocking accompani ed by dyeing or by printing      or      Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompani ed by knitting      or      Twisting or texturing accompani ed by knitting provided that the value of the non- twisted/non -textured yarns used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Chapter  Articles of apparel          61  and clothing    accessories, knitted    or crocheted:   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    Obtained by sewing  Manufacture    Manufacture    together or otherwise  from fabric  from fabric  assembling, two or      more pieces of      knitted or crocheted      fabric which have      been either cut to      form or obtained      directly to form        -Other  Spinning of    Spinning of      natural and/or  natural and/or    man-made  man-made    staple fibres or  staple fibres or    extrusion of  extrusion of    man-made  man-made    filament yarn,  filament yarn,    in each case  in each case    accompanied by  accompanied    knitting (knitted  by knitting    to shape  (knitted to    products)  shape products)    or  or    Dyeing of yarn  Dyeing of yarn  of natural fibres  of natural fibres  accompanied by  accompanied  knitting (knitted  by knitting  to shape products) (1)  (knitted to shape products) (2)  ex  Articles of apparel  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  and clothing  from fabric  from fabric  62  accessories, not        knitted or crocheted;        except for:      1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing  (1)  (2)  (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)    (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  6213 and  Handkerchiefs,          6214  shawls, scarves,    mufflers, mantillas,    veils and the like:    Embroidered  Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting)    Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting) or Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting,  Manufacture from unembroidered fabric provided the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex-works price of the product2    or    Manufacture from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex-works price of the product(1)    or  raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product (4)(1)    Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product (2)(3)  1  See Introductory Note 7. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6.  4 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6 1  See Introductory Note 7 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 3 See Introductory Note 7    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    -Other  Weaving    Weaving  Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product (5)(6)    accompanied by  accompanied    making-up  by making-up    (including  (including    cutting)  cutting)    or      Making-up    preceded by  printing  accompanied by  at least two  preparatory  finishing  operations (such  as scouring,  bleaching,  mercerising,  heat setting,  raising,  calendering,  shrink  resistance  processing,  permanent  finishing,  decatising,  impregnating,  mending and  burling),  provided that  the value of the  unprinted fabric  used does not  exceed 50% of  the ex-works  price of the  product (3)(4)    3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 See Introductory Note 7 5 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 6 See Introductory Note 7 1 See Introductory Note 7 2 See Introductory Note 6 ex 6217  Other made up clothing accessories; parts of garments or of clothing accessories, other than those of heading No 6212:           HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    Embroidered  Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting) or Manufacture from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex-works price of the product (1)    Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting)  Manufacture from unembroidered fabric provided the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex- works price of the product2   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Fire-resistant equipment of fabric covered with foil of aluminised  polyester  Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting) or Coating provided that the value of the uncoated fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex-works price of the product accompanied by making-up (including cutting) (1)    Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting)  Coating provided that the value of the uncoated fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex-works price of the product accompanied by making-up (including cutting) (2)    -Interlinings for  Manufacture    Manufacture    collars and cuffs, cut  from materials  from materials  out  of any heading,  of any heading,    except that of  except that of    the product, and  the product,    in which the  and in which    value of all the  the value of all    materials used  the materials    does not exceed  used does not    40% of the ex-  exceed 40% of    works price of  the ex-works    the product  price of the      product  ex  Other made-up  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  textile articles; sets;  from materials  from materials  63  worn clothing and  of any heading,  of any heading,    worn textile articles;  except that of  except that of    rags; except for:  the product  the product  6301 to  Blankets, travelling          6304  rugs, bed linen etc.;    curtains etc.; other    furnishing articles:  1 See Introductory Note 7 2 See Introductory Note 7  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Of felt, of  Any non-woven    Any non-    nonwovens  process  woven process    including  including    needle punching  needle    accompanied by  punching    making up  accompanied    (including  by making up    cutting)  (including      cutting)    - Other:            - - Embroidered  Weaving or knitting accompanied by making-up (including cutting) or Manufacture from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex-works price of the product (1)(2)    Weaving or knitting accompanied by making-up (including cutting)  Manufacture from unembroidered fabric (other than knitted or crocheted) provided the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40% of the ex- works cost of the product  1 See Introductory Note 7 2 For knitted or crocheted articles, not elastic or rubberised, obtained by sewing or assembling pieces of knitted or crocheted fabrics (cut out or knitted directly to shape), see Introductory Note 7.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - - Other  Weaving or knitting accompanied by making-up (including cutting)    Weaving or knitting accompanied by making-up (including cutting)    6305  Sacks and bags, of a kind used for the packing of goods  Weaving or knitting and making-up (including    Weaving or knitting and making-up (including    cutting)(1)  cutting)(2)  6306  Tarpaulins, awnings and sunblinds; tents; sails for boats, sailboards or landcraft; camping goods:            - Of nonwovens  Any non-woven process including needle punching accompanied by making up (including cutting)    Any non- woven process including needle punching accompanied by making up (including cutting)    1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 1 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 2 See Introductory Note 7. 3 For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 6. 4 See Introductory Note 7.  HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Other  Weaving    Weaving      accompanied by  accompanied    making-up  by making-up    (including  (including    cutting) (1)(2)  cutting) (3)(4)    or  or    Coating  Coating  provided that  provided that  the value of the  the value of the  uncoated fabric  uncoated fabric  used does not  used does not  exceed 40% of  exceed 40% of  the ex-works  the ex-works  price of the  price of the  product  product  accompanied by  accompanied  making-up  by making-up  (including  (including  cutting)  cutting)  6307  Other made-up  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      articles, including  which the value  which the value    dress patterns  of all the  of all the      materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      40% of the ex-  40% of the ex-      works price of  works price the      the product  product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  6308  Sets consisting of woven fabric and yarn, whether or not with accessories, for making up into rugs, tapestries, embroidered table cloths or serviettes, or similar textile articles, put up in packings for retail sale  Each item in the set must satisfy the rule which would apply to it if it were not included in the set. However , non- originati ng articles may be incorpor ated, provided that their total value does not exceed 25% of the ex-works price of the set    Each item in the set must satisfy the rule which would apply to it if it were not included in the set. However, non-originating articles may be incorporated provided their total value does not exceed 25% of the ex-works price of the set    ex Chapter 64  Footwear, gaiters and the like; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except from assemblies of uppers affixed to inner soles or to other sole components of heading 6406    Manufacture from materials of any heading except for assemblies of uppers affixed to inner soles or to other sole components of heading No 6406       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  6406  Parts of footwear  Manufacture    Manufacture      (including uppers  from materials  from materials    whether or not  of any heading,  of any heading,    attached to soles  except that of  except that of    other than outer  the product  the product    soles); removable        in-soles, heel        cushions and similar        articles; gaiters,        leggings and similar        articles, and parts        thereof       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Headgear and parts  Manufacture    Manufacture    65  thereof  from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  Chapter 66  Umbrellas, sun umbrellas, walking-sticks, seat-sticks, whips, riding-crops, and parts thereof  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product  Chapter 67  Prepared feathers and down and articles made of feathers or of down; artificial flowers; articles of human hair  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    Manufacture from materials  of any heading, except that of the product      HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)      (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Articles of stone,  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Chapter  plaster, cement,  which the value  68  asbestos, mica or  of all the    similar materials;  materials used    except for:  does not exceed      70% of the ex-      works price of      the product      or          Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product       HS  Description of product  Working or processing  (1)  (2)    (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)      (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 6803  Articles of slate or of agglomerated slate  Manufacture from worked slate    Manufacture from worked slate    ex 6812  Articles of asbestos;  Manufacture    Manufacture      articles of mixtures  from materials  from materials    with a basis of  of any heading  of any heading    asbestos or of        mixtures with a basis        of asbestos and        magnesium        carbonate      ex 6814  Articles of mica,  Manufacture    Manufacture      including  from worked  from worked    agglomerated or  mica (including  mica (including    reconstituted mica,  agglomerated or  agglomerated    on a support of  reconstituted  or reconstituted    paper, paperboard or  mica)  mica)    other materials      Chapter  Ceramic products  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product      Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  69    Manufacture      from materials      of any heading,      except that of      the product      or          Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex Chapter 70  Glass and glassware; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed  that of the product  70% of the ex-        works price of        the product      or          Manufacture in      which the value  of all the  materials used  does not exceed  50% of the ex-  works price of  the product.  7006  Glass of heading No 7003, 7004 or 7005, bent, edge-worked, engraved, drilled, enamelled or otherwise worked, but not framed or fitted with other materials:            - Glass plate  Manufacture    Manufacture    substrate coated with  from non-  from  dielectric thin film,  coated glass-  non-coated  semi-conductor  plate substrate  glass plate  grade, in accordance  of heading 7006  substrate of  with SEMII standards1    heading No 7006    - Other  Manufacture    Manufacture      from materials  from materials    of heading 7001  of heading No      7001  1 SEMII-Semiconductor Equipment and Materials Institute Incorporated.    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  7010  Carboys, bottles, flasks, jars, pots, phials, ampoules and other containers, of glass, of a kind used for the conveyance or packing of goods; preserving jars of glass; stoppers, lids and other closures, of glass  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or  Cutting of glassware, provided that the total value of the uncut glassware used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Cutting of glassware, provided the value of the uncut glassware does not exceed 60% of the ex-works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  7013  Glassware of a kind used for table, kitchen, toilet, office, indoor decoration or similar purposes (other than that of heading No 7010 or 7018)  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or  Cutting of glassware, provided that the total value of the uncut glassware used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or  Cutting of glassware, provided the value of the uncut glassware does not exceed 60% of the ex-work price of the product    or      Hand- decoration (except silk- screen printing) of hand-blown glassware, provided that the total value of the hand- blown glassware used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product  or  Hand-decoratio n (with the exception of silk-screen printing) of hand-blown glassware, provided the value of the hand-blown glassware does not exceed 60% of the ex- work price of the product  ex 7019  Articles (other than yarn) of glass fibres  Manufacture from:    Manufacture from:        uncoloured slivers, rovings, yarn or chopped strands, or glass wool  – uncoloured slivers, rovings, yarn or chopped strands, or        – glass wool     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex Chapter 71  Natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones, precious metals, metals clad with precious metal, and articles thereof; imitation jewellery; coin; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product  7106, 7108 and 7110  Precious metals:            Unwrought  Manufacture    Manufacture from materials not classified within heading No 7106, 7108 or 7110  Electrolytic, thermal or chemical separation of precious metals of heading No 7106, 7108 or 7110  or  Fusion and/or alloying of precious metals of heading No 7106, 7108 or 7110 with each other or with base metals    from materials    of any heading,    except those of    headings 7106,    7108 and 7110    or    Electrolytic,    thermal or    chemical    separation of    precious metals    of heading    7106, 7108 or    7110    or    Fusion and/or    alloying of    precious metals    of heading    7106, 7108 or    7110 with each    other or with    base metals    Semi-manufactured  Manufacture    Manufacture    or in powder form  from unwrought  from    precious metals  unwrought      precious metals   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 7107,  Metals clad with  Manufacture    Manufacture    ex 7109  precious metals,  from metals  from metals  and  semi-manufactured  clad with  clad with  ex 7111    precious metals,  precious      unwrought  metals,        unwrought  7115  Other articles of  Manufacture    Manufacture      precious metal or of  from materials  from materials    metal clad with  of any heading,  of any heading,    precious metal  except that of  except that of      the product  the product  7117  Imitation jewellery  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture from base metal parts, not plated or covered with precious metals, provided that the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex-works price of the product  ex  Iron and steel; except  Manufacture        Chapter  for:  from materials  Manufacture  72    of any heading,  from materials      except that of  of any heading,      the product  except that of        the product  7207  Semi-finished  Manufacture          products of iron or  from materials  Manufacture    non-alloy steel  of  from materials      heading 7201,  of      7202, 7203,  heading 7201,      7204, 7205 or  7202, 7203,      7206  7204, 7205 or        7206   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  7208 to  Flat-rolled products,  Manufacture    Manufacture    7216  bars and rods, angles,  from ingots or  from ingots or    shapes and sections  other primary  other primary    of iron or non-alloy  forms or semi-  forms or semi-    steel  finished  finished      materials of  materials of      heading 7206 or  heading 7206      7207  or 7207   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  7217  Wire of iron or  Manufacture    Manufacture      non-alloy steel  from semi-  from semi-      finished  finished      materials of  materials of      heading 7207  heading 7207  7218 91  Semi-finished  Manufacture    Manufacture    and 7218  products  from materials  from materials  99    of  of      heading 7201,  heading 7201,      7202, 7203,  7202, 7203,      7204, 7205 or  7204, 7205 or      sub-heading  sub-heading      7218 10  7218 10  7219 to  Flat-rolled products,  Manufacture    Manufacture    7222  bars and rods, angles,  from ingots or  from ingots or    shapes and sections  other primary  other primary    of stainless steel  forms or semi-  forms or semi-      finished  finished      materials of  materials of      heading 7218  heading 7218  7223  Wire of stainless  Manufacture    Manufacture      steel  from semi-  from semi-      finished  finished      materials of  materials of      heading 7218  heading 7218  7224 90  Semi-finished  Manufacture    Manufacture      products  from materials  from materials      of  of      heading 7201,  heading 7201,      7202, 7203,  7202, 7203,      7204, 7205 or  7204, 7205 or      sub-heading  sub-heading      7224 10  7224 10  7225 to  Flat-rolled products,  Manufacture    Manufacture    7228  hot-rolled bars and  from ingots or  from ingots or    rods, in irregularly  other primary  other primary    wound coils; angles,  forms or semi-  forms or semi-    shapes and sections,  finished  finished    of other alloy steel;  materials of  materials of    hollow drill bars and  heading 7206,  heading 7206,    rods, of alloy or  7207, 7218  7207, 7218    non-alloy steel  or 7224  or 7224  7229  Wire of other alloy  Manufacture    Manufacture      steel  from semi-  from semi-      finished  finished      materials of  materials of      heading 7224  heading 7224   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Articles of iron or  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  steel; except for:  from materials  from materials  73    of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  ex 7301  Sheet piling  Manufacture    Manufacture        from materials  from materials      of heading 7207  of heading No        7207   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  7302  Railway or tramway  Manufacture    Manufacture      track construction  from materials  from materials    materials of iron or  of heading 7206  of heading No    steel, the following:    7206    rails, checkrails and        rackrails, switch        blades, crossing        frogs, point rods and        other crossing pieces,        sleepers (cross-ties),        fish-plates, chairs,        chair wedges, sole        plates (base plates),        rail clips, bedplates,        ties and other        material specialised        for jointing or fixing        rails      7304,  Tubes, pipes and  Manufacture        7305 and  hollow profiles, of  from materials  Manufacture  7306  iron (other than cast  of  from materials    iron) or steel  heading 7206,  of      7207, 7208,  heading 7206,      7209, 7210,  7207, 7208,      7211, 7212,  7209, 7210,      7218, 7219,  7211, 7212,      7220 or 7224  7218, 7219,        7220 or 7224  ex 7307  Tube or pipe fittings  Turning,    Turning,      of stainless steel  drilling,  drilling,    (ISO No X5CrNiMo  reaming,  reaming,    1712), consisting of  threading,  threading,    several parts  deburring and  deburring and      sandblasting of  sandblasting of      forged blanks,  forged blanks      provided that  the value of      the total value  which does not      of the forged  exceed 35% of      blanks used  the ex-work      does not exceed  price of the      35% of the ex-  product      works price of        the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  7308  Structures (excluding  Manufacture    Manufacture      prefabricated  from materials  from materials    buildings of heading  of any heading,  of any heading,    No 9406) and parts  except that of  except that of    of structures (for  the product.  the product.    example, bridges and  However,  However,    bridge-sections,  welded angles,  welded angles,    lock-gates, towers,  shapes and  shapes and    lattice masts, roofs,  sections of  sections of    roofing frame-works,  heading 7301  heading No    doors and windows  may not be used  7301 may not    and their frames and    be used    thresholds for doors,        shutters, balustrades,        pillars and columns),        of iron or steel;        plates, rods, angles,        shapes, sections,        tubes and the like,        prepared for use in        structures, of iron or        steel       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 7315  Skid chain  Manufacture in    Manufacture in        which the value  which the value      of all the  of all the      materials of  materials of      heading 7315  heading No      used does not  7315 used does      exceed 50% of  not exceed      the ex-works  60% of the ex-      price of the  work price of      product  the product  ex  Copper and articles  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  thereof; except for:  from materials  from materials  74    of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  7403  Refined copper and copper alloys, unwrought:  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Manufacture from materials of any heading    Chapter  Nickel and articles  Manufacture    Manufacture    75  thereof  from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  ex  Aluminium and  Manufacture    Manufacture    Chapter  articles thereof;  from materials  from materials  76  except for:  of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  7601  Unwrought aluminium  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Manufacture from materials of any heading    7607  Aluminium foil  Manufacture    Manufacture      (whether or not  from materials  from materials    printed or backed  of any heading,  of any heading,    with paper,  except that of  except that of    paperboard, plastics  the product and  the product and    or similar backing  heading 7606  heading 7606    materials) of a        thickness (excluding        any backing) not        exceeding 0.2 mm      Chapter 77  Reserved for possible future use in HS           HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex Chapter 78  Lead and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    7801  Unwrought lead:            -Refined lead  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Manufacture from materials of any heading      -Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading 7802 may not be used    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading No 7802 may not be used     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Zinc and articles  Manufacture    Manufacture    79  thereof  from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product  Chapter  Tin and articles  Manufacture    Manufacture    80  thereof  from materials  from materials      of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)      (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter 81  Other base metals; cermets; articles thereof  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Manufacture from materials of any heading    ex  Tools, implements,  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in  Chapter  cutlery, spoons and  which the value  82  forks, of base metal;  of all the    parts thereof of base  materials used    metal; except for:  does not exceed      70% of the ex-      works price of      the product      or          Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product      8206  Tools of two or more  Manufacture    Manufacture      of the heading Nos  from materials  from materials    8202 to 8205, put up  of any heading,  of any heading,    in sets for retail sale  except those of  except those of      headings 8202  headings 8202      to 8205.  to 8205.      However, tools  However, tools      of headings Nos  of heading Nos      8202 to 8205  8202 to 8205      may be  may be      incorporated  incorporated      into the set,  into the set      provided that  provided their      their total value  value does not      does not exceed  exceed 15% of      15% of the ex-  the ex-works      works price of  cost of the set      the set     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 8211  Knives with cutting blades, serrated or not (including pruning knives), other than knives of heading No 8208  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, knife blades and handles of base metal may be used    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, knife blades and handles of base metal may be used    8214  Other articles of cutlery (for example, hair clippers, butchers' or kitchen cleavers, choppers and mincing knives, paper knives); manicure or pedicure sets and instruments (including nail files)  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, handles of base metal may be used    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, handles of base metal may be used    8215  Spoons, forks, ladles, skimmers, cake-servers, fish-knives, butter-knives, sugar tongs and similar kitchen or tableware  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, handles of base metal may be used    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, handles of base metal may be used    ex Chapter 83  Miscellaneous articles of base metal; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 8302  Other mountings,  Manufacture    Manufacture      fittings and similar  from materials  from materials    articles suitable for  of any heading,  of any heading,    buildings, and  except that of  except that of    automatic door  the product.  the product.    closers  However, other  However, other      materials of  materials of      heading 8302  heading 8302      may be used,  may be used,      provided that  provided that      their total value  their total value      does not exceed  does not exceed      20% of the ex-  20% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  ex 8306  Statuettes and other  Manufacture    Manufacture      ornaments, of base  from materials  from materials    metal  of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product.  the product.      However, other  However, other      materials of  materials of      heading 8306  heading 8306      may be used,  may be used,      provided that  provided that      their total value  their total value      does not exceed  does not exceed      30% of the ex-  30% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  ex Chapter 84  Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts thereof; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  8407  Spark-ignition  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      reciprocating or  which the value  which the value    rotary internal  of all the  of all the    combustion piston  materials used  materials used    engines  does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70 % of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  8408  Compression-ignition  Manufacture in    Manufacture in       internal  which the value  which the value    combustion piston  of all the  of all the    engines (diesel or  materials used  materials used    semi-diesel engines)  does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  8427  Fork-lift trucks; other  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      works trucks fitted  which the value  which the value    with lifting or  of all the  of all the    handling equipment  materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  8482  Ball or roller  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      bearings  which the value  which the value      of all the  of all the      materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex Chapter 85  Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  8501 and 8502  Electric motors and generators, Electric generating sets and rotary converters  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8503 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8503  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product  ex 8517  Other apparatus for the transmission or reception of voice, images or other data, including apparatus for communication in a wireless network (such as a local or wide area network), other than transmission or reception apparatus of headings 8443, 8525, 8527 or 8528  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  8519  Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8522 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    Magnetic tape recorders and other sound recording apparatus, whether or not incorporating a sound reproducing device  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- work price of the product  8521  Video recording or reproducing apparatus, whether or not incorporating a video tuner  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8522 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8522  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)   (4)  (3)  or   (6)  (5)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    :           HS  Description of product  Working or processing  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 8523  Unrecorded discs,  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      tapes, solid-state  which the value  which the value    non-volatile storage  of all the  of all the    devices and other  materials used  materials used    media for the  does not exceed  does not exceed    recording of sound or  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    of other phenomena,  works price of  works price of    but excluding  the product  the product    products of        Chapter 37                                                                                                     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK              8525  Transmission apparatus for radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not incorporating reception apparatus or sound recording or reproducing apparatus; television cameras; digital cameras and video camera recorders  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  8526  Radar apparatus, radio navigational aid apparatus and radio remote control apparatus  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product  8527  Reception apparatus for radio broadcasting, whether or not combined, in the same housing, with sound recording or reproducing apparatus or a clock  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8529  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- work price of the product  8528  Monitors and projectors, not incorporating television reception apparatus; reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus:           HS  Description of product  Working or  (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK    - Monitors and  Manufacture  Manufacture in  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  projectors, not  from materials  which the  from materials  incorporating  of any heading,  value of all the  of any heading,  television reception  except that of  materials used  except that of  apparatus, of a kind  the product  does not  the product  solely or principally    exceed 70% of    used in an automatic    the ex-works    data-processing    price of the    system of heading    product    8471          - Other monitors and  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product  projectors, not  from materials  from materials  incorporating  of any heading,  of any heading,  television reception  except that of  except that of  apparatus; reception  the product and  the product and  apparatus for  of heading 8529  of heading  television, whether    8529  or not incorporating      radio broadcast      receivers or sound or      video recording or      reproducing      apparatus      8535  Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making connections to or in electrical circuits (for example, switches, fuses, lightning arresters, voltage limiters, surge suppressors, plugs and other connectors, junction boxes) for a voltage exceeding 1,000 volts  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8538 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8538  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- work price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  8536  Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making connections to or in electrical circuits for a voltage not exceeding 1,000 Volt; connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables:            - Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making connections to or in electrical circuits for a voltage not exceeding 1,000 Volt  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8538  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8538  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    - Connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables:            -- of plastics  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product.  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product.  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    -- of ceramics  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    -- of copper  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product     HS  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  8537  Boards, panels,  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8538  Manufacture in  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product and of heading 8538  Manufacture in    consoles, desks,  which the  which the value    cabinets and other  value of all the  of all the    bases, equipped with  materials used  materials used    two or more  does not  does not exceed    apparatus of heading  exceed 50% of  60% of the ex-    No 8535 or 8536, for  the ex-works  work price of    electric control or the  price of the  the product    distribution of  product      electricity, including        those incorporating        instruments or        apparatus of Chapter        90, and numerical        control apparatus,        other than switching        apparatus of heading        No 8517      8540 11  Cathode ray  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    and 8540  television picture  which the value  which the value  12  tubes, including  of all the  of all the    video monitor  materials used  materials used    cathode ray tubes  does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  8542  Electronic integrated circuits:           HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3)  or  (5)  or      (4)    (6)        For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  - Monolithic  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex-works price of the product    854231,  integrated circuits  ex    854232,    ex    854233    and    854239        or  or      The operation  The operation      of diffusion, in  of diffusion, in      which  which      integrated  integrated      circuits are  circuits are      formed on a  formed on a      semi-conductor  semi-conductor      substrate by the  substrate by the      selective  selective      introduction of  introduction of      an appropriate  an appropriate      dopant, whether  dopant,      or not  whether or not      assembled  assembled      and/or tested in  and/or tested in      a non-party  a non-party    - Multichips which  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    are parts of  which the value  which the value  machinery or  of all the  of all the  apparatus, not  materials used  materials used  specified or included  does not exceed  does not exceed  elsewhere in this  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-  Chapter  works price of  works price of    the product  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  8544  Insulated (including  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      enamelled or  which the value  which the value    anodised) wire, cable  of all the  of all the    (including coaxial  materials used  materials used    cable) and other  does not exceed  does not exceed    insulated electric  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    conductors, whether  works price of  works price of    or not fitted with  the product  the product    connectors; optical        fibre cables, made up        of individually        sheathed fibres,        whether or not        assembled with        electric conductors or        fitted with        connectors      8545  Carbon electrodes,  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      carbon brushes, lamp  which the value  which the value    carbons, battery  of all the  of all the    carbons and other  materials used  materials used    articles of graphite or  does not exceed  does not exceed    other carbon, with or  70% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    without metal, of a  works price of  works price of    kind used for  the product  the product    electrical purposes      8546  Electrical insulators  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      of any material  which the value  which the value      of all the  of all the      materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  8547  Insulating fittings for  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      electrical machines,  which the value  which the value    appliances or  of all the  of all the    equipment, being  materials used  materials used    fittings wholly of  does not exceed  does not exceed    insulating materials  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    apart from any minor  works price of  works price of    components of metal  the product  the product    (for example,        threaded sockets)        incorporated during        moulding solely for        purposes of assembly        other than insulators        of heading No 8546;        electrical conduit        tubing and joints        therefor, of base        metal lined with        insulating material      8548  Waste and scrap of  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      primary cells,  which the value  which the value    primary batteries and  of all the  of all the    electric  materials used  materials used    accumulators; spent  does not exceed  does not exceed    primary cells, spent  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    primary batteries and  works price of  work price of    spent electric  the product  the product    accumulators;        electrical parts of        machinery or        apparatus, not        specified or included        elsewhere in this        Chapter      Chapter  Railway or tramway  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    86  locomotives,  which the value  which the value    rolling-stock and  of all the  of all the    parts thereof; railway  materials used  materials used    or tramway track  does not exceed  does not exceed    fixtures and fittings  70% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    and parts thereof;  works price of  works price of    mechanical  the product  the product    (including        electro-mechanical)        traffic signalling        equipment of all        kinds       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex  Vehicles other than  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    Chapter  railway or tramway  which the value  which the value  87  rolling-stock, and  of all the  of all the    parts and accessories  materials used  materials used    thereof; except for:  does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  8711  Motorcycles  (including mopeds) and cycles fitted with an auxiliary motor, with or without side-cars; side-cars  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product        HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex Chapter 88  Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  ex 8804  Rotochutes  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 8804 or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- work price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading No 8804  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter 89  Ships, boats and floating structures  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  ex Chapter 90  Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking, precision, medical or surgical instruments and apparatus; parts and accessories thereof; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  9002  Lenses, prisms,  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      mirrors and other  which the value  which the value    optical elements, of  of all the  of all the    any material,  materials used  materials used    mounted, being parts  does not exceed  does not exceed    of or fittings for  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    instruments or  works price of  work price of    apparatus, other than  the product  the product    such elements of        glass not optically        worked       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out  (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  9033  Parts and accessories  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      (not specified or  which the value  which the value    included elsewhere  of all the  of all the    in this Chapter) for  materials used  materials used    machines,  does not exceed  does not exceed    appliances,  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    instruments or  works price of  works price of    apparatus of Chapter  the product  the product    90      Chapter  Clocks and watches  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    91  and parts thereof  which the value  which the value      of all the  of all the      materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product  Chapter  Musical instruments;  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    92  parts and accessories  which the value  which the value    of such articles  of all the  of all the      materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      70% of the ex-  70% of the ex-      works price of  works price of      the product  the product    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  Chapter  Arms and  Manufacture in    Manufacture in    93  ammunition; parts  which the value  which the value    and accessories  of all the  of all the    thereof  materials used  materials used      does not exceed  does not exceed      50% of the ex-  50% of the ex-      works price of  work price of      the product  the product  Chapter 94  Furniture; bedding, mattresses, mattress supports, cushions and similar stuffed furnishings; lamps and lighting fittings, not elsewhere specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and the like; prefabricated buildings  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  ex Chapter 95  Toys, games and sports requisites; parts and accessories thereof; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product    HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  ex 9506  Golf clubs and parts thereof  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, roughly-shaped blocks for making golf club heads may be used    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product. However, roughly shaped blocks for making golf club heads may be used    ex Chapter 96  Miscellaneous manufactured articles; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product or Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  (5) or (6)      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  9601 and 9602  Worked ivory, bone, tortoiseshell, horn, antlers, coral, mother-of-pearl and other animal carving material, and articles of these materials (including articles obtained by moulding). Worked vegetable or mineral carving material and articles of these materials; moulded or carved articles of wax, of stearin, of natural gums or natural resins or of modelling pastes, and other moulded or carved articles, not elsewhere specified or included; worked, unhardened gelatine (except gelatine of heading 3503) and articles of unhardened gelatine  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Manufacture from materials of any heading     HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  9603  Brooms, brushes  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      (including brushes  which the value  which the value    constituting parts of  of all the  of all the    machines, appliances  materials used  materials used    or vehicles), hand-  does not exceed  does not exceed    operated mechanical  50% of the ex-  70% of the ex-    floor sweepers, not  works price of  works price of    motorised, mops and  the product  the product    feather dusters;        prepared knots and        tufts for broom or        brush making; paint        pads and rollers,        squeegees (other than        roller squeegees)      9605  Travel sets for  Each item in the    Each item in      personal toilet,  set must satisfy  the set must    sewing or shoe or  the rule which  satisfy the rule,    clothes cleaning  would apply to  which would      it if it were not  apply to it if it      included in the  were not      set. However,  included in the      non-originating  set However,      articles may be  non-originating      incorporated,  articles may be      provided that  incorporated,      their total value  provided their      does not exceed  total value does      15% of the ex-  not exceed 15%      works price of  of the ex-works      the set  price of the set  9606  Buttons, press-fasteners, snap-fasteners and press-studs, button moulds and other parts of these articles; button blanks  Manufacture: - from materials of any heading, except that of the product, and in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- work price of the product   HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)    (3)  or    (5)  or      (4)      (6)          For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  9608  Ball-points pens;  Manufacture    Manufacture      felt-tipped and other  from materials  from materials    porous-tipped pens  of any heading,  of any heading,    and markers;  except that of  except that of    fountain pens,  the product.  the product.    stylograph pens and  However, nibs  However, nibs    other pens;  or nib-points of  or nib-points    duplicating stylos;  the same  classified    propelling or sliding  heading as the  within the same    pencils; penholders,  product may be  heading may be    pencil-holders and  used  used    similar holders; parts        (including caps and        clips) of the        foregoing articles,        other than those of        heading No 9609       HS  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) (4)  or  (5) (6)  or      For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For UK Exports to the EAC Partner State(s)  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  For EAC Partner State(s) Exports to the UK  9612  Typewriter or similar ribbons, inked or otherwise prepared for giving impressions, whether or not on spools or in cartridges; ink-pads, whether or not inked, with or without boxes  Manufacture: - from materials of any heading, except that of the product, and - in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60% of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 70% of the ex- works price of the product  9613 20  Pocket lighters, gas  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      fuelled, refillable  which the total  which the total      value of the  value of the      materials of  materials of      heading 9613  heading 9613      used does not  used does not      exceed 30% of  exceed 30% of      the ex-works  the ex-works      price of the  price of the      product  product  9614  Smoking pipes  Manufacture    Manufacture      (including pipe  from materials  from materials    bowls) and cigar or  of any heading  of any heading    cigarette holders, and        parts thereof      9619  Sanitary towels  Manufacture in    Manufacture in      (pads) and tampons,  which all the  which all the    napkins and napkin  materials used  materials used    liners for babies and  are classified  are classified    similar articles, of  within a  within a    any material  heading other  heading other      than that of the  than that of the      product  product  Chapter  Works of art,  Manufacture    Manufacture    97  collectors' pieces and  from materials  from materials    antiques  of any heading,  of any heading,      except that of  except that of      the product  the product     ANNEX III  FORM FOR MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE  1. Movement certificates EUR 1 shall be made out on the form of which a specimen appears in this Annex. This form shall be printed in one or more of the languages in which the Agreement is drawn up. Certificates shall be made out in one of these languages and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting State. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink and in capital letters.  2. Each certificate shall measure 210 x 297mm, a tolerance of up to plus 8mm or minus 5mm in the length may be allowed. The paper used must be white, sized for writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 25g/m2. It shall have a printed green guilloche pattern background making any falsification by mechanical or chemical means apparent to the eye.  3. The exporting States may reserve the right to print the certificates themselves or may have them printed by approved printers. In the latter case each certificate must include a reference to such approval. Each certificate must bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified. It shall also bear a serial number, either printed or not, by which it can be identified.     Movement certificate   Movement certificate NOTES  1. Certificates must not contain erasures or words written over one another. Any alterations must be made by deleting the incorrect particulars and adding any necessary corrections. Any such alteration must be initialled by the person who completed the certificate and endorsed by the customs authorities of the issuing country or territory.  2. No spaces must be left between the items entered on the certificate and each item must be preceded by an item number. A horizontal line must be drawn immediately below the last item. Any unused space must be struck through in such a manner as to make any later additions impossible.  3. Goods must be described in accordance with commercial practice and with sufficient detail to enable them to be identified.    APPLICATION FOR A MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE  Movement certificate     Declaration by the exporter form   ANNEX IV  ORIGIN DECLARATION  The origin declaration, the text of which is given below, must be made out in accordance with the footnotes. However, the footnotes do not have to be reproduced.   The exporter of the products covered by this document (customs authorisation No ...(1)) declares that, except where otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of ...(2) preferential origin.  …………………………………………………(3) (Place and date)  …………………………………………………(4)   (Signature of the exporter; in addition the name of the person signing the declaration has to be indicated in clear script)  NOTES (1) When the origin declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the origin declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank. (2) Origin of products to be indicated.  (3) These indications may be omitted if the information is contained on the document itself. (4) See Article 22(5) of the Protocol. In cases where the exporter is not required to sign, the exemption of signature also implies the exemption of the name of the signatory.      ANNEX V (A)  SUPPLIER DECLARATION FOR PRODUCTS HAVING PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN STATUS   I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this invoice ....................................................(1) were produced in ................................(2) and satisfy the rules of origin governing preferential trade between the EAC Partner State(s) and the United Kingdom.  I undertake to make available to the customs authorities, if required, evidence in support of this declaration. .............................…...............................(3).................................................................................(4)  .............................................(5)  Note  The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity with the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier's declaration. The footnotes do not have to be reproduced.  (1) – If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should be clearly indicated or marked and this marking entered on the declaration as follows: "............................ listed on this invoice and marked .................... were produced ...............................". – If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see Article 30(3)), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead of the word "invoice". (2) The United Kingdom, EAC Partner State, the European Union, Member State, OCT or other ACP State. Where an EAC Partner State, the European Union, Member State, OCT or another ACP State is given, a reference must also be made to the United Kingdom customs office holding any EUR 1 (s) concerned, giving the No of the certificate(s) concerned and, if possible, the relevant customs entry No involved. (3) Place and date. (4) Name and function in company. (5) Signature.        ANNEX V (B)  SUPPLIER DECLARATION FOR PRODUCTS NOT HAVING PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN STATUS  I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this invoice ....................(1) were produced in ......................(2) and incorporate the following components or materials which do not have an EAC Partner State, EU, other ACP State, OCT or United Kingdom origin for preferential trade: .............................................(3)...............................................(4)........................................................(5) ................................................................................................................................................................ .....................................................................…....................................................................................... ............................................................................................................................................................(6)  I undertake to make available to the customs authorities, if required, evidence in support of this declaration. .................................................................(7).......................................................................................(8) ............................................................................................................................................................(9)  Note  The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity with the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier's declaration. The footnotes do not have to be reproduced.  (1) – If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should be clearly indicated or marked and this marking entered on the declaration as follows: " ………. listed on this invoice and marked …………were produced ………….". – If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see Article 30(3)), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead of the word "invoice". (2) The United Kingdom, EAC Partner State, European Union, Member State, OCT or another ACP State. (3) Description is to be given in all cases. The description must be adequate and should be sufficiently detailed to allow the tariff classification of the goods concerned to be determined. (4) Customs values to be given only if required. (5) Country of origin to be given only if required. The origin to be given must be a preferential origin, all other origins to be given as "third country". (6) "and have undergone the following processing in [the United Kingdom] [EAC Partner State] [the European Union] [Member State] [OCT] [other ACP State] .................................", to be added with a description of the processing carried out if this information is required. (7) Place and date. (8) Name and function in company. (9) Signature.  ANNEX V (C)  LONG-TERM SUPPLIER’S DECLARATION FOR PRODUCTS HAVING PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN STATUS AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 28 (6)  I, the undersigned, declare that the goods described below:  ...........................................................................................(1)  …………………………………………………………...(2)  which are regularly supplied to …………………………..(3), originate in ……………………(4) and satisfy the rules of origin governing preferential trade with…………………………..(5).  This declaration is valid for all further shipments of these goods dispatched from ………….to …………………………(6).   I undertake to inform .................................immediately this declaration is no longer valid.  I undertake to make available to the Customs authorities any further supporting documents they require.  ………………………………………………(7) ………………………………………………(8)  ………………………………………………(9)     Note  (1) Description (2) Commercial designation as used on the invoices, e.g. model no. (3) Name of company to which goods are supplied (4) The country, group of countries or territory, from which the goods originate (5) Country, group of countries or territories concerned (6) Give the dates. The period shall not exceed 12 months (7) Place and date (8) Name and position, name and address of company (9) Signature    ANNEX V (D)  LONG-TERM SUPPLIER’S DECLARATION FOR PRODUCTS NOT HAVING PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN STATUS AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 28 (6)  I, the undersigned, supplier of the goods covered by this document, which are regularly sent to …………….………(1) declare that:  The following materials which do not originate in the UK, EAC Partner State(s), EU, OCT or other ACP States have been used to produce these goods.  Description of  Description of non HS heading of non Value of non                          All the other materials used to produce these goods originate in the UK, EAC Partner State(s), EU, OCT or other ACP States.  This declaration is valid for all further shipments of these products dispatched from ................to ..............(5).  I undertake to inform ........................................immediately if this declaration is no longer valid.  I undertake to make available to the Customs authorities any further supporting documents they require. .....................................................(6) .....................................................(7) .....................................................(8)  Note  (1) Customer’s name and address (2) When the invoice, delivery note or other commercial document to which the declaration is annexed relates to a variety of goods, or goods not incorporating the same proportion of non-originating materials, the supplier must clearly differentiate between them. (3) To be completed only where relevant. (4) “Value” means the Customs value of the materials at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the UK, EAC Partner State(s), EU, OCT or other ACP States. (5) Give the dates. The period should not exceed 12 months. (6) Place and date. (7) Name and position, name and address of company. (8) Signature.  ANNEX VI  INFORMATION CERTIFICATE  1. The form of information certificate given in this Annex shall be used and be printed in one or more of the official languages in which the Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting State. Information certificates shall be completed in one of those languages; if they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in capital letters. They shall bear a serial number, whether or not printed, by which they can be identified.  2. The information certificate shall measure 210 x 297mm, a tolerance of up to plus 8mm or minus 5mm in the length may be allowed. The paper must be white, sized for writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 25g/m2.  3. The national administrators may reserve the right to print the forms themselves or may have them printed by printers approved by them. In the latter case, each form must include a reference to such approval. The forms shall bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified.   1. Supplier INFORMATION  2. Consignee (1)  3. Processor (1)  4. State in which the working or processing has been carried out  6. Customs office of importation (1)  5. For official use  7. Import document (2) Form : ........................................... No : .................... .............................. Series :………………………….………………………………………… Date :  GOODS SENT TO A STATE OF DESTINATION  8. Marks, numbers, quantity and kind of package  9. Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System heading/subheading number (HS code)  10. Quantity (1)  11. Value (4)  IMPORTED GOODS USED  12. Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System heading/subheading number (HS code)  13. Country of origin  14. Quantity (3)  15. Value (2)(5)     16. Nature of the working or processing carried out  17. Remarks  18. CUSTOMS ENDORSEMENT Declaration certified:      19. DECLARATION BY THE SUPPLIER 1, the undersigned, declare that the information on this certificate is accurate.  Document :……………………... Form :...................................No :……... Customs office :……………….. Date:         -------------------------------- Place :…………………………….Date…………………………………    Stamp        ---------------------------------------. (Signature)      .    ................ ..................... ........................................... .................... (Signature)  (1)(2)(3)(4)(5) See footnotes on verso     REQUEST FOR VERIFICATION  RESULT OF VERIFICATION  The undersigned customs official requests verification of  the Verification carried out by the undersigned customs official  authenticity and accuracy of this information certificate.  shows that this information certificate:   a) was issued by the customs office indicated and that  the  b) does not meet the requirements as to authenticity and  accuracy (see notes appended)(*)  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  --- (Place and date)  (Place and date)      --------------------------------------------------------------------------  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  ---- (*) Delete where not    CROSS REFERENCES (1) Name of individual or business and full address. (2) Optional information. (3) Kg, hl, m. or other measure. (4) Packaging shall be considered as forming a whole with the goods contained therein. However, this provision shall not apply to packaging which is not of the normal type for the Article packed, and which has a lasting utility value of its own, apart from its function as packaging. (5) The value must be indicated in accordance with the provisions on rules of origin.      ANNEX VII  FORM FOR APPLICATION FOR A DEROGATION      3. Commercial description of third country materials Customs classification (H. S. code)  4. Anticipated annual quantity of third country materials to be used  5.Value of third country materials  6.Value of finished products   7.Origin of third country materials  8.Reasons why the rule of origin for the finished product cannot be fulfilled  9.Commercial description of materials originating in States or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5  10.Anticipated annual quantity of materials originating in States or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5 to be used    11. Value of materials of States or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5   12.Working or processing carried out in States or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5 on third country materials without obtaining origin    13. Duration requested for derogation from............................... to......................................     14. Detailed description of working and processing in the EAC Partner State(s):   15. Capital structure of the firm(s) concerned   16. Amount of investments made/foreseen   17. Staff employed/expected          19.Other possible sources of supply for materials   21.Observations   NOTES  1. If the boxes in the form are not sufficient to contain all relevant information, additional pages may be attached to the form. In this case, the mention "see annex" shall be entered in the box concerned.  2. If possible, samples or other illustrative material (pictures, designs, catalogues, etc.) of the final product and of the materials should accompany the form.  3. A form shall be completed for each product covered by the request.  Boxes 3, 4, 5, 7: "third country" means any country which is not referred to in Articles 4 and 5.  Box 12: If third country materials have been worked or processed in the States or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5 without obtaining origin, before being further processed in the EAC Partner State requesting the derogation, indicate the working or processing carried out in the States or territories referred to in Articles 4 and 5.  Box 13: The dates to be indicated are the initial and final one for the period in which EUR 1 certificates may be issued under the derogation.  Box 18: Indicate either the percentage of added value in respect of the ex-works price of the product or the monetary amount of added-value for unit of product.  Box 19: If alternative sources of material exist, indicate here what they are and, if possible, the reasons of cost or other reasons why they are not used.  Box 20: Indicate possible further investments or suppliers' differentiation which make the derogation necessary for only a limited period of time.   ANNEX VIII  OVERSEAS COUNTRIES AND TERRITORIES  Within the meaning of this Protocol "overseas countries and territories" shall mean the countries and territories listed below:  (This list is without prejudice to the status of these countries and territories, or future changes in their status.)  1. Overseas countries and territories that have special relations with the Kingdom of Denmark: – Greenland.  2. Overseas countries and territories that have special relations with the French Republic: – New Caledonia and Dependencies, – French Polynesia, – French Southern and Antarctic Territories, – Wallis and Futuna Islands, – Saint Barthelemy, – Saint Pierre and Miquelon.  3. Overseas countries and territories that have special relations with the Kingdom of the Netherlands: – Aruba, – Bonaire, – Curaçao, – Saba, – Sint Eustatius, – Sint Maarten.  4. Overseas countries and territories that have special relations with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland: – Anguilla, – Bermuda, – Cayman Islands, – Falkland Islands, – South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands, – Montserrat, – Pitcairn, – Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, – British Antarctic Territory, – British Indian Ocean Territory, – Turks and Caicos Islands, – British Virgin Islands.   ANNEX IX  PRODUCTS FOR WHICH THE CUMULATION PROVISIONS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 APPLY  HS/CN Description  1701  Cane or beet sugar and chemically pure sucrose, in solid form.  1702  Other sugars, including chemically pure lactose, maltose, glucose and fructose, in solid form; sugar syrups not containing added flavouring or colouring matter; artificial honey, whether or not mixed with natural honey; caramel.  Ex 1704 90 corresponding to 1704 90 99  Sugar confectionery, not containing cocoa (excl. chewing gum; liquorice extract containing more than 10% by weight of sucrose but not containing other added substances; white chocolate; pastes, including marzipan in immediate packings of a net content of 1 kg or more; throat pastilles and cough drops; sugar-coated (panned) goods; gum confectionery and jelly confectionery, including fruit pastes in the form of sugar confectionery; boiled sweets; toffees; caramels and similar sweet; compressed tablets)  ex 1302.20  Pectic substances, pectinates and pectates, added sugar or other sweetening matter  Ex 1806 10 corresponding to 1806 10 30  Cocoa powder, containing 65% or more but less than 80% by weight of sucrose (including invert sugar expressed as sucrose) or isoglucose expressed as sucrose  Ex 1806 10 corresponding to 1806 10 90  Cocoa powder containing 80 % or more by weight of sucrose (including invert sugar expressed as sucrose) or isoglucose expressed as sucrose  Ex 1806 20 corresponding to 1806 20 95  Food preparations containing cocoa in blocks, slabs or bars weighing more than 2 kg or in liquid, paste, powder, granular or other bulk form in containers or immediate packings, of a content exceeding 2 kg (excl. cocoa powder, preparations containing 18% or more by weight of cocoa butter or containing a combined weight of 25% or more of cocoa butter and milkfat; chocolate milk crumb; chocolate flavour coating; chocolate and chocolate products; sugar confectionery and substitutes thereof made from sugar substitution products, containing cocoa; spreads containing cocoa; preparations containing cocoa for making beverages)  Ex 1901 90 corresponding to 1901 90 99  Food preparations of flour, groats, meal, starch or malt extract, not containing cocoa or containing less than 40% by weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included, food preparations of goods of headings 0401 to 0404, not containing cocoa or containing less than 5% by weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included (excl. food preparations containing nor or less than 1.5% milkfat, 5% sucrose (including invert sugar) or isoglucose, 5% glucose or starch; food preparations in powder form of goods of headings 0401 to 0404; preparations for infant use, put up for retail sale; mixes and doughs for the preparation of bakers' wares of heading 1905)  Ex 2101 12 corresponding to 2101 12 98  Products with a basis of coffee (excl. extracts, essences and concentrates of coffee and preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates)  Ex 2101 12 corresponding to 2101 12 98  Products with a basis of tea or maté (excl. extracts, essences and concentrates of tea or maté and preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates)  Ex 2106 90 corresponding to 2106 90 59  Flavoured or coloured sugar syrups (excl. isoglucose syrups, lactose syrup, glucose syrup and maltodextrine syrup)  Ex 2106 90 corresponding to  Food  preparations  not  elsewhere  specified  or  included  (excl.  protein  concentrates  and textured protein substances; compound alcoholic preparations, other than those based on odoriferous  substance,  of  a  kind  used  for  the  manufacture  of  beverages;  flavoured  or   2106 90 98  coloured sugar syrups; preparations containing no less than 1.5% milkfat; 5%  Ex3302 10 corresponding to 3302 10 29  Preparations based on odoriferous substances of a kind used as raw materials in the drinks industries containing all flavouring agents characterising a beverage with an actual alcoholic strength by volume not exceeding 0.5% (excl. preparations containing no less than 1.5% milkfat, 5% sucrose or isoglucose, 5 glucose or starch)     ANNEX X  TEMPLATE ON ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION  UNDERTAKING ON ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION OF CUMULATION PROVISIONS BETWEEN THE EAC PARTNER STATE(S) AND ............(COUNTRIES OR REGIONS PROVIDED FOR UNDER ARTICLES 4 AND 6 OF PROTOCOL 1 TO THE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA, A MEMBER OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY, OF THE ONE PART, AND THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, OF THE OTHER PART)  Considering the obligation of providing for the administrative cooperation necessary to ensure the correct implementation of the Protocol of origin to the Economic Partnership Agreement between the Republic of Kenya, a Member of the East African Community, of the one part, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, of the other part, and wishing to benefit from cumulation between the Parties, as established within Articles 4 and 6 of Protocol 1 to the EPA,  The Parties undertake:  - to comply and ensure compliance with Articles 4 and 6 of this Protocol;  - to provide the administrative cooperation necessary to ensure the correct implementation of Articles 4 and 6 of this Protocol and its provisions on cumulation both with regard to the UK and between themselves;  - to notify their commitment to ensure compliance with the rules of origin laid down in Title IV of the Protocol on Rules of Origin, and to provide, both with regard to the UK and between themselves, the administrative cooperation necessary to ensure the correct implementation of those Articles.    ..........................................................................  Date and signature of the authorised representative of the Government of...   ...........................................................................  Date and signature of the authorised representative of the Government of ..    JOINT DECLARATION concerning the Principality of Andorra  1. Products originating in the Principality of Andorra meeting the conditions of Articles 4 and 5 of this Agreement, and falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized System shall be accepted by the Parties as originating in the European Union within the meaning of this Agreement.  2. Protocol 1 shall apply mutatis mutandis for the purpose of defining the originating status of the above-mentioned products.   JOINT DECLARATION concerning the Republic of San Marino  1. Products originating in the Republic of San Marino, meeting the conditions of Articles 4 and 5 of this Agreement shall be accepted by the Parties as originating in the European Union within the meaning of this Agreement.  2. Protocol 1 shall apply mutatis mutandis for the purpose of defining the originating status of the above-mentioned product.     PROTOCOL 2  ON MUTUAL ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS   ARTICLE 1  Definitions  For the purposes of this Protocol:  (a) "Goods" means all goods falling within the scope of the Harmonized System, irrespective of the scope of this Agreement;  (b) "Customs legislation" means any legal or regulatory provisions applicable in the territories of a Party, governing the import, export and transit of goods and their placing under any other customs regime or procedure, including measures of prohibition, restriction and control;  (c) "Applicant Authority" means a competent administrative authority which has been designated by a Party for the implementation of this Protocol and which makes a request for assistance on the basis of this Protocol;  (d) "Requested Authority" means a competent administrative authority which has been designated by a Party for the implementation of this Protocol and which receives a request for assistance on the basis of this Protocol;  (e) "Personal data" means all information relating to an identified or identifiable individual;  (f) "Operation in breach of customs legislation" means any violation or attempted violation of customs legislation.   ARTICLE 2  Scope  1. The Parties shall assist each other, in the areas within their competence, in the manner and under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, to ensure the correct application of the customs legislation, in particular by preventing, investigating and combating operations in breach of that legislation.   2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall apply to any administrative authority of the Parties which is competent for the application of this Protocol. It shall not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in criminal matters. Nor shall it cover information obtained under powers exercised at the request of a judicial authority, except where communication of such information has the prior authorisation of that authority.  3. Assistance in recovery proceedings regarding duties, taxes or fines is not covered by this Protocol.   ARTICLE 3  Assistance on Request  1. At the request of the Applicant Authority, the Requested Authority shall provide it with all relevant information which may enable it to ensure that customs legislation is correctly applied, including information regarding activities noted or planned which are or could be operations in breach of customs legislation.  2. At the request of the Applicant Authority, the Requested Authority shall inform it:  (a) whether goods exported from the territory of a Party have been lawfully imported into the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the goods;  (b) whether goods imported into the territory of a Party have been lawfully exported from the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the goods.  3. At the request of the Applicant Authority, the Requested Authority shall, within the framework of its legal or regulatory provisions, take the necessary steps to ensure special surveillance of:  (a) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (b) places where stocks of goods have been or may be assembled in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that these goods are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (c) goods that are or may be transported in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation; and  (d) means of transport that are or may be used in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.   ARTICLE 4  Spontaneous Assistance  The Parties shall assist each other, at their own initiative and in accordance with their legal or regulatory provisions, if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs legislation, particularly by providing information obtained pertaining to:  (a) operations which are or appear to be in breach of customs legislation and which may be of interest to the other Party;  (b) new means or methods employed in carrying out operations in breach of customs legislation;  (c) goods known to be subject to operations in breach of customs legislation;  (d) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation; and  (e) means of transport in respect of which there are reasonable grounds for believing that they have been, are, or may be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.   ARTICLE 5  Delivery and Notification  1. At the request of the Applicant Authority, the Requested Authority shall, in accordance with legal or regulatory provisions applicable to the latter, take all necessary measures in order:  (a) to deliver any documents emanating from the Applicant Authority and falling within the scope of this Protocol, to an addressee residing or established in the territory of the Requested Authority, and, where appropriate;  (b) to notify any decisions emanating from the Applicant Authority and falling within the scope of this Protocol, to an addressee residing or established in the territory of the Requested Authority.  2. Requests for delivery of documents or notification of decisions shall be made in writing in an official language of the Requested Authority or in a language acceptable to that authority.   ARTICLE 6  Form and Substance of Requests for Assistance  1. Requests pursuant to this Protocol shall be made in writing. They shall be accompanied by the documents necessary to enable compliance with the request. When required because of the urgency of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in writing immediately. Requests may also be communicated in electronic form.  2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include the following information:  (a) the name of the Applicant Authority;  (b) the measure requested;  (c) the object of and the reason for the request;  (d) the legal or regulatory provisions and other legal elements involved;  (e) indications as exact and comprehensive as possible on the natural or legal persons who are the target of the investigations; and  (f) a summary of the relevant facts and of the enquiries already carried out.  3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the Requested Authority or in a language acceptable to that authority. This requirement shall not apply to any documents that accompany the request under paragraph 1.  4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements set out above, its correction or completion may be requested; in the meantime precautionary measures may be ordered.     ARTICLE 7  Execution of Requests  1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the Requested Authority shall proceed, within the limits of its competence and available resources, as though it were acting on its own account or at the request of other authorities of that same Party by supplying information already possessed, by carrying out appropriate enquiries or by arranging for them to be carried out. This provision shall also apply to any other authority to which the request has been addressed by the Requested Authority when the latter cannot act on its own.  2. Requests for assistance shall be executed in accordance with the legal or regulatory provisions of the requested Party.  3. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter:  (a) be present to obtain in the offices of the Requested Authority or any other concerned authority in accordance with paragraph 1, information relating to activities that are or may be operations in breach of customs legislation which the Applicant Authority needs for the purposes of this Protocol;  (b) be present at enquiries carried out in the latter’s territory.   ARTICLE 8  Form in which information is to be Communicated  1. The Requested Authority shall communicate results of enquiries to the Applicant Authority in writing together with relevant documents, certified copies or other items.  2. If requested, the information provided for in paragraph 1 may be in electronic form.  3. Original documents shall be transmitted only upon request in cases where certified copies would be insufficient. These originals shall be returned at the earliest opportunity.     ARTICLE 9  Exceptions to the obligation to provide assistance  1. Assistance may be refused or may be subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions or requirements, in cases where a Party concerned is of the opinion that assistance under this Protocol would:  (a) be likely to prejudice the sovereignty of an EAC Partner State or that of the UK which has been requested to provide assistance under this Protocol; or  (b) be likely to prejudice public policy, security or other essential interests, in particular in the cases referred to under Article 10(2); or  (c) violate an industrial, commercial or professional secret.  2. Assistance may be postponed by the Requested Authority on the ground that it will interfere with an ongoing investigation, prosecution or proceeding. In such a case, the Requested Authority shall consult with the Applicant Authority to determine if assistance can be given subject to such terms or conditions as the Requested Authority may require.  3. Where the Applicant Authority seeks assistance which it would itself be unable to provide if so requested, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. It shall then be for the Requested Authority to decide how to respond to such a request.  4. For the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the decision of the Requested Authority and the reasons must be communicated to the Applicant Authority without delay.   ARTICLE 10  Information Exchange and Confidentiality  1. Any information communicated in whatsoever form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of a confidential or restricted nature, depending on the rules applicable in each of the Parties. Such information shall be covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shall enjoy the protection extended to similar information under the relevant laws of the Party that received it.  2. Personal data may be exchanged only where the Party which may receive them agrees to ensure an adequate level of protection of such data in at least an equivalent way to the one applicable to that particular case in the Party that may supply them. To that end, the Parties shall communicate to each other information on their applicable rules and legal provisions.  3. The use, in judicial or administrative proceedings instituted in respect of operations in breach of customs legislation, of information obtained under this Protocol, is considered to be for the purposes of this Protocol. Therefore, the Parties may, in their records of evidence, reports and testimonies and in proceedings and charges brought before the courts, use as evidence information obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. The competent authority which supplied that information or gave access to those documents shall be notified of such use.  4. Information obtained shall be used solely for the purposes of this Protocol. Where one of the Parties wishes to use such information for other purposes, it shall obtain the prior written consent of the authority which provided the information. Such use shall then be subject to any restrictions laid down by that authority.   ARTICLE 11  Experts and Witnesses  An official of a Requested Authority may be authorised to appear, within the limitations of the authorisation granted, as an expert or witness in judicial or administrative proceedings regarding the matters covered by this Protocol, and produce such objects, documents or certified copies thereof, as may be needed for the proceedings. The request for appearance must indicate specifically before which judicial or administrative authority the official will have to appear, on what matters and by virtue of what title or qualification the official will be questioned.   ARTICLE 12  Assistance Expenses  The Parties shall waive all claims on each other for the reimbursement of expenses incurred pursuant to this Protocol, except, as appropriate, for expenses to experts and witnesses, and those to interpreters and translators who are not public service employees.   ARTICLE 13  Implementation  1. The implementation of this Protocol shall be entrusted on the one hand to the customs authorities of the EAC Partner State(s) and on the other hand to the customs authorities of the UK as appropriate. They shall decide on all practical measures and arrangements necessary for its application, taking into consideration the rules in force in particular in the field of data protection.  2. The Parties shall consult each other and subsequently keep each other informed of the detailed rules of implementation which are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.   ARTICLE 14  Amendments  The Parties may recommend to the competent bodies amendments which they consider should be made to this Protocol.   ARTICLE 15  Final Provisions  1. This Protocol shall complement and not impede application of any agreements on mutual administrative assistance which have been concluded or may be concluded between the Parties nor shall it preclude more extensive mutual assistance granted under such agreements.  2. The provisions of this Protocol shall not affect the obligations of the Parties under any other international agreement or convention.  3. The provisions of this Protocol shall not affect the provisions of the EAC Partner State(s) governing the communication between the competent EAC Organs and the customs authorities (or authority) of the EAC Partner State(s) of any information obtained under this Protocol which could be of interest to the EAC Partner State(s).  4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the provisions of this Protocol shall take precedence over the provisions of any bilateral Agreement on mutual assistance which has been or may be concluded between the UK and any EAC Partner State in so far as the provisions of the latter are incompatible with those of this Protocol.  5. In respect of questions relating to the applicability of this Protocol, the Parties shall consult each other to resolve the matter in the framework of the Special Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation.    CCS1220743916 978-1-5286-2337-7 